                                                        Harness as an Asset: Enforcing Determinism via
                                                         the Convergent AI Agent Framework (CAAF)

                                                                                       Tianbao Zhang∗
                                                                                   Independent Researcher
                                                                                 tianbao.zhang@yahoo.com




arXiv:2604.17025v3 [cs.AI] 4 May 2026
                                                                                              Abstract
                                                    Large Language Models produce a controllability gap in safety-critical engineering: even low
                                                rates of undetected constraint violations render a system undeployable. Current orchestration
                                                paradigms suffer from sycophantic compliance, context attention decay [Liu et al., 2024], and
                                                stochastic oscillation during self-correction [Huang et al., 2024].
                                                    We introduce the Convergent AI Agent Framework (CAAF), which transitions agentic work-
                                                flows from open-loop generation to closed-loop fail-safe determinism via three pillars: (1) Re-
                                                cursive Atomic Decomposition (RAD) with physical context firewalls; (2) Harness as an Asset,
                                                formalizing domain invariants into machine-readable registries enforced by a deterministic Uni-
                                                fied Assertion Interface (UAI); and (3) Structured Semantic Gradients with State Locking for
                                                monotonic non-regression.
                                                    This paper makes two core claims. First, an industrialization thesis: once domain invari-
                                                ants are formalized as an executable Harness, the Harness itself becomes a first-class enterprise
                                                asset that compounds in value as foundation models commoditize, and CAAF’s ability to de-
                                                liver its reliability on commodity-tier models makes fully self-hosted, on-premises deployment
                                                architecturally feasible for regulated sectors where cloud APIs are not an option. Second, an
                                                architectural claim supported by ablation: CAAF’s three pillars address complementary failure
                                                surfaces—context isolation, deterministic grounding, and oscillation control—and none alone
                                                closes the controllability gap at commodity cost. The paper proposes no new training recipe,
                                                architecture, or scaling study; the contribution is entirely at the orchestration and industrial-
                                                ization layer. Evidence across two structurally complementary benchmarks (autonomous driv-
                                                ing and pharmaceutical reactor design), three-tier UAI ablations, multi-agent baselines, and a
                                                closed-source commodity family replicated by two independent open-weight families, is reported
                                                in the body.


                                        1       Introduction
                                        The current generation of Large Language Models excels at broad heuristic reasoning but fun-
                                        damentally lacks deterministic grounding in physical and regulatory invariants. In safety-critical
                                        industries such as automotive engineering, bio-pharmaceutical manufacturing, and cloud infrastruc-
                                        ture, a single undetected physical constraint violation can propagate through design and validation
                                            ∗
                                             This work was conducted in the author’s personal capacity as an independent researcher. The views expressed are
                                        those of the author alone and do not represent any current or former employer. All domain examples are constructed
                                        from publicly available physics and engineering literature; no proprietary or confidential information was used. CAAF
                                        is a general-purpose framework not tied to any specific organization’s products or services. All experiments are offline
                                        requirements-engineering simulations; no real vehicles, drug production, or patients were involved.



                                                                                                   1
pipelines—triggering costly recalls, regulatory rejections, or safety incidents. Our experiments re-
veal that even when monolithic GPT-4o is given an explicit semantic hint to “check for paradox,”
it achieves only 90% accuracy on a controlled engineering task with known ground truth. When the
hint is removed—the deployment-realistic condition—accuracy collapses to 0%. This demonstrates
that apparent LLM reliability in safety-critical domains is often a prompt engineering artifact, not
an architectural property: a system whose reliability depends on the presence of a specific linguistic
trigger cannot be safely deployed in production environments where engineers draft requirements
in natural language without prescribed escape hatches.
    While techniques such as Chain-of-Thought [Wei et al., 2022], ReAct [Yao et al., 2023], and
iterative self-reflection have marginally improved LLM reliability, they remain vulnerable to two
well-documented structural failure modes: Context Rot, where models deprioritize safety con-
straints introduced early in long prompts [Liu et al., 2024]; and Stochastic Oscillation, where
models oscillate between constraint violations when simultaneously satisfying competing require-
ments [Huang et al., 2024].
    This paper introduces the Convergent AI Agent Framework (CAAF), which integrates
emerging industrial practices of Harness Engineering [Böckeler, 2026] with classical Cybernetic
Control Theory to address these failure modes. CAAF builds on insights from three research di-
rections: (a) evidence that LLMs cannot reliably self-correct intrinsic reasoning failures without
external grounding [Huang et al., 2024]; (b) the principle that domain invariants can be formal-
ized as executable machine contracts [Meyer, 1992, CNCF, 2019]; and (c) the observation that
textual feedback signals can be structured as analogue gradients to guide iterative improvement
[Yuksekgonul et al., 2024].
    CAAF’s core theoretical contribution is its third pillar: the transition from naive heuristic
feedback to a Closed-Loop Cybernetic Controller. By introducing Structured Semantic
Gradients and mathematical State Locking, CAAF provides a deterministic pathway to force
a stochastic LLM toward monotonic convergence on a verifiable Harness Asset. We demonstrate
that by supplanting “prompt engineering” with a formal cybernetic control loop, AI agents can
reliably converge upon physically verified specifications—or reliably detect when constraints are
irreconcilable—in domains where safety and organizational red lines must not be silently relaxed.
    This paper validates CAAF through two independent domain benchmarks—automotive en-
gineering and pharmaceutical continuous flow reactor design—and demonstrates that alternative
multi-agent architectures (debate, sequential checking) fail to achieve the same reliability on these
tasks. We argue, based on the architectural decomposition rather than on domain count alone,
that CAAF addresses a general structural problem: any workflow in which an LLM gener-
ates a complex artifact that must simultaneously satisfy multiple formally verifiable
constraints. The domain-specific component is exclusively the Harness Registry and its UAI
validators; the decomposition engine, convergence loop, and paradox detection mechanism are de-
signed to be domain-agnostic. We therefore conjecture that wherever constraints can be expressed
as executable assertions—whether physical laws, regulatory requirements, or financial models—the
same architectural pattern applies; broader empirical validation beyond the two reported domains
remains future work (Section 12.6). In this sense, we propose CAAF as a candidate constraint
satisfaction layer for LLM-generated artifacts: analogous to how a type system catches errors
at compile time before code reaches production, CAAF is designed to catch constraint violations
at generation time before engineering artifacts reach downstream processes.

Contributions.     This paper makes two core claims; the remaining sections supply the supporting
evidence.


                                                  2
    1. An industrialization thesis: the Harness as a first-class enterprise asset, and the
       self-hosted commodity-model deployment it unlocks. The central claim is not about
       model intelligence—we propose no training recipe, no new architecture, no scaling study. It
       is about where domain knowledge should live in an AI-augmented engineering organization.
       Pulling domain invariants out of prompts and into a frozen YAML+UAI contract, governed by
       a Change Approval Board, turns the Harness Registry into a versioned, auditable corporate
       asset whose value compounds as the inference layer underneath it commoditizes. Because
       CAAF’s reliability does not depend on frontier-model capability, all components can run on
       a single commodity-tier model on commodity hardware inside the enterprise firewall—which
       in regulated sectors (ISO 26262, ISO 13485, IEC 62443, SOTIF) is the difference between
       being unable to deploy AI-augmented requirements engineering at all and deploying it with
       the controllability contract kept in-house.

    2. An architectural claim, validated by ablation: CAAF’s three pillars address com-
       plementary failure surfaces, and none alone closes the controllability gap at com-
       modity cost. RAD + Context Firewall defeats Context Rot; UAI + Harness supplies the
       deterministic constraint boundary; Structured Semantic Gradients + State Locking prevent
       stochastic oscillation. A three-tier UAI ablation makes the interaction concrete: determinis-
       tic UAI grounding is necessary—monolithic and multi-agent baselines without it fail across
       all domains tested—but not sufficient at commodity reasoning cost, where faithful tool-call
       UAI access still collapses into oscillation until State Locking is added. Frontier reasoning can
       substitute for Pillar 3, but only at an order-of-magnitude higher per-trial cost.

The evidence supporting these two claims—two structurally complementary benchmarks (a 2-
constraint L3 AD paradox and a 7-constraint pharmaceutical flow-reactor paradox with a 3-way
minimal unsatisfiable subset), three-tier UAI ablations, debate / sequential-checker baselines, cross-
family open-weight replication, and the full per-trial cost analysis—is reported in Sections 4–9.

Relation to Prior Work. The mechanisms underlying CAAF’s three pillars—computational
assertions [Singhvi et al., 2023], structured textual feedback [Yuksekgonul et al., 2024, Cheng et al.,
2024, Agrawal et al., 2025], monotonic state preservation [Liao, 2026], and recursive context de-
composition [Zhang et al., 2025]—each have independent prior art. The most direct precedents
for the overall positioning are Blueprint First, Model Second [Qiu et al., 2025] and ATLAS [Ma
et al., 2025]. CAAF’s contribution is the integration: a single coherent framework that couples
these mechanisms with a long-lived, versioned domain Harness library targeted at safety-critical
engineering. Detailed positioning appears in Section 10.


2     Problem Statement: The Controllability Gap
Contemporary AI orchestration frameworks suffer from three structural failure modes that prevent
deployment in regulated production environments.

2.1    The “Compliant Hallucination” Paradox
When an LLM is tasked with satisfying a complex engineering constraint set, it often prioritizes
linguistic completeness over mathematical accuracy. This produces “Compliant Hallucinations”—
outputs that are syntactically well-formed and rhetorically persuasive but contain latent physical
contradictions. Two behavioral tendencies compound this failure mode:


                                                   3
   Sycophancy: LLMs adapt to the tone and expectations of the prompt, producing answers
that appear to satisfy the requester’s stated goal even when the underlying physics are impossible
[Zheng et al., 2024].
   Completion Bias: LLMs are trained to produce complete, useful outputs [Kadavath et al.,
2022]. An implicit reward for providing a solution—rather than declaring no valid solution exists—
causes models to force answers when the correct response is to declare a physical deadlock.

2.2   Context Rot and Attention Decay
Transformer-based LLMs allocate attention via a softmax mechanism, meaning attention weights
are normalized across the full context length [Vaswani et al., 2017]. As context grows, individual
tokens—including early-defined safety constraints—receive progressively diluted attention weight.
Liu et al. [2024] empirically demonstrate this effect: information placed in the middle of long con-
texts is systematically underweighted compared to content near the beginning or end of the prompt.
This effect manifests in engineering contexts as what is commonly referred to as Context Rot: in
deeply populated requirement documents, models gradually deprioritize strict safety invariants in
favor of later-appearing business preferences.

      Note on memory architectures: External memory mechanisms (such as context
      files in long-running agent sessions) partially mitigate context rot by elevating critical
      information to the context boundary. CAAF’s Context Firewall is a structural alterna-
      tive: by isolating each executor’s context to only the information relevant to its atomic
      task, it prevents dilution from occurring in the first place, rather than attempting to
      repair it after the fact.

    Frontier evidence (2026). We empirically confirm in Section 5.3 that context rot persists
at the 2026 reasoning frontier: under cross-domain noise injection, Anthropic Claude Opus 4 with
adaptive high-effort thinking (n=20) commits the same forward-safety violation in 20/20 trials with
zero variance in chosen speed, despite mean encrypted-thinking signature lengths exceeding 6,000
characters. Increased deliberation capacity does not cure context-rot failures; the reliability gap
remains architectural.

2.3   Stochastic Oscillation in Reflection Loops
Multi-agent frameworks relying on unstructured self-reflection or “agent debate” [Du et al., 2024]
suffer from Stochastic Oscillation: a state of unbounded self-correction where fixing an error in
one constraint domain inadvertently re-introduces an error in another. This is not a fundamental
capability limitation of the underlying model; rather, it arises because writing explicit, sufficiently
precise correction prompts for each possible failure combination is impractical at scale. Without a
mechanism to lock previously validated states, each correction step is an unanchored random walk
in parameter space.


3     Methodology: The CAAF Architecture
CAAF is built upon three interdependent pillars inspired by Systems Engineering, Contract-Based
Design [Meyer, 1992], and Control Theory.




                                                  4
       INPUT                                                                               OUTPUT

             Engineering Requirements (User Input)                                                     Verified Artifact                                   FAILED_PARADOX
                                                                                                                                           OR
              Additional information, reference, etc.                                              All constraints satisfied                                    Deadlock report



      CAAF SYSTEM                             System input                                                                                         System output


             ORCHESTRATOR — coordinates pipeline, manages state, controls convergence                                                        All nodes converged / paradox detected

               Recursive atomic Decomposition                     Topological DAG                                                                              Aggregation
                                                                                                       Executor (node) Task Assigning
                           LLM reasoning                          parent_id + topo sort                                                                        global artifact




             EXECUTOR LAYER — context-firewalled, physically isolated API threads                                                                                          Reviewer's feedback

                                                                                                                                                       Two-level feedback:
                                                                                                                                                       • Per-node: UAI → Executor
                         Executor 1                            Executor 2                                           Executor N
                       Vision/Perception
                                                 +
                                                             Kinematics/Physics
                                                                                       +     ···       +
                                                                                                                   Domain-specific
                                                                                                           dispatch (firewalled context)               • Global: aggregate → Reviewer




                                                                                                           candidate artifacts
               HARNESS REGISTRY                                            UAI ASSERTION ENGINE
               - Constraint files (YAML)                                   Python eval(), deterministic, incorruptible by LLM reasoning
               - Versioned, auditable
               - Model-agnostic
                                                                            eval(assertion, artifact) → PASS or FAIL + Error Trace

                             e.g.
                   assert(stop_dist < 30)                                                                                                     Pass?
                    assert(decel <= 2.0)


      temporarily modify Harness                                                                                                                  no              yes


               SEMANTIC REVIEWER
               global cross-node validation
                                                      ⑥
                                                     STRATEGIC
                                                     NEGOTIATION
                                                                                          Strategic Resolution Menu
                                                                                              LLM generates trade-off
                                                                                                                                     yes
                                                                                                                                             Global
                                                                                                                                           violations?
               on integrated artifact                                                     options anchored by UAISolver
                                                      paradox resolution

                                                                                                                                                  no
                                                             UAISolver Hints
                Root-Cause Analysis                        deterministic math:                 Human Decision
               DAG traversal → isolate minimal          exact physical boundaries
                 conflicting constraint subset

                                                                                                                        terminate with deadlock
                                                                            relax constraints

                Review Feedback Creation

                          State Locking               Harness Updating                                           Structured Semantic Gradient
                        PASS → immutable             Update with the relaxed                               ∇ε = { Dimension, Direction, Magnitude }
                        prevents regression               constraints                 Dimension & Direction: anchored by UAI boolean; Magnitude: LLM-inferred




Figure 1: CAAF closed-loop system architecture. The Orchestrator decomposes requirements into
a topological DAG; isolated Executors generate candidate artifacts validated by the UAI Assertion
Engine; the Semantic Reviewer produces Structured Semantic Gradients with State Locking to
drive monotonic convergence or escalate to Strategic Negotiation upon detecting irreconcilable
paradoxes.




                                                                                                   5
3.1     Pillar 1: Recursive Atomic Decomposition (RAD) and Topological Scoping
CAAF employs Physical Context Decoupling via independent API execution threads to con-
struct a Context Firewall. Unlike “agent personas” operating within a shared context window,
RAD nodes are physically isolated. For example, a node computing physical safety boundaries is
explicitly denied access to a sibling node’s budgetary constraints, preventing the LLM from trading
safety margins against financial targets. Recursive context decomposition with isolated subagents
has recently become a commodity primitive [Zhang et al., 2025]; RAD’s contribution is the har-
ness coupling described in Section 3.2, in which each isolated subcontext receives only the harness
slice declared in its scope. This principle generalizes to any domain where independent constraint
dimensions must not contaminate each other’s evaluation.

         Monolithic LLM — Shared Context Window                                                                   CAAF — Context Firewall (RAD)

                                                                                    Vision Executor                       Kinematics Executor                   Comfort Executor
      Single Context Window
                                                                                          Context:                                Context:                             Context:
      • Forward safety constraint                                                       weather data,                          physics params,                    VIP jerk constraint,
      • Rear safety constraint                                                      perception range only                    speed/stopping only                  comfort spec only
      • VIP comfort constraint             Context Rot: safety constraints                                                                                  …
      • CPU scheduling specification               diluted by noise
      • V2X bandwidth requirement                                                      LLM Node 1                               LLM Node 2                          LLM Node N
      • Cost optimization target
      • Brand reputation flag                                                     → perception_range = 30m                    → stop_dist = 82m                 → (not yet evaluated)
      • Thermal management spec                                              VS
      •…



                                                                                                                      UAI — Physical Assertions
                                     LLM                                                                             Cross-node, deterministic evaluation
                           Attention diluted across                                                          assert(stop_dist < perception_range) → FAIL
                            all constraints equally



                       Compliant Hallucination                                                                            FAILED_PARADOX
                                 vt5 = 55 km/h                                                                        Safety paradox detected before
                         (silently violates rear safety)                                                            comfort constraint is even considered




Figure 2: Context Firewall contrast. Left: A monolithic LLM receives all constraints in a shared
context window, enabling safety–cost trade-off contamination (Context Rot). Right: CAAF’s RAD
architecture isolates each Executor to its domain-specific context; cross-node conflicts are detected
deterministically by the UAI at integration time.

     Metadata-Driven DAG Construction: The Orchestrator uses a two-step RAD process:
first, the LLM decomposes the problem statement into an atomic node graph (a JSON structure
with explicit parent id dependency links); then, a deterministic topological sort maps these de-
pendencies to an ordered execution sequence. The LLM contributes semantic decomposition; a
deterministic algorithm enforces structural routing:

                                                                Listing 1: Illustrative RAD node structure
{
    " nodes ": {
       " Vision_Node ": {
          " id ": " Vision_Node " ,
          " parent_id ": null ,
          " description ": " Calculate perception range from rainfall intensity " ,
          " context_keys ": [] ,
          " expected_schema ": { " pe rc ep ti on _r an ge _m ": " float " }
       },
       " Kinematics_Node ": {
          " id ": " Kinematics_Node " ,


                                                                                          6
            " parent_id ": " Vision_Node " ,
            " description ": " Calculate stopping distance and verify speed
                constraint " ,
            " context_keys ": [" pe rc ep ti on _r an ge _m "] ,
            " expected_schema ": { " v e h i c l e _ s p e e d _ k m p h _ t 5 ": " int " }
        }
    }
}

Illustrative node structure; actual decompositions are LLM-generated and may use less descriptive
identifiers. The structural properties (parent id, context keys, expected schema) are enforced
deterministically regardless of naming.
    The topological sort automatically derives [Vision Node] → [Kinematics Node] from the par-
ent id graph. This routing is computed deterministically from the node structure, not inferred by
an LLM at execution time.
    Constraint Awareness Layer: The DAG establishes a topological Constraint Awareness
Layer. Each Reviewer traverses the graph to access the contextual outputs of predecessor nodes.
For instance, the Kinematics Node incorporates the 30m vision limit computed by Vision Node,
enabling cross-domain conflict detection (e.g., a computed stopping distance of 80m) prior to final
artifact integration.
    Progressive Graph Construction: For ultra-large requirement documents, CAAF employs
Progressive Graph Construction. Rather than forcing the Orchestrator to ingest thousands of
constraints simultaneously, the Orchestrator establishes a high-level taxonomy and incrementally
spawns sub-orchestrators to parse and insert localized dependencies into the DAG dynamically.
This cognitive throttling enables scaling to industrial-sized specifications without saturating the
Orchestrator’s context window.

3.2     Pillar 2: Harness as an Asset (HaaA)
CAAF decouples domain knowledge from LLM inference capability. Engineering expertise is for-
malized into machine-readable Harness Registries (YAML constraint files mapped to a Unified
Assertion Interface) that function as first-class enterprise assets. This concept is grounded in es-
tablished software engineering principles: Design by Contract [Meyer, 1992] treats preconditions
and postconditions as executable specifications; Policy-as-Code [CNCF, 2019] treats business rules
as independently versioned, testable artifacts. CAAF extends both paradigms to AI-generated
outputs. In the LLM era, the closest precedent is DSPy Assertions [Singhvi et al., 2023] within the
DSPy declarative programming model [Khattab et al., 2023], in which a Python predicate serves
simultaneously as the generator’s compilation target and as the runtime check; HaaA differs in
being asset-shaped—a versioned registry binding YAML rules to external validators (simulation,
EDA, HiL, TLA+) dispatched through the UAI, under the harness lifecycle described below—and
in producing failure traces designed as safety-case evidence (e.g., for ISO 26262 hazard-and-risk
argumentation) rather than for self-refinement alone. A detailed comparison appears in Section 10.
    Because CAAF systematically converges toward the Harness, the fidelity of the Harness repre-
sents the ultimate determinism ceiling of the system. If an enterprise formalizes a flawed constraint,
the system will deterministically converge toward that flaw. This reliance necessitates a rigorous
Harness Lifecycle:
    1. Tacit-to-Explicit Transformation: A robust Harness distills tacit expert intuition and
       regulatory frameworks (e.g., ISO 26262 [International Organization for Standardization, 2018]
       for automotive functional safety) into executable machine contracts.

                                                    7
  2. Meta-Validation (Test-Driven Constraints): Before deployment, a Harness undergoes a
     CI/CD pipeline in which “golden” (known-valid) and “poisoned” (known-invalid) test artifacts
     are submitted to the UAI. If the Assertion Engine fails to trigger [HARD FAILURE] on a
     poisoned artifact, the Harness itself is flagged for human review. This treats constraints as
     code subject to the same quality gates as production software.

  3. Harness Freezing and RBAC: Once validated, the Harness is frozen via Role-Based Access
     Control. Neither AI agents nor standard users may modify constraints at runtime. Relax-
     ation of any constraint requires a formal Change Approval Board (CAB) process, creating an
     auditable record of every engineering trade-off.

  4. The Compounding Moat: Foundation LLMs are commoditizing utilities whose relative
     capability is eroded by successive model generations. The Harness is a compounding asset:
     every novel edge-case encountered in production adds a new assertion, accumulating the orga-
     nization’s history of solved engineering paradoxes as a proprietary, model-agnostic knowledge
     base.

    Harness Sources — YAML and External Tools: The Harness asset has two complemen-
tary sources. First, YAML-encoded rules capture formalized domain knowledge (physical laws,
business red lines, regulatory requirements) as parameterized, human-readable contracts. Second,
the UAI integrates existing external validation tools—simulation software, Electronic Design Au-
tomation (EDA) tools, Hardware-in-the-Loop (HiL) test benches, and formal verification tools such
as the Temporal Logic of Actions (TLA+)—as deterministic grounding mechanisms. Rather than
replacing these specialized tools, CAAF integrates them into the agent workflow, preserving their
unique validation capabilities while providing the surrounding convergence infrastructure.


                 BEFORE HaaA                                    Engineer           AFTER HaaA

                               Human Expertise
           Engineer
                               & Tacit Knowledge                                   Human Expertise
                                                           CAAF
                                                       →    Harness Registry
                                                                                   & Tacit Knowledge
                             Simulation / validation
                                   tool, etc.                     via UAI         Simulation / validation
                                                            Harness as an Asset         tool, etc.
      Engineering Artifact



                                                           Engineering Artifact




Figure 3: Enterprise asset landscape before and after Harness as an Asset (HaaA). Before HaaA,
domain expertise is locked in individuals and tools are coupled ad hoc. After HaaA, knowledge is
codified into a versioned, auditable Harness Registry that integrates UAI validation and simulation
tools, producing verified engineering artifacts.


3.3   Pillar 3: Structured Semantic Gradients and Monotonic Non-Regression
The Semantic Reviewer functions as a semantic sensor. Upon detecting a UAI deviation, it
                                         ⃗
computes a Structured Semantic Gradient ∇ϵ:

                                                       8
                   ⃗ = {Dimensioni , Directioni , Exact Boundary Magnitudei }
                   ∇ϵ                                                                             (1)
     Beyond Heuristic Feedback: A line of recent work—ProTeGi [Pryzant et al., 2023], TextGrad
[Yuksekgonul et al., 2024], Trace [Cheng et al., 2024], and GEPA [Agrawal et al., 2025]—treats
textual feedback as a gradient signal for LLM workflows; CAAF’s Structured Semantic Gradient
shares this metaphor and is positioned in detail in Section 10. Classical LLM self-reflection provides
“Blind Gradients” of the form “the speed is too high; please reduce it.” These supply a qualitative
direction (Directioni ) but leave the magnitude (Magnitudei ) to stochastic guessing—leading to in-
efficient step sizes and oscillation. CAAF resolves this by projecting exact analytical solutions from
the physical space (via the UAI) into the semantic space. When a constraint failure is detected,
the UAI reports not merely a binary FAIL but the exact mathematical boundary required for com-
pliance. Feeding this exact magnitude to the Reviewer replaces stochastic magnitude guessing with
a sharp, directionally anchored gradient on that constraint, narrowing the search to the feasible
half-space rather than leaving step size to chance.
     Semi-Deterministic Gradient Formulation: The gradient has two components with dif-
ferent origins. The Error Trace (e.g., AssertionError: Kinematics.D stop (82m) > Vi-
sion.D limit (30m)) is produced deterministically by the UAI’s Python assertion engine. The
Reviewer LLM synthesizes this trace into a semantic gradient: the Dimension and Direction are
strictly anchored by the boolean failure, while the Magnitude (e.g., “Set speed ≤ 50 km/h”) is
an LLM-inferred approximation. Crucially, because CAAF operates as a closed control loop, the
magnitude need not be exact on the first iteration. If the LLM under-corrects, the UAI will de-
terministically reject the output again. State Locking ensures that while the LLM searches for the
correct magnitude, it cannot regress previously validated constraints.
     Two-Level Feedback Architecture: The Reviewer operates as CAAF’s unified feedback
center at two levels. At the per-node level, the Reviewer interprets a single Executor’s UAI
failure and generates a targeted gradient to guide its retry—Root-Cause Analysis identifies which
constraint was violated, the gradient specifies how to correct it, and State Locking protects already-
verified dimensions. At the global level, after all nodes individually converge, the Orchestrator
aggregates their results into a unified artifact and the Reviewer performs cross-node validation
against the full Harness rule set—detecting conflicts that are invisible to any individual Executor
operating in its firewalled context. In both cases, the Reviewer produces the same output triple:
{Root-Cause Analysis, Structured Semantic Gradient, State Locking decisions}. This architectural
symmetry ensures that the same convergence mechanism governs both local correction and global
integration.
     Temporal Relevance: A natural question is whether it is contradictory to rely on an LLM
to generate corrective gradients if LLMs are unreliable. The answer lies in task specificity. Current
models are not reliable enough for zero-shot guaranteed compliance on complex, multi-constraint
engineering problems. However, they are capable enough to perform the atomic reasoning step of
reading a stack trace and determining which direction a parameter should move. CAAF places the
LLM within a deterministic bounding box: within this constrained space, the LLM’s tendency to
diverge becomes an asset—enabling rapid exploration of candidate solutions and escape from local
optima that would trap rigid algorithmic solvers.
     Monotonic Non-Regression via State Locking: To prevent stochastic oscillation (“fixing A
while breaking B”), CAAF implements State Locking. When a dimension is validated as PASS, its
corresponding JSON schema node is marked read only: true in the subsequent iteration prompt.
This forces the Executor to concentrate creative inference only on failing dimensions, guaranteeing
that the set of verified constraints grows monotonically across iterations (Eq. 2 below). Importantly,


                                                  9
State Locking operates within each Executor’s scope: because nodes are context-firewalled, locking
a verified dimension in one node does not constrain the adjustment of independent dimensions in
sibling nodes. The Context Firewall and State Locking are complementary mechanisms—the former
prevents cross-node contamination, while the latter prevents intra-node regression. The closest
precedent for explicit monotonic-progress enforcement is Soft-FSM [Liao, 2026]; State Locking
achieves the same invariant declaratively at the constraint-dimension level (Section 10).
    Monotonic Non-Regression + Finite Termination. Let C = {c1 , . . . , cK } denote the set
of modeled constraints, and let Vt ⊆ C denote the set of constraints satisfied (verified) at iteration t.
Under CAAF’s State Locking mechanism:

                                          Vt ⊆ Vt+1     ∀t ≥ 0                                       (2)

That is, the set of verified constraints is monotonically non-decreasing—once a constraint is verified,
State Locking prevents the Executor from regressing it in subsequent iterations. This property holds
under two assumptions: (a) the Harness is internally consistent (no contradictory assertions), and
(b) UAI evaluations are deterministic. The loop terminates in one of two states: VT = C (all
constraints satisfied, PASS) or the Reviewer determines that C is unsatisfiable (FAILED PARADOX).
Termination is enforced by a bounded retry budget (max iters) rather than by a formal fixed-
point theorem; Eq. 2 is a non-regression invariant, not a finite-time convergence proof. We do not
claim a formal contraction bound on how fast Vt grows toward C in the general case; the empirical
convergence behavior is reported in Sections 4.5 and 7.

                                  Listing 2: State Locking example
{
    " audit_results ": {
       " s e n s o r _ f u s i o n _ p r o t o c o l ": {
           " status ": " PASS " ,
           " instruction ": " LOCKED . Do not modify in next iteration ."
       },
       " k i n e m a t i c s _ s a f e t y _ m a r g i n ": {
           " status ": " FAIL " ,
           " error_trace ": " Stopp ing_di stance (80 m ) exceeds visual_range (30 m )
                 ." ,
           " semant ic_gr adient ": " Enforce speed_limit <= 60 km / h to satisfy
                                                       D_stop < D_vision ."
       }
    }
}


3.4    Unified Assertion Interface (UAI): The Semantic-to-Physical Transducer
LLMs operate in a continuous, probabilistic semantic space where contradictions can be obfuscated
by eloquent phrasing. Industrial engineering demands a deterministic physical space where a 70m
braking distance either is or is not less than a 30m perception limit—there is no rhetorical middle
ground.
    The UAI acts as the mandatory transducer between these two realms. Leveraging the Model
Context Protocol (MCP) [Anthropic, 2024], the UAI connects AI agents to deterministic external
validators—simulation software, EDA tools, HiL test benches, or formal verification tools (e.g.,
TLA+). This architecture structurally prevents the LLM from “grading its own homework.” LLM
outputs are compiled into rigid schemas and evaluated within a sandboxed assertion engine. The

                                                   10
                                                   UAI Assertion                             Semantic Reviewer
        LLM Executor
                                                      Engine                                   Interprets error trace
                                                    Python eval()                         → Structured Semantic Gradient
       Generates candidate
        engineering artifact
                                       artifact     → PASS / FAIL          error trace
                                                     + error trace                              ∇ε = {Dimension,
                                                                                              Direction, Magnitude}
       Firewalled context →
      only relevant constraints                      deterministic /
                                                  incorruptible by LLM                          State Locking →
                                                                                               Prevents regression
                                                                                              of verified constraints




                                                  Orchestrator                       ∇ε
                                                      Replanning
                                                      Aggregation




                             EXIT: PASS                                  EXIT: FAILED_PARADOX
                            Verified Artifact                               Deadlock Detected




Figure 4: Structured Semantic Gradient pipeline. The LLM Executor generates a candidate ar-
tifact; the UAI Assertion Engine produces a deterministic PASS/FAIL with an error trace; the
Semantic Reviewer interprets the trace into a gradient ∇ϵ⃗ = {Dimension, Direction, Magnitude};
State Locking freezes verified dimensions. The loop exits on full PASS or FAILED PARADOX.




                                                              11
result is returned as an incorruptible PASS/FAIL accompanied by an exact error trace. Critically,
the UAI is purely a detector: it evaluates whether an assertion holds and produces a boolean result
with diagnostic data, but does not interpret failures, generate corrective feedback, or make state
management decisions. All interpretation—determining why a constraint failed, how to correct it,
and which previously verified dimensions to lock—is the responsibility of the Semantic Reviewer
(Section 3.3). This separation ensures that the deterministic check remains independent of the
stochastic feedback generation.
    Neuro-Symbolic Architecture: CAAF instantiates a practical Neuro-Symbolic architec-
ture [Shen et al., 2023, Schick et al., 2023] in which the LLM does not replace mathematical
computation but serves as its cognitive interface:

  1. Formalization (Frontend): The LLM translates unstructured business requirements into
     structured parameters, establishing the problem space for the solver.

  2. Heuristic Search: In early-stage engineering, where not all constraints are mathematically
     defined, the LLM proposes creative, topological alternatives (e.g., modifying system architec-
     ture) to bypass deadlocks that a pure numerical solver cannot conceptualize.

  3. Strategic Translation (Backend): When the UAI identifies a deadlock or optimal bound-
     ary, the LLM translates machine-oriented coordinates into human-interpretable strategic
     trade-offs (e.g., “Option A: maintain speed; Option B: upgrade radar”).

   In this division of labor, the LLM handles decomposition, communication, and heuristic leaps,
while the UAI defends physical red lines with mathematical certainty.

3.5   Paradox Termination and Strategic Negotiation
The Structured Semantic Gradient loop converges when all constraints pass—but for constraint sets
that are mathematically irreconcilable, no amount of iteration produces a valid artifact. CAAF
handles this case through a deterministic exit: when the Reviewer detects that the active constraint
set admits no solution, it terminates the loop with FAILED PARADOX and initiates the Strategic
Negotiation phase.
    Topological Root-Cause Analysis: Root-Cause Analysis (RCA) is a general capability of
the Semantic Reviewer, employed at both per-node and global levels (Section 3.3). At the per-node
level, RCA identifies which specific constraint an Executor violated and why. At the global level,
the Reviewer traverses the DAG backwards from the failed UAI assertion to isolate the minimal
conflicting Harness rule subset—the smallest set of constraints whose simultaneous satisfaction is
impossible. This topological scoping prevents false attribution: a failure in a downstream node is
traced to its upstream root cause, not blamed on whichever node first triggered the error. When
RCA determines that the conflicting subset is irreconcilable—no parameter value satisfies all con-
straints simultaneously—the Reviewer escalates to Strategic Negotiation rather than continuing
futile iteration.
    Strategic Resolution Menu: Rather than halting operations or silently violating a constraint,
CAAF generates a Strategic Resolution Menu: a structured set of conflict-resolution options,
each with explicit quantified trade-offs (which constraint would be relaxed, by how much, and what
downstream impact this incurs). This shifts the human operator’s role from manual debugging to
executive policy authorization—a transition from engineering mechanic to strategic decision-maker.
    Dynamic Harness Override and Controlled Relaxation: When the human selects a res-
olution option, CAAF executes a Dynamic Harness Override: a Compliance Engineer agent


                                                12
rewrites the targeted assertion to reflect the authorized relaxation, computing the exact minimal
boundary value required to resolve the deadlock rather than over-correcting. With the relaxed con-
straint locked via State Locking, the pipeline re-enters the convergence loop—now with a satisfiable
constraint set—and achieves PASS in one subsequent iteration.
    This makes CAAF a collaborative decision arbiter : physical red lines cannot be silently over-
ridden by LLM inference, but operations are not blocked indefinitely. Any departure from original
constraints occurs through an explicit, timestamped human authorization record—a structural de-
fense against the organizational failure modes discussed in Section 9.


4     Empirical Evaluation: The L3 AD Degradation Paradox
To demonstrate CAAF’s deterministic capabilities, we designed an evaluation based on an L3 au-
tonomous driving function transition scenario characterized by an irreconcilable physical contradic-
tion. This is an offline requirements engineering task: the scenario is posed to an AI system
acting as a system architect, whose job is to determine the target parameters for a production
vehicle system. This is not a real-time control scenario.

4.1   The Engineering Narrative and Constraint Setup
An L3 autonomous vehicle is cruising on a highway at 120 km/h. Torrential rain (80 mm/h) reduces
the sensor detection range to 30 meters. The system engineer poses the following requirements
engineering task to the AI framework:

      Define the “Degradation State Machine” for this scenario. Determine the target cruise
      speed vehicle speed kmph t5 at the end of a 5-second transition window, such that
      the vehicle reaches a physically safe state without triggering a rear-end collision from
      following traffic.

    The scenario is governed by two simultaneous hard constraints:

         Constraint           Formula                 Implication
                               (vt5 /3.6)2
         Fwd. Safety (A)           2µg     < Prange   At 30m perception limit: vt5 ≤ 55 km/h
                               v0 −vt5
         Rear Safety (B)        t·3.6   ≤  amax       At 2.0 m/s2 decel limit: vt5 ≥ 84 km/h

    The Irreconcilable Paradox: Constraint A requires vt5 ≤ 55 km/h; Constraint B requires
vt5 ≥ 84 km/h. No value of vt5 satisfies both simultaneously. The physically and operationally
correct response is to (a) detect this paradox, (b) generate a formal deadlock report, and (c) rec-
ommend driver handover or propose explicit constraint relaxation with quantified trade-offs.

4.2   Experimental Design and Results
Methodology: parse-failure exclusion. Across all experimental cells reported in this paper,
we apply a uniform parse-retry policy: any trial whose model output cannot be parsed into the
required JSON schema is re-attempted with a fresh API call (max 3 attempts). Trials whose
three attempts all fail are excluded from the valid-n denominator and reported separately. The
justification is operational: a parse-failed output is trivially detected by any production system (the
JSON parser raises immediately) and cannot propagate as an undetected violation, so it does not


                                                      13
                      Constraint A: (vt5/3.6)² / (2·0.4·9.8) < 30m                                                  Constraint B: (120 − vt5) / (5·3.6) ≤ 2.0 m/s²


                      Forward Safe                                                                                                                  Rear Safe
                      vt5 ≤ 55 km/h                                    Paradox: vt5 ≤ 55 AND vt5 ≥ 84 → No solution exists                        vt5 ≥ 84 km/h



                                                                                          EMPTY
                                                                                      SOLUTION SPACE


                                                                                                                                                                                     vt5 (km/h)
          0                                                             55                                            84                                                 120
                                                                     Fwd ceiling                                   Rear floor                                        Initial speed
                                                                      55 km/h                                       84 km/h                                           120 km/h




Figure 5: L3 AD paradox zone visualization. Forward safety requires vt5 ≤ 55 km/h (green); rear
safety requires vt5 ≥ 84 km/h (blue). The gap between 55 and 84 km/h is an empty solution
space—no valid vt5 satisfies both constraints simultaneously, constituting a provably irreconcilable
paradox.


contribute to the controllability gap this paper measures. Conflating parse failures with compliant
hallucinations (well-formed JSON that violates physics) is a category error. Per-cell exclusion
counts are reported wherever non-zero.
    Experimental Design. We conducted a controlled comparison across seven conditions (n=30
per monolithic condition; n=30 for CAAF), varying three axes: model capability (GPT-4o vs.
GPT-4o-mini), architecture (monolithic vs. CAAF), and prompt condition (no-hint vs. with-hint).
All evaluations used independent API calls; CAAF runs used a fresh orchestrator instance per trial
to prevent state bleed.
    Two independent metrics were applied uniformly across all conditions:

     • Correct%: Semantic self-assessment—whether the system declared a paradox and recom-
       mended driver handover.

     • UAI-intercept%: Physical violation rate—post-hoc evaluation against the harness asser-
       tions, independent of prompt wording.


Table 1: Physical Paradox Detection — Full Experimental Results (n=30). For monolithic rows,
Temp is the single-model sampling temperature; for CAAF rows, “0.7/0.0” denotes Executor/Re-
viewer temperatures respectively.
 #    System             Model                                 Temp                    Hint             n          Correct%                      Failure Mode Distribution
 1    Monolithic      GPT-4o                                          0.7                 ×            30                0%                      Fwd-Viol: 12, Rear-Viol: 11, Forced: 7
 2    Monolithic      GPT-4o                                          0.7                 ✓            30               90%                      Fwd-Viol: 3
 3    Monolithic    GPT-4o-mini                                       0.7                 ×            30                0%                      Fwd-Viol: 25, Rear-Viol: 2, Forced: 3
 4    Monolithic    GPT-4o-mini                                       0.7                 ✓            30               50%                      Fwd-Viol: 15
 5    Monolithic      GPT-4o                                          0.0                 ×            30                0%                      Rear-Viol: 27, Fwd-Viol: 2, Forced: 1
 6    CAAF         all-GPT-4o-mini                           0.7/0.0                      ×            30             100%                       —
 7    CAAF         all-GPT-4o-mini                           0.7/0.0                      ✓            30             100%                       —


    UAI intercept rate was 100% for all conditions: every trial without a correct paradox declara-
tion contained at least one physical violation. For the primary CAAF result (30/30 correct), the
Clopper–Pearson 95% confidence interval is [88.4%, 100%]; for monolithic GPT-4o no-hint (0/30),
it is [0%, 11.6%]. The two intervals do not overlap, establishing statistical significance without
parametric assumptions. This confirms that no monolithic run achieved a physically valid artifact
even when semantic correctness appeared plausible.


                                                                                                      14
    Finding 1 — Architecture Supersedes Model Capability. Conditions [1] and [6] are
the primary comparison: identical physical task, GPT-4o monolithic vs. CAAF-all-mini. GPT-4o
achieves 0% under ecologically valid conditions (no hint); CAAF-all-mini achieves 100%. A smaller,
cheaper model, when embedded in CAAF’s architectural scaffolding, outperforms a state-of-the-art
model operating alone.
    Finding 2 — Monolithic Failure is Structural, Not Stochastic. Condition [5] tests
GPT-4o at temperature 0.0—full determinism. The result is 0%, with Rear-Violation dominating
(27/30 runs). Reducing randomness does not eliminate failure; it fixes the model onto a dominant
incorrect attractor (v=55 km/h, satisfying forward safety while violating rear safety). This refutes
the hypothesis that monolithic failures are sampling artifacts.
    Finding 3 — CAAF is Invariant to Prompt Hints. Conditions [6] and [7] both achieve
100%, whether or not the prompt explicitly contains the word “paradox.” Monolithic models show
substantial sensitivity: GPT-4o improves from 0% to 90%, and GPT-4o-mini from 0% to 50%
when given a semantic escape hatch. CAAF’s reliability derives from its UAI architecture, not
prompt engineering—a critical property for production deployment where prompt content cannot
be controlled.
    Finding 4 — Failure Modes Reveal Systematic Biases. The no-hint condition exposes
a dominant bias: 83% of GPT-4o-mini failures (25/30) are Forward Safety Violations (choosing
v ≥ 84 km/h, satisfying rear safety but violating forward safety). GPT-4o’s failures are more
evenly distributed, suggesting that larger models apply more varied—but equally flawed—reasoning
strategies. No monolithic model, regardless of capability, reliably detects the paradox without an
explicit semantic scaffold.
    Finding 5 — Enterprise Offline Deployment Viability (Cross-Family Open-Weight
Replication). CAAF-all-mini (conditions [6–7]) uses only GPT-4o-mini for all roles: Orchestrator,
Executors, and Reviewer. This architecture eliminates dependency on frontier models and, in
principle, enables fully on-premises deployment using open-weight equivalents. We empirically
validated this claim by re-running the full pipeline on two independent open-weight families accessed
via OpenRouter: Cohere Command-R7B (7B, structured-output fine-tuned) and Google Gemma-3-
12B-IT (12B, general-purpose). For each configuration, we ran n=20 trials on both the AD paradox
(PASS-path variant, Section 4.5) and the pharma 3-way paradox (unsatisfiable variant, Section 7).
All four conditions achieved 100% constraint-satisfaction / paradox-detection rate (80/80
trials; Table 2), with total API cost of $0.061 across the entire 80-trial open-weight matrix.


Table 2: Cross-family open-weight replication of CAAF (n=20 per cell, same Harness and Orches-
trator as the GPT-4o-mini conditions). Both Cohere Command-R7B (7B parameters) and Google
Gemma-3-12B-IT (12B parameters) match the 100% reliability of the reference GPT-4o-mini CAAF
configuration on both benchmarks for models meeting the structured-output prerequisite surfaced
below.
 Executor / Reviewer               Family / Size          AD PASS-path      Pharma Paradox     Total cost
                                                         (SUCCESS rate)     (detection rate)   (80 trials)
 GPT-4o-mini (reference, closed)   OpenAI, ∼8B activ.        20/20 (100%)     20/20 (100%)       $0.05
 Cohere Command-R7B                Cohere, 7B                20/20 (100%)     20/20 (100%)       $0.024
 Gemma-3-12B-IT                    Google, 12B               20/20 (100%)     20/20 (100%)       $0.037


    A secondary observation from the same study: smoke tests of generic instruction-tuned sub-12B
models (Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, Qwen-2.5-7B-Instruct, Gemma-3-4B-IT) failed not on the physics
task but on the decomposition step—their JSON outputs either wrapped the root object in a top-


                                                        15
level list or omitted the nodes key entirely, causing the Orchestrator’s strict-schema parser to reject
the plan. Command-R7B, which is specifically fine-tuned for tool use and structured generation,
did not exhibit this drift. We therefore interpret Finding 5 as two-layered: (i) architectural re-
liability is indeed independent of model scale above a modest capability floor; but (ii) that floor
requires baseline schema-faithful JSON generation, which in the open-weight regime is supplied
either by explicit structured-output fine-tuning (Command-R7B at 7B) or by sufficient general-
purpose capability (Gemma-3 at 12B, and we expect similarly from Llama-3.3-70B-class models).
In practice, this narrows the engineering prerequisite for an on-premises CAAF deployment to a
surmountable one: select an open-weight model with either a JSON/tool-use fine-tune or a ≥12B
parameter count.

                                           Correct (paradox declared)         Forward Safety Violation      Rear Safety Violation          Forced Solution

                   35                                                                                                  Monolithic -> <- CAAF
                                                                                                                                               100%             100%
                   30                                                                                                                                                          n


                   25




Number of trials
                   20

                   15

                   10

                    5

                    0
                            [1] GPT-4o      [2] GPT-4o            [3] GPT-4o-mini         [4] GPT-4o-mini        [5] GPT-4o              [6] CAAF-mini       [7] CAAF-mini
                           no-hint t=0.7     hint t=0.7             no-hint t=0.7             hint t=0.7        no-hint t=0.0           no-hint t=0.7/0.0     hint t=0.7/0.0




Figure 6: Failure mode distribution across all 7 experimental conditions (n=30). Conditions [1–
5] are monolithic LLMs; conditions [6–7] are CAAF. CAAF conditions achieve 100% paradox
detection (green). Monolithic conditions exhibit systematic biases: GPT-4o-mini predominantly
violates forward safety (orange), while GPT-4o failures are more evenly distributed. No monolithic
condition achieves correct paradox detection without an explicit hint.


4.3                     CAAF Execution: Global Interception via Topological Scoping
CAAF dispatches atomic tasks to isolated Executors using a commodity model (GPT-4o-mini):

                   1. The Vision Executor processes weather data and reports perception range:                                                                    30m.

                   2. The Kinematics Executor, isolated from cost and business constraints, computes stop-
                      ping distance: 70m for the candidate speed.

   Each Executor’s output is immediately validated by the UAI Assertion Engine against the node’s
applicable Harness rules. The UAI produces a deterministic PASS or FAIL with an exact error trace;
the Semantic Reviewer then interprets this result to generate actionable feedback—Root-Cause
Analysis identifies the violated constraint, the Structured Semantic Gradient specifies the correction


                                                                                          16
                                                                                                     Problem Statement
                                                                                            Define vt5 for Degradation State Machine




                                                                         Weather Node                                                  Sensor Node
       Layer 1 — Sensor Processing                                    Input: rainfall = 80 mm/h                                    Input: visibility_condition
                                                                     Output: visibility_condition                              Output: perception_range = 30m




                                                         Forward Safety Node                                                                 Rear Safety Node
       Layer 2 — Physics Computation                     Input: perception_range, vt5                     No shared context                  Input: v0=120, vt5, t=5s
                                                        Compute: stop_dist = v²/(2μg)                     (Context Firewall)            Compute: decel = (v₀−vt5)/(t·3.6)
                                                          Assert: stop_dist < 30m                                                           Assert: decel ≤ 2.0 m/s²




                                                                                                         Integrator Node
       Layer 3 — Integration & Cross-Node Assertion                                       Merge outputs → Run UAI cross-assertions




                                                      vt5 accepted                 Both PASS                                    Irreconcilable                   FAILED_PARADOX
                                                          PASS
                                                                                                           UAI Result
                                                                                                                                                           → Strategic Resolution Menu



Figure 7: DAG topology for the L3 AD degradation scenario. Layer 1 (sensor processing) feeds into
Layer 2 (physics computation), where the Forward and Rear Safety nodes are context-firewalled
from each other. The Integrator Node in Layer 3 merges outputs and runs cross-node UAI asser-
tions, guaranteeing that kinematics computation is never contaminated by comfort or cost con-
straints from sibling nodes.


direction and magnitude, and State Locking protects any previously converged dimensions from
regression. This feedback is returned to the Executor for retry (up to 3 iterations per node).
    Once all nodes individually converge, the Orchestrator aggregates their results into a unified
global artifact and the Reviewer performs cross-node validation against the full Harness rule set.
Because the nodes are topologically linked, the UAI assertion evaluates: assert((84/3.6)**2
/ (2*0.4*9.8) < 30) → False. The Python runtime emits an incorruptible [HARD FAILURE].
Critically, this assertion is a Python eval() call, not an LLM judgment—the LLM cannot argue,
reinterpret, or rhetorically override this result. When the Reviewer’s Root-Cause Analysis deter-
mines that the global constraint set admits no solution, the Orchestrator sets the pipeline status
to FAILED PARADOX and initiates the Strategic Negotiation process (Section 3.5).

4.4   Empirical Illustration: Strategic Resolution Menu
The negotiation mechanism described in Section 3.5 produces the following concrete output for the
L3 AD paradox:

                                             Listing 3: Strategic Resolution Menu output
[ SYSTEM DEADLOCK ] Physical constraints are irreconcilable .
   Rule REAR_SAFETY :    v_t5 must be >= 84 km / h ( decel limit )
   Rule FWD_SAFETY :     v_t5 must be <= 55 km / h ( stopping distance )

STRATEGIC RESOLUTION OPTIONS :
[ A ] Formal Deadlock Report ( preserve all constraints ; handover required )
[ B ] Relax rear - safety deceleration limit


                                                                                                    17
      -> Allows v_t5 = 55 km / h ; requires decel = 3.6 m / s ^2 ( comfort impact )
[ C ] Extend perception range via sensor fusion upgrade
      -> Requires hardware change ( V2X / radar redundancy ; cost impact )

   Upon human selection of Option B, CAAF computes vt5 = 55 km/h as the exact forward-safety
boundary, locks it via State Locking, and achieves PASS in one subsequent iteration. A formal
deadlock evidence package (Appendix C) is generated as the auditable authorization record.

4.5   PASS-Path Convergence on the Satisfiable Variant
The preceding experiments validate CAAF’s FAILED PARADOX termination path. A complete ar-
chitectural check also requires that CAAF cleanly takes the SUCCESS path when the constraint set
admits a solution, and that the monotone-convergence property of Equation 2 holds empirically.
We therefore constructed a structurally identical but satisfiable variant of the L3 AD scenario: the
weather is clear and the perception range is raised from 30 m to 90 m, while every other parameter
and both harness rules are unchanged. The feasibility window becomes

                                        vt5 ∈ [84, 95.6) km/h                                       (3)

(84 km/h is the rear-safety lower bound; 95.6 km/h is the forward-safety upper bound at 90 m
perception). Inside this interval every integer speed satisfies both safety constraints.
    Experimental setup. We ran n=20 independent trials of CAAF on this variant using a
GPT-4o executor and a GPT-4o-mini reviewer (temperatures 0.7 / 0.0), identical orchestrator con-
figuration and harness file (ad degradation pass.yaml). Each trial performs the full pipeline:
RAD decomposition, per-node execution with UAI verification, global integration review, and ter-
mination decision. No human interaction is allowed; SUCCESS is declared only when the global
Reviewer confirms every harness clause passes on the aggregated artifact.
    Results. CAAF achieved 100% PASS (20/20, Clopper–Pearson 95% CI [83.2%, 100%]) with
every run terminating in a single iteration (mean node-level retries = 0.0). Both harness rules
locked on first review in all 20 runs; neither rule ever regressed. The Executor selected vt5 = 84
in 8 runs and vt5 = 90 in 12 runs—both valid, and bracketing the feasible window exactly (see
Figure 8).

                Table 3: PASS-path convergence on satisfiable AD variant (n=20)
                    Metric                                               Value
                    PASS (SUCCESS) rate                             100% (20/20)
                    Mean node-level retries per run                       0.0
                    Monotone non-regression runs (Eq. 2)                 20/20
                    State Locking: rear rule never-failed runs           20/20
                    State Locking: forward rule never-failed runs        20/20
                    Chosen vt5 distribution (km/h)                  {84: 8, 90: 12}

    PASS-Path Architectural Check. The PASS path exercises exactly the same decomposi-
tion, UAI verification, and Global Review stages as the paradox path, but exits through SUCCESS
instead of FAILED PARADOX. Table 3 confirms three claims: (i) CAAF terminates correctly when a
solution exists, with no false-positive paradox detections; (ii) Equation 2 is satisfied empirically—
V0 = ∅ ⊆ V1 = C in every trial, since the Executor’s first parameter choice falls inside the feasibility
window and every harness clause locks immediately; and (iii) on satisfiable workloads CAAF adds
no iteration overhead beyond the single RAD pass and the deterministic UAI sweep. Together with

                                                  18
                              Constraint A: (vt5/3.6)² / (2·0.4·9.8) < 90 m                                                        Constraint B: (120 − vt5) / (5·3.6) ≤ 2.0 m/s²

                                Forward Safe                                                                                                                Rear Safe
                      vt5 < 95.6 km/h (@ 90 m perception)                     Feasibility: vt5 < 95.6 AND vt5 ≥ 84 → window [84, 95.6) km/h
                                                                                                                                                          vt5 ≥ 84 km/h



                                                                                                                         FEASIBLE
                                                                                                                         WINDOW


                                                                                                                                                                                     vt5 (km/h)
                                      old boundary value
                                                                                                                                                               Initial speed
          0                           @30 m perception          55                                                84                95.6                                       120



                                                                  20 CAAF trials
                                                                  every run lands in the feasible window         n=8       n=12
                                                                                                                (v=84)    (v=90)




Figure 8: Solution zone for the satisfiable AD variant (perception range relaxed from 30 m to 90 m),
drawn on the vt5 number line (km/h). The widened forward-safety half-line (vt5 < 95.6, green) and
the rear-safety half-line (vt5 ≥ 84, blue) overlap to form the gold feasible window [84, 95.6). The two
constraint formulas are annotated at the top; the initial speed (120 km/h, black square) and the
55 km/h boundary from the original 30 m-perception paradox (dotted) are marked for reference.
The annotation box below records the vt5 values chosen by the Executor across 20 CAAF trials—8
runs at v=84 and 12 at v=90—both inside the window. Together with the empty intersection in
Figure 5, this visualizes CAAF’s symmetric handling of the SUCCESS and FAILED PARADOX paths.


the paradox experiments (§4.2, Table 1) this demonstrates that CAAF’s two termination branches
are both operational, neither collapses into the other, and the deterministic UAI floor preserves
safety symmetrically across both branches.


5     Empirical Variant I: Context Rot Under Requirement Noise
To empirically validate Context Rot as a structural failure mode, we designed a controlled bench-
mark (n=20 per condition) that injects cross-domain requirement noise into the core scenario and
compares monolithic and CAAF responses.

5.1    Experimental Setup
We extended the L3 AD scenario with two noise categories:

    1. Information Volume Noise: Irrelevant constraints on CPU core scheduling and Vehicle-
       to-Everything (V2X) 5G video compression bandwidth.

    2. Business Conflict Noise: A “VIP Sleep Mode” constraint mandating that longitudinal
       braking jerk must not exceed 1.5 m/s3 to avoid waking a rear-seat passenger.

   The monolithic baseline used GPT-4o at temperature=0.0 (n=20 per condition). CAAF used
the all-GPT-4o-mini configuration (executor temp=0.7, reviewer temp=0.0, n=20 per condition).

5.2    Monolithic Failure: Systematic Safety-Priority Collapse
Across all 20 trials of the Safety-Only (clean) Product Requirements Document (PRD), the mono-
lithic model converged to a mean speed of 57.9 km/h, with 18/20 runs violating rear safety and
2/20 violating forward safety. No run passed UAI verification (0/20). The dominant failure mode is
systematic prioritization of the forward safety constraint, silently violating the rear safety invariant
without flagging the paradox.


                                                                                                    19
    Adding VIP Sleep Mode, thermal protection, and compute allocation noise (the noise condition)
shifted the failure distribution: mean speed rose to 63.7 km/h, with 14/20 runs violating rear safety
and 6/20 violating forward safety, but zero outputs passed UAI verification (0/20). Across all 40
trials in both conditions, no monolithic output achieved physical compliance.

                      Table 4: Context Rot Benchmark Results (n=20 per condition)
System                               Test Condition        Paradox Detected   Failure Distribution
Mono GPT-4o (t=0)                    Clean (safety-only)         0/20         Rear-Viol: 18, Fwd-Viol: 2
Mono GPT-4o (t=0)                    Noise (VIP+thermal)         0/20         Rear-Viol: 14, Fwd-Viol: 6
Mono Opus 4 thinking (effort=high)   Noise (VIP+thermal)         0/20         Rear-Viol: 20 (zero-variance v=55; 11/20 also jerk-viol)
CAAF-all-mini                        Clean (safety-only)        20/20         —
CAAF-all-mini                        Noise (VIP+thermal)        20/20         —


   The noise condition does not improve the monolithic failure rate (already 0/20 in the clean
condition) but shifts the failure distribution—forward safety violations increase from 2/20 to 6/20—
revealing that attention is stochastically redistributed across competing requirements under noise.

5.3      CAAF Defense: Context Firewall via RAD
When processed through CAAF, the Orchestrator’s RAD established a Context Firewall. The
Kinematics Executor received only kinematics-relevant context; the VIP Sleep Mode and jerk
constraint were routed to a separate comfort analysis node. In all 20 runs of both conditions
(40 total), the UAI immediately detected the physical paradox—no speed value simultaneously
satisfies both hard constraints—and halted with FAILED PARADOX. CAAF’s detection is invariant
to requirement noise because the UAI evaluates physical assertions independently of whatever
business-context tokens the executor received.

5.4      Under Frontier Reasoning (CR1)
To test whether increased deliberation capacity alleviates context rot, we replicated the noisy
condition using Anthropic Claude Opus 4 with adaptive high-effort extended thinking (n=20, ef-
fort=high). Detection remained 0/20. Every trial committed vt5 =55 km/h (zero-variance lock onto
the forward-safety boundary), violating rear safety. The mean encrypted-thinking signature length
was 6,269 characters (max 13,444), confirming substantial deliberation capacity was deployed with-
out effect on the failure outcome. Notably, 11/20 trials also violated the injected jerk constraint
(> 1.5 m/s3 ), indicating that the thinking budget was partially absorbed by the irrelevant “VIP
Sleep Mode” requirement without producing a correct global trade-off.
    Compared with GPT-4o (whose noisy-condition speed distribution shifted from 57.9 to 63.7
km/h mean), Opus 4 thinking is more attractor-locked under noise rather than less. This refutes
the hypothesis that increased deliberation capacity cures context-rot failures: frontier reasoning
with no external deterministic grounding concentrates onto the dominant local attractor more
rigidly, not less. The reliability gap is architectural, not a function of raw reasoning budget.


6     Empirical Variant II: Stochastic Oscillation vs. Monotonic Con-
      vergence
Having demonstrated CAAF’s interception capability, we evaluated its convergence behavior under
a naive reflection baseline (n=20 per condition).



                                                             20
6.1       The Seesaw Effect of Naive Reflection
We placed a monolithic LLM (GPT-4o-mini, temperature=0.7) in an AutoGPT-style [Wu et al.,
2023] naive reflection loop: upon each UAI failure, the error message was appended to the prompt
as feedback, with no State Locking applied. Across n=20 independent trials (5 iterations each),
the model experienced severe Stochastic Oscillation in all 20/20 runs—zero convergence.


           Table 5: Stochastic Oscillation vs. Monotonic Convergence — Aggregate (n=20)
 Iteration    Dominant Speed (km/h)    Freq.   Other Speeds Observed          CAAF — Status
      1           55 (fails Rear)      14/20         84 (4), 0 (2)        Paradox detected (halted)
      2           84 (fails Fwd)       15/20            55 (5)                       —
      3           55 (fails Rear)      15/20             84 (5)                      —
      4           84 (fails Fwd)       13/20    55 (5), 70 (1), 110 (1)              —
      5           55 (fails Rear)      14/20        84 (5), 90 (1)                   —

Aggregate over n=20 naive reflection runs (5 iterations each). 0/20 converged. The dominant
pattern is 55↔84 oscillation, but 20% of runs include outlier speeds (0, 70, 90, 110 km/h)—
attempts at compromise values that still violate at least one constraint. CAAF (n=20): paradox
detected on the first pass, halting in all 20/20 runs.
    The oscillation pattern is structurally determined: when the model attempts to fix the forward
safety constraint (lowering speed to ≈55 km/h), it immediately violates the rear safety deceleration
limit. When corrected to raise speed to ≈84 km/h, it violates forward safety. Occasional outlier
speeds (0, 70, 90, 110 km/h) represent the model’s stochastic attempts at compromise, but all
remain physically invalid. Without a mechanism to lock confirmed constraint boundaries and
escalate the authorization decision, the model oscillates indefinitely.

6.2       CAAF: Deterministic Termination vs. Iterative Oscillation
CAAF exits on the first pass in all 20/20 runs (FAILED PARADOX), requiring zero iterative guessing.
The contrast is structural: on paradox inputs, CAAF halts in the first global review without iter-
ative magnitude search—the Reviewer evaluates the constraint set, determines from deterministic
UAI failures that no valid value exists, and escalates immediately. This deterministic termina-
tion property is what distinguishes CAAF from reflection-based approaches: rather than iterating
toward a solution that cannot exist, CAAF declares infeasibility via the Reviewer’s root-cause anal-
ysis over deterministic UAI failures and invokes the Strategic Negotiation process (Section 3.5) to
resolve the deadlock through authorized constraint relaxation.


7     Cross-Domain Validation: Pharmaceutical Flow Reactor Para-
      dox
To validate CAAF’s domain-agnosticism claim beyond automotive engineering, we constructed a
second paradox benchmark in the pharmaceutical process engineering domain. This benchmark is
structurally more demanding than the AD case: it involves 7 simultaneous constraints with
nonlinear (Arrhenius-exponential) interactions, a 3-way minimal unsatisfiable subset, a multi-layer
DAG topology, and 4 constraints that independently PASS—enabling a rigorous test of State
Locking.



                                                21
                                                                            Naive reflection: every iteration
                     140                                                    violates 1 constraint; no run
                                                                          declares paradox (0/20 converged).
                     120
                                                                                                                          Rear Safe
                     100                                                                                                  (vt5 84)

                     80
        vt5 (km/h)                                                                                                        No Solution
                     60

                     40
                                                CAAF: 2 irreconcilable constraints                                        Fwd Safe
                                                flagged simultaneously (iter 1).                                          (vt5 55)
                     20                         No speed proposed.

                      0
                                    1                  2                   3                  4                 5
                                                                               Iteration
                           Naive reflection (n = 20, 5 iters/run, 0/20 converged)          CAAF (n = 20): FAILED_PARADOX at iter 1 (20/20)


Figure 9: Stochastic oscillation (naive reflection, n=20) vs. deterministic termination (CAAF).
Each orange star is one naive-reflection run’s proposed speed at a given iteration; the green ×
marks the CAAF halt state. The naive baseline oscillates between the two constraint boundaries
(v=55 and 84 km/h) with occasional outliers, and never declares a paradox (callout: each iteration
still violates ≥ 1 harness constraint across all 100 iteration-samples). CAAF instead exits on
iteration 1 of every run by flagging both constraints as simultaneously irreconcilable and proposing
no speed (20/20; callout). No naive run converges; CAAF requires zero iterative search.


7.1   Constraint Setup
A pharmaceutical process engineer must design operating parameters for a continuous flow mi-
croreactor producing a drug intermediate via a first-order reaction with a competing side reaction.
The reaction follows Arrhenius kinetics:
                                             
                                   −Ea
           k(T ) = A · exp                      , A = 2.5 × 108 s−1 , Ea = 72,000 J/mol         (4)
                             R · (T + 273.15)
with conversion X = 1 − exp(−k · τ ) and impurity fraction I = α · k 2 · τ (α = 0.35 s). Seven
constraints must be simultaneously satisfied:

Table 6: Pharmaceutical Flow Reactor Constraints. ICH = International Council for Harmonisation
(pharmaceutical regulatory guidelines).
                                   ID     Constraint                  Formula                Source
                                  C1      Conversion                  X ≥ 0.95               ICH Q6A regulatory
                                  C2      Impurity                    I ≤ 0.02               ICH Q3A guideline
                                  C3      Temperature                 T ≤ 150 ◦ C            Thermal decomposition
                                  C4      Residence time              τ ≤ 120 s              Process stability
                                  C5      Production rate             ≥ 5.0 kg/day           Scale-up requirement
                                  C6      Thermal safety              Qgen ≤ Qcool           Runaway prevention
                                  C7      Pressure drop               ∆P ≤ 15 bar            Equipment rating


                                                                                 22
   The Irreconcilable Paradox. C1 and C2 interact through the shared nonlinear variable
k(T ):

     • C1 requires k · τ ≥ − ln(0.05) ≈ 3.0, pushing τ upward.

     • C2 requires α · k 2 · τ ≤ 0.02, capping k 2 · τ .
                         Imax /α
     • Combining: k ≤ − ln(1−X min )
                                     ≈ 0.01908 s−1 , forcing τ ≥ 157.1 s.

     • C4 caps τ ≤ 120 s. The gap is 37.1 s—no valid τ exists.

The minimal conflict set {C1, C2, C4} has cardinality 3 (vs. 2 in the AD benchmark), and any
two of these three constraints are pairwise satisfiable—the irreconcilability emerges only when all
three are imposed simultaneously. Meanwhile, C3, C5, C6, and C7 are independently satisfiable at
the boundary operating point (T ≈ 98.6 ◦ C, τ ≈ 157 s), providing a State Locking demonstration:
these constraints should lock to PASS and never regress during iteration.

7.2       Experimental Results
We evaluated eight conditions (n=20 each) spanning two executor families (OpenAI GPT-4o-mini
and Anthropic Claude). Conditions 1–4 test GPT-4o-mini with and without hints, the CAAF
pipeline, and a Mono+UAI (prompt-sim) ablation in which the model is told to mentally
apply the harness formulas and retry. Conditions 5–8 add 2026-frontier reasoning baselines and a
cross-vendor CAAF cell: monolithic Opus 4 with adaptive high-effort thinking (Cond. 5), the same
model granted true tool-call UAI access via the Anthropic tool-use API (Cond. 6), commodity-
tier Haiku 4.5 with the same true tool-call UAI interface but no extended thinking (Cond. 7), and
the full CAAF pipeline with all-Haiku-4.5 executors (Cond. 8).


Table 7: Pharmaceutical Flow Reactor Paradox Results (n=20 per condition). Conditions 1–4 use
GPT-4o-mini; conditions 5–8 use Anthropic Claude. The uniform parse-retry policy (§4.2) applies
to every cell.
#     System                                               Hint   n    Correct%   Failure Mode Distribution
 1    Monolithic GPT-4o-mini                                ×     20     0%       Impurity-Viol: 11, Conv-Viol: 9
 2    Monolithic GPT-4o-mini                                ✓     20     70%      Impurity-Viol: 6
 3    CAAF-all-mini                                         ×     20    100%      Paradox detected: 20/20
 4    Mono + UAI (prompt-sim)                               ×     20     95%      Impurity-Viol: 1 (at T =130 ◦ C, τ =60 s)
 5    Mono (reasoning) Opus 4 thinking, effort=high         ×     20     0%       Impurity: 12, Conv: 2, Dual: 6 (dual attractor at τ ≈157 s and τ =120 s)
 6    Mono + UAI (true tool-call) Opus 4 thinking           ×     20    100%      MUS {C1, C2, C4}: 20/20 (mean 3.15 iters)
 7    Mono + UAI (true tool-call) Haiku 4.5, no thinking    ×     20     0%       Oscillation, max iters 20/20 (Imp: 14, Conv: 12 overlap)
 8    CAAF-all-Haiku-4.5                                    ×     20    100%      Paradox detected: 20/20




7.3       Analysis
Finding 6 — Structural Complexity Does Not Degrade CAAF. Despite the 7-constraint,
nonlinear, 3-way paradox structure, CAAF achieves 100% paradox detection (20/20), replicating
the AD domain result. The DAG decomposition correctly routes temperature and residence time
computations through dependent constraint nodes, and State Locking confirms that C3, C5, C6,
and C7 lock to PASS throughout iteration.
   Finding 7 — Hint Fragility Scales with Complexity. In the AD domain (2-constraint
paradox), the hint condition achieved 100% detection. In the pharma domain (3-way paradox with
nonlinear interactions), hint-aided detection drops to 70%. This confirms that prompt engineering


                                                                          23
                                                                                    C4:     120 s                                                                C2: k(T)2 0.02 (impurity                             2%)
                             400                                                    C1: k(T)     3.0 (conversion                          95%)                   C1+C2 feasible region

                             350
                             300




     Residence time (s)
                             250
                                                                                                                              Feasible boundary
                             200                                                                                              T = 98.6°C, = 157 s
                             150                                              gap
                                                                              37 s
                             100
                                     50
                                          0
                                              80                   90                           100                         110                      120                          130                        140                   150
                                                                                                                       Temperature T (°C)

Figure 10: Pharmaceutical flow reactor paradox zone in the (T, τ ) plane. The C1 conversion
boundary (green) requires τ above the curve; the C2 impurity boundary (red) requires τ below it.
Their intersection forms the C1+C2 feasible region (green wedge), whose minimum-τ point—the
feasible boundary—is at T = 98.6 ◦ C, τ = 157 s. The C4 residence-time limit (blue dashed) caps τ
at 120 s (blue band below). The two feasible regions do not overlap: the wedge apex sits 37 s above
the C4 ceiling (red arrow), constituting an empty solution space.



                                                                   Correct (paradox declared)     Impurity Violation (C2)    Conversion Violation (C1)   Dual Violation (C1+C2)    Oscillation / Silent Override


                                                                             GPT-4o-mini family                                                                           Anthropic Claude family

                                                                                                 100%                                                                100%                                          100%
                                     20                                                                                                                                                                                        n




                  Number of trials
                                     15


                                     10


                                     5


                                     0
                                                   [1] Mono mini      [2] Mono mini              [3] CAAF             [4] Mono+UAI          [5] Mono Opus        [6] Mono+UAI           [7] Mono+UAI               [8] CAAF
                                                       no-hint             hint                   all-mini             prompt-sim               thinking          Opus true-tc           Haiku true-tc             all-Haiku



Figure 11: Failure mode distribution across eight experimental conditions (n=20 each) in the phar-
maceutical domain. Baselines exhibit diverse failure modes dominated by impurity and conversion
violations. Mono Opus thinking (Cond. 5) exhibits a dual-attractor pattern (C1+C2 optimum vs.
C4 boundary). Mono+UAI (Haiku true tool-call, Cond. 7) enters the stochastic-oscillation trap
with all trials hitting max iters (Finding 8). CAAF achieves perfect paradox detection in both
Cond. 3 (all-mini) and Cond. 8 (all-Haiku).



                                                                                                                                  24
reliability degrades as constraint complexity increases—precisely the regime where architectural
enforcement becomes most critical.
    Finding 8 — Three-Tier UAI Ablation: UAI Access is Necessary but Not Suffi-
cient. The Mono+UAI condition strips away RAD and Structured Semantic Gradients, giving
a monolithic LLM direct UAI access. We evaluate three implementations at n=20 on Pharma:
(i) prompt-simulated UAI on GPT-4o-mini (Cond. 4), where the model is told to mentally apply
the harness formulas and retry up to three times; (ii) true tool-call UAI on Claude Haiku 4.5
without extended thinking (Cond. 7), where the model invokes a Python harness assertion engine
via the Anthropic tool-use API at commodity-tier reasoning cost; and (iii) true tool-call UAI on
Claude Opus 4 with adaptive high-effort thinking (Cond. 6), same tool interface at frontier-tier
reasoning cost.
    Prompt-simulated UAI on the commodity model reaches 95%; true tool-call UAI on the frontier
model reaches 100% (all 20 trials correctly identifying the minimal unsatisfiable subset {C1, C2, C4}
in a mean of 3.15 tool-loop iterations); but true tool-call UAI on the commodity model reaches
0%. In Cond. 7, 20/20 trials exhaust max iters=8 oscillating between CONVERSION MINIMUM and
IMPURITY LIMIT (final-iteration failed-rule tally: 14 IMPURITY, 12 CONVERSION, overlapping),
and no trial declares a paradox. The variance across the three cells is therefore not explained by
UAI access modality: the configuration with the most faithful UAI access (case ii—every constraint
evaluated by a Python engine, every verdict returned as a structured tool result) performs worst.
It is explained by the interaction between reasoning capability and the capacity to step back from
iterative local fixes to recognize global unsatisfiability. Case ii enters the stochastic-oscillation
trap identified in §6 for naive-reflection baselines: it survives transplantation into a Mono+UAI
scaffold because Mono+UAI provides detection but no State Locking—each tool-call turn repairs
one constraint while re-introducing another.
    This reverses the framing in earlier drafts that attributed the residual Mono+UAI gap to reason-
ing capability alone: at commodity-model cost, the Structured Semantic Gradient with
State Locking (Pillar 3) is what translates UAI grounding into reliability. Frontier rea-
soning is a viable substitute for that scaffolding—at ∼12× Haiku’s cost and ∼114× GPT-4o-mini’s
cost—but it is not a free one.
    This result is consistent with CAAF’s design philosophy: the three architectural pillars address
complementary failure surfaces:

   • UAI (Harness as an Asset) provides the deterministic constraint boundary—necessary
     for grounding but not sufficient alone at commodity reasoning cost.

   • RAD ensures input fidelity at scale by decomposing complex specifications into atomic,
     context-firewalled subtasks, preventing context attention decay.

   • Structured Semantic Gradients with State Locking prevent the stochastic-oscillation
     trap that destroys Mono+UAI with commodity models; this pillar is reliability-load-bearing
     at the price point where deployment economics become practical.

    Finding 9 — Adaptive Thinking Does Not Bridge the Gap Without UAI. Cond. 5
grants Opus 4 the same adaptive high-effort thinking budget but no UAI tool. Across n=20 Pharma
trials, the model achieves 0% paradox detection. The failures concentrate on two locally optimal
attractors: 11/20 trials commit to (T ≈98.6 ◦ C, τ ≈157 s)—the C1+C2 optimum that violates C4
by exactly 37 s—and 9/20 commit to (T ≈103 ◦ C, τ =120 s)—the C4 boundary that violates C1 or
C2. Each attractor satisfies a 2-constraint subset; neither acknowledges the 3-way irreconcilability.
Despite encrypted thinking blocks averaging ∼7,670 characters per trial (max 10,032), no run


                                                 25
produced a paradox declaration, replicating the GPT-4o monolithic failure pattern at the frontier
reasoning scale. Reasoning capability alone is necessary but not sufficient; an external deterministic
detector remains the load-bearing component. Conversely, as shown in Finding 8, an external
deterministic detector without Structured Semantic Gradients is also insufficient at commodity-
model cost—both directions of the ablation refute “a single primitive closes the controllability
gap.”
    Finding 10 — The Practical Contribution is Cost. Conditions 3, 6, and 8 all reach
100% paradox detection on the Pharma benchmark. Their per-trial API costs differ by two orders
of magnitude: CAAF-all-mini at $0.0044/trial; CAAF-all-Haiku-4.5 at $0.20/trial; Mono+UAI
true-tool-call on Opus 4 thinking at $0.499/trial (mean 3.15 tool-call iterations). Including the
open-weight executors from Finding 5 (Cohere Command-R7B at $0.0012/trial; Google Gemma-
3-12B-IT at $0.0013/trial), CAAF achieves identical reliability 114× cheaper than the frontier-
reasoning + true-tool-call path, and 415× cheaper for the Command-R7B configuration. Impor-
tantly, Mono+UAI is not a cheap alternative at commodity-model cost: Cond. 7 (Haiku 4.5 + true
tool-call) costs $0.0404/trial but reaches 0%, so the relevant cost comparison is between CAAF
at commodity cost and Mono+UAI at frontier cost. The cost gap is the architectural payoff: by
combining UAI invocation enforcement with the Structured Semantic Gradient that prevents oscil-
lation, CAAF makes deterministic constraint satisfaction available at commodity-model economics.
See §9 for the full per-trial cost analysis and Appendix references.


8     Alternative Architecture Baselines
To demonstrate that CAAF’s reliability derives from its specific architectural properties (UAI +
State Locking) rather than from multi-agent orchestration per se, we evaluated two alternative
multi-agent architectures that lack deterministic constraint enforcement.

8.1   Multi-Agent Debate Baseline
Following Du et al. [2024], we implemented a debate architecture: two LLM agents independently
generate solutions, then engage in 3 rounds of cross-critique. No UAI or State Locking is applied;
agents rely on mutual persuasion to converge. We evaluated on both the AD and pharmaceutical
domains (n=20 each).

8.2   Sequential Checker Baseline
We implemented a sequential pipeline: a primary LLM executor generates a solution, then a second
LLM instance acts as a checker, critiquing the output. Up to 3 retry cycles are permitted. The
checker uses natural language judgment (no UAI assertions).

8.3   Results
Finding 11 — Multi-Agent Orchestration Alone is Insufficient; UAI Is Insufficient
Alone at Commodity Cost. Both the debate and sequential baselines achieve 0% paradox de-
tection across all 80 trials (40 AD + 40 Pharma). The debate architecture exhibits a notable failure
mode: agents converge on a socially negotiated “consensus” that silently violates one constraint,
producing False Consensus—in the Pharma domain, 16/20 debate trials converge on impurity-
violating solutions where neither agent detects the three-way paradox. The sequential checker
baseline produces a near-even split between impurity and conversion violations (9/20 IMPURITY,


                                                 26
                     Table 8: Alternative Architecture Baselines (n=20 per condition)
 System                                         Domain   n    Correct%   Failure Mode Distribution
 Debate (2 agents, 3 rounds)                    AD       20     0%       Fwd-Viol: 7, Rear-Viol: 13
 Debate (2 agents, 3 rounds)                    Pharma   20     0%       Impurity-Viol: 16, Conv-Viol: 4
 Sequential (exec + checker, 3 retries)         AD       20     0%       Forced: 9, Fwd-Viol: 7, Rear-Viol: 4
 Sequential (exec + checker, 3 retries)         Pharma   20     0%       Impurity-Viol: 9, Conv-Viol: 9, Dual: 2
 CAAF-all-mini (no hint)                        AD       30    100%      Paradox detected: 30/30
 CAAF-all-mini (no hint)                        Pharma   20    100%      Paradox detected: 20/20
 Mono + UAI (prompt-sim)                        AD       20     85%      Fwd-Viol: 3
 Mono + UAI (prompt-sim)                        Pharma   20     95%      Impurity-Viol: 1
 Mono + UAI (true tool-call, Opus 4 thinking)   Pharma   20    100%      MUS {C1, C2, C4}: 20/20
 Mono + UAI (true tool-call, Haiku 4.5)         Pharma   20      0%      Oscillation, max iters 20/20



9/20 CONV, 2/20 DUAL), with the LLM checker approving constraint-violating solutions despite
all containing physical violations. Meanwhile, CAAF achieves 100% across both domains.
    The Mono+UAI ablation yields three disparate data points on Pharma: prompt-sim on GPT-
4o-mini reaches 95%; true tool-call on Opus 4 thinking reaches 100%; true tool-call on commodity-
tier Haiku 4.5 reaches 0%, with all 20 trials oscillating through max iters=8 without a paradox
declaration (Finding 8). UAI alone therefore closes the controllability gap only given frontier-grade
reasoning; at commodity reasoning cost, even faithful tool-call UAI access falls into a stochastic-
oscillation trap. The architectural value of CAAF is twofold: enforcement (unlike Mono+UAI, it
does not depend on the agent choosing to invoke the assertion engine; unlike multi-agent baselines, it
does not depend on consensus dynamics) and oscillation control (the Structured Semantic Gradient
with State Locking closes the gap that Haiku+UAI leaves open). See Finding 10 for the cost
consequences.
    These results confirm that CAAF’s reliability derives from the combination of its UAI assertion
engine, Structured Semantic Gradient, and State Locking mechanism, not from the general prin-
ciple of multi-agent decomposition. Neither UAI grounding alone nor multi-agent orchestration
alone bridges the controllability gap; CAAF’s architectural advantage is the composition of these
primitives at commodity-model economics.


9     Economics and Organizational Dynamics
9.1     Paradigm Shift: From One-Shot Heuristics to Expansion-to-Convergence
The adoption of CAAF necessitates a transition in user expectations from the “One-Shot” fallacy
to an Expansion-to-Convergence (E2C) workflow.
    In the prevailing “One-Shot” approach, users treat LLMs as high-capability search engines,
expecting a flawless engineering specification from a single inference. While initial outputs often
appear syntactically impressive, they frequently harbor latent physical contradictions that surface
only during downstream testing—at far greater cost than the original generation. CAAF accepts
initial output variance and treats the first generation as a “coarse expansion” of possibilities, then
systematically prunes this draft via Structured Semantic Gradients until it aligns with physical
reality. The cost of convergence is paid in cheap inference tokens, not in expensive engineering
labor.

9.2     The Economics of Certainty: Redefining Total Cost of Ownership
We formalize the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) for AI-generated engineering artifacts:

                                                   27
                                                                             Correct (paradox declared)        Incorrect   AD (n=20-30)       Incorrect   Pharma (n=20)

                                                                UAI absent                                                                                  UAI present
                                     0       0                  0            0       0          0         0                 95                100                   0      100    100         100
                             100




Paradox detection rate (%)
                             75



                             50



                             25



                              0
                                   [1] Monolithic     [2] Monolithic         [3] Debate       [4] Sequential       [5] Mono+UAI       [6] Mono+UAI        [7] Mono+UAI      [8] CAAF    [9] CAAF
                                    commodity       frontier+thinking                                               prompt-sim         Opus true-tc        Haiku true-tc     all-mini   all-Haiku




 Figure 12: Paradox detection rate across architectures and domains. All baselines without deter-
 ministic UAI—monolithic, debate, and sequential—achieve 0% detection in both domains. Only
 CAAF achieves 100% across both. Mono+UAI shows large model-dependent variance on Pharma:
 95% on GPT-4o-mini (prompt-simulated), 100% on Opus 4 thinking (true tool-call), but 0% on
 Haiku 4.5 (true tool-call, no thinking) where every run oscillates to max iters. UAI ground-
 ing is necessary but not sufficient at commodity reasoning cost. CAAF closes the oscillation gap
 structurally via Structured Semantic Gradients with State Locking, reaching 100% on both domains
 with commodity models.



                                                                    TCO = (Nloops × Cinf ) + (Pfail × Ccat ) + CHITL                                                                                (5)
 where Nloops = internal inference cycles, Cinf = per-cycle inference cost, Pfail = probability of an
 undetected defect reaching production, Ccat = catastrophic failure cost (recall or redesign), and
 CHITL = human debugging labor cost.
      Monolithic deployments minimize Nloops (fast single-shot generation) but accept a non-zero Pfail
 and incur substantial CHITL as engineers diagnose “compliant hallucinations.” CAAF executes a
 Compute-for-Risk Arbitrage: deliberately inflating Nloops through relentless UAI validation
 drives Pfail toward zero on all modeled constraints—empirically observed at 100% detection across
 both reported benchmarks—while reducing CHITL from “hunting for hidden paradoxes” to “exec-
 utive decision authorization.”
      Empirical TCO Analysis (L3 AD Paradox Benchmark): API costs were directly mea-
 sured across n=30 trials per condition. Enterprise pricing (illustrative reference rates): GPT-4o at
 $2.50/$10.00 per 1M tokens (input/output); GPT-4o-mini at $0.15/$0.60 per 1M tokens.
      CAAF-all-mini costs 4.5× more per run than monolithic GPT-4o-mini ($0.0027 vs. $0.0006), yet
 it is the only condition that produces a valid artifact. When cost is measured per correct outcome
 rather than per inference call, monolithic deployments have no estimable cost-per-correct-artifact
 for this class of irreconcilable paradox—zero successes in the denominator. For deployments using
 on-premises open-weight models, per-run inference cost approaches near-zero, retaining reliability
 comparable to our reference configuration on the two reported benchmarks (empirically validated
 with Cohere Command-R7B and Gemma-3-12B-IT; see Finding 5 and Table 2) while eliminating
 the API cost differential entirely.


                                                                                                                   28
Table 9: Empirical TCO Comparison. Dashes in the last row indicate the metric is undefined: no
correct artifacts were produced, so “cost per correct artifact” is not estimable from the measured
data (it would be ∞ in the limit of any finite API spend divided by zero successes).
      Metric                                     Mono GPT-4o         Mono GPT-4o-mini         CAAF-all-mini
      API cost per run (measured)                    $0.0145                $0.0006               $0.0027
      Paradox detection rate                           0%                     0%                   100%
      Artifact physically verified?                     No                     No                   Yes
      Estimated HITL cost (per failure)               $50.00                 $50.00                $5.00
      Effective cost per correct artifact              —†                     —†                  $0.0027
                †
                    Not estimable: 0% paradox detection ⇒ zero correct artifacts in the denominator.


    HITL cost basis: $50/incident = ∼20 min of senior systems engineer time to diagnose a “com-
pliant hallucination”; $5/incident = ∼2 min of executive review of a pre-computed boundary report.
These are conservative engineering-labor estimates for illustration; actual values are domain- and
organization-specific.
    Scaling Behavior: For tasks with S independent constraints, monolithic joint success proba-
bility decays as Psuccess = pS (e.g., p=0.85 per constraint). CAAF’s constraint-wise decomposition
breaks this joint-failure dependency, providing approximately linear cost scaling. Table 10 projects
the theoretical TCO differential as constraint complexity increases:

                          Table 10: Theoretical TCO Scaling (Illustrative Projection)
   Complexity (# Constraints)             Monolithic TCO (est.)        CAAF TCO (est.)         Cost Arbitrage
                     1                              $8.84                     $5.02                     1.8×
                     5                             $62.73                     $5.10                    12.3×
                     10                           $204.06                     $5.21                    39.2×

These projections apply the empirical per-run API costs and the HITL cost estimates above across
varying constraint counts. They are theoretical projections intended to illustrate scaling behavior,
not empirical measurements at each complexity level. External UAI simulation latency (e.g., FEA
solvers) would shift the bottleneck from human cognition to machine compute, reinforcing the eco-
nomic thesis.

9.3     Pharma Cost Comparison at 100% Reliability
Table 11 consolidates the per-trial API economics of every configuration that achieves 100% para-
dox detection on the 7-constraint Pharma benchmark, sorted by cost. The frontier-reasoning
Mono+UAI true-tool-call path matches CAAF’s reliability but costs 114× more per trial than
CAAF-all-mini and 415× more than CAAF-Command-R7B—driven by the per-trial mean of 3.15
sequential tool-call iterations on Opus 4 thinking.
    Mono+UAI is not a cheap alternative at commodity-model cost. The obvious steelman—
pairing a cheap executor with a real tool-call UAI interface instead of running the CAAF pipeline—is
empirically refuted by Cond. 7: Claude Haiku 4.5 (no extended thinking), granted the same true
tool-call UAI access, exhausts max iters on 20/20 Pharma trials at $0.0404/trial and reaches 0%
paradox detection (Finding 8, Table 7). The cheapest configuration that both (a) uses a commodity
model and (b) reaches 100% is CAAF-all-mini at $0.0044/trial, which is ∼9× cheaper than commod-

                                                          29
                                                                                   Monolithic                  Mono + UAI (prompt-sim)            CAAF (reference mini)
                                                                                   Multi-agent baseline        Mono + UAI (true tool-call)        CAAF (alt executors)

                                              CAAF-Command-R7B                                                   Production target (100 %)            CAAF-Haiku-4.5
                                                                                               CAAF-all-mini
                                        100
                                               CAAF-Gemma-3-12B                                                                                                            Opus true-tc
                                                                                     mini prompt-sim




           Paradox detection rate (%)
                                        75                 Mono mini (hint)


                                        50


                                        25
                                               Mono mini (no-hint)
                                                                      Debate
                                                                                                                                                             Opus thinking (no UAI)
                                         0
                                                                                                                                             Haiku true-tc
                                                                      Sequential

                                                               10 3                                       10 2                                          10 1                                100
                                                                                                    API cost per trial (USD, log scale)


Figure 13: Cost vs. reliability on the Pharma benchmark (n=20 per cell except where otherwise
stated). CAAF configurations (green squares) cluster on the 100% detection ceiling at $0.0012–
$0.20 per trial. Mono+UAI true tool-call splits by reasoning tier: Opus 4 thinking reaches 100% at
$0.499/trial; Haiku 4.5 (no thinking) reaches 0% at $0.0404/trial despite the same tool interface.
All non-UAI baselines (monolithic, debate, sequential) sit on or near the 0% floor. The log-scale
cost axis makes the ∼114× gap between CAAF-all-mini and Mono+UAI-Opus visible at identical
reliability.




        Table 11: Pharma per-trial cost at 100% paradox detection (n=20 each, no-hint).
 System                                                                   Executor                                                                                    Iters           $/trial     vs. CAAF-mini
 CAAF                                                                     Cohere Command-R7B (open)                                                                     —             $0.0012         0.27×
 CAAF                                                                     Gemma-3-12B-IT (open)                                                                         —             $0.0013         0.30×
 CAAF (reference)                                                         GPT-4o-mini                                                                                   —             $0.0044          1×
 CAAF                                                                     Claude Haiku 4.5                                                                              —               $0.20          46×
 Mono + UAI (true tool-call)                                              Claude Opus 4 thinking, effort=high                                                          3.15            $0.499         114×




                                                                                                                    30
ity Mono+UAI and ∞× more reliable. This is the empirical content of Finding 10: deterministic
UAI is necessary but not sufficient; at commodity-model cost, reliability requires the Structured
Semantic Gradient with State Locking (Pillar 3) to prevent the oscillation trap. The architectural
value CAAF adds over Mono+UAI is therefore both (i) closing the 0% → 100% reliability gap at
commodity cost and (ii) the ∼114× cost reduction vs. the frontier-reasoning Mono+UAI path.

9.4   The AI as Collaborative Decision Arbiter
Post-mortem analyses of catastrophic engineering failures—including the space shuttle Challenger
O-ring incident and the Boeing 737 MAX Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System
(MCAS) design defects—have identified systemic organizational factors as significant contributors
alongside technical causes [Vaughan, 1996]. In these cases, engineers possessed relevant technical
knowledge but were unable to prevent the erosion of safety margins under schedule and manage-
rial pressure. The common pattern is not ignorance of risk but institutional failure to preserve
engineering red lines when they conflict with delivery timelines.
    CAAF structurally addresses this behavioral vulnerability. Consider a scenario where a project
manager requests that a software team “bypass the safety warning” to meet a deployment dead-
line. A monolithic LLM may comply. CAAF does not, by construction: if the artifact violates the
frozen Harness, the UAI emits [HARD FAILURE]. To proceed, the team must engage the Strategic
Negotiation process (Section 3.5), creating a formal, timestamped decision record. CAAF is de-
signed to convert transient project pressures into durable institutional knowledge, conditional on
the integrity of the Harness Registry itself (see Section 12.2).

9.5   A Constraint Satisfaction Layer for LLM-Generated Artifacts
The empirical results in this paper span two domains—L3 AD requirements engineering (Section 4)
and pharmaceutical continuous flow reactor design (Section 7). We argue that the problem CAAF
addresses is not limited to these, and offer the framing below as a hypothesis motivated by the
architecture—one whose empirical scope remains bounded by the two benchmarks reported here.
We conjecture that workflows of this shape—an LLM generating a complex artifact subject to
formally verifiable constraints—share the same structural risk surface demonstrated in Sections 4–
8: sycophantic compliance, context rot, stochastic oscillation, and silent constraint override; broader
empirical validation of this conjecture remains future work. The pattern is general: human intent
expressed in natural language → LLM-generated artifact → formal correctness criteria
that must all be satisfied simultaneously → potential contradictions among criteria that
must be detected, not masked.
    CAAF’s domain-specific component is exclusively the Harness Registry and its UAI valida-
tors. The RAD decomposition engine, convergence control loop, State Locking mechanism, and
Strategic Negotiation protocol are designed to be domain-agnostic. Replacing the YAML Har-
ness with domain-appropriate assertions is the intended extension mechanism, and we conjecture
that the convergence behavior observed on the two benchmarks carries over to any domain where
constraints can be formalized as executable predicates and composed into a DAG with bounded
branching factor. The UAI evaluation mechanism is identical whether the assertion computes a
braking distance, a thermodynamic equilibrium, a regulatory compliance check, or a financial risk
exposure—but empirical validation beyond physical-law constraints remains future work.
    We identify four categories of formally verifiable constraints, each mapping to distinct industries:

   • Physical Laws (kinematics, thermodynamics, material science): Bio-pharma process de-
     sign—temperature ramp stability can be formalized as thermodynamic assertions; UAI would

                                                  31
      evaluate whether proposed cooling schedules violate phase transition boundaries. Structural
      engineering—load-bearing calculations can be expressed as Finite Element Analysis (FEA)-
      derived assertions; existing simulation tools can be integrated via MCP as UAI validators.

   • Regulatory and Legal Rules (ISO standards, FDA regulations, GDPR, building codes):
     Clinical trial protocol design—sample size, exclusion criteria, and informed consent require-
     ments are formalizable constraints that frequently conflict with practical constraints (budget,
     timeline, patient availability). CAAF’s paradox detection and Strategic Negotiation are di-
     rectly applicable: when ethical constraints conflict with statistical power requirements, the
     system surfaces the trade-off with quantified impact rather than silently relaxing either.

   • Mathematical and Logical Rules (type systems, formal specifications, financial models):
     Financial risk modeling—regulatory capital requirements (e.g., Basel III/IV) impose simul-
     taneous constraints on leverage ratios, liquidity coverage, and risk-weighted assets. These
     constraints are mathematically expressible and frequently tension against business objectives.

   • Infrastructure and Operational SLAs (latency, availability, cost budgets): Cloud Infras-
     tructure as Code—Kubernetes deployment configurations must simultaneously satisfy secu-
     rity policies (network isolation, pod security standards), SLAs (latency < 100ms, replicas
     ≥ 3), and cost budgets. These three constraint categories are individually formalizable and
     routinely conflict: high availability requires more replicas, which violates cost constraints.
     Current tools (OPA, Terraform plan) perform post-hoc policy checks but do not provide
     convergence or paradox detection.

    Embodied AI and Vision-Language-Action (VLA) Models. A particularly compelling
application frontier is the emerging class of Vision-Language-Action models (e.g., RT-2 [Brohan
et al., 2023], Octo [Octo Model Team et al., 2024]) for robotics and autonomous vehicles. VLA
models generate action plans from visual perception and natural language instructions, but remain
fundamentally probabilistic—they provide no formal guarantee that a proposed plan satisfies safety
constraints. Current safety mechanisms in embodied AI operate primarily at the control layer
(millisecond-level): Control Barrier Functions (CBFs) enforce real-time safety boundaries, action-
space clipping limits individual joint ranges, and emergency-stop monitors provide a last resort.
However, at the planning layer (second-level)—where VLA models decide what to do—there is
no equivalent of a constraint satisfaction guarantee: if a VLA proposes a manipulation plan that
simultaneously violates gripper force limits, collision boundaries, and task-completion deadlines, no
existing system detects the multi-constraint conflict, converges toward a feasible plan, or identifies
when the constraint set is irreconcilable.
    CAAF fills this gap as a planning-layer constraint satisfaction layer that complements
control-layer safety mechanisms. Each VLA-proposed action plan can be validated against a Har-
ness encoding physical safety constraints (joint torque limits, collision boundaries), task constraints
(completion time, precision tolerances), and human-safety constraints (approach speed, handover
force). When constraints conflict—for instance, when a manipulation task requires a trajectory
that is fast enough to meet a deadline but too fast for safe human proximity—CAAF’s paradox
detection surfaces the trade-off with quantified options rather than silently selecting a compromised
plan. This positions CAAF and CBFs as complementary layers: CAAF ensures the plan is correct
before execution; CBFs ensure execution stays safe during execution.
    In each case across the domains above, the distinguishing feature of CAAF is not merely
constraint checking (which existing tools already provide) but the combination of convergence
toward satisfaction, paradox detection when the constraint set is irreconcilable, and

                                                  32
structured negotiation with quantified trade-offs. No existing framework provides all three
capabilities in a unified architecture.
    We provide empirical validation for the first category (Physical Laws) in Section 7. Validation
across the remaining categories constitutes a primary direction for future research (Section 12.6).
    Enterprise Offline Deployment. The experimental results (Finding 5, Section 4.2, Table 2)
empirically establish that CAAF’s reliability does not depend on frontier closed-source model ca-
pability. Two open-weight families at two distinct parameter scales—Cohere Command-R7B (7B,
structured-output fine-tuned) and Google Gemma-3-12B-IT (12B, general-purpose)—each achieve
100% on both the AD PASS-path benchmark (20/20 SUCCESS) and the pharma 3-way paradox
benchmark (20/20 paradox detection), exactly matching the GPT-4o-mini reference configuration.
For regulated industries where data-residency constraints prohibit transmission to external APIs
(automotive type approval, ISO 13485 medical devices, IEC 62443 industrial control systems [In-
ternational Organization for Standardization, 2018]), a fully offline CAAF instance using one of
these open-weight models can in principle be certified as part of the engineering toolchain without
sacrificing the convergence guarantee. The Harness Registry and UAI remain deterministic regard-
less of model host, and the convergence behavior is architectural rather than API-dependent. This
positions CAAF as a practical path to AI-augmented requirements engineering in environments cur-
rently closed to cloud-dependent LLM tooling, with the one engineering prerequisite surfaced by
our replication study: the selected open-weight model must either (a) be fine-tuned for structured
/ tool-use output, or (b) be large enough (≥12B) that general instruction-following is sufficient to
emit schema-faithful JSON for the Orchestrator’s decomposition step.


10     Related Work
10.1   LLM Agent Frameworks
Prompt Engineering treats the LLM as a black-box stochastic optimizer, refining inputs to max-
imize the probability of a desirable output distribution. CAAF explicitly supersedes this approach:
rather than optimizing the input to a single inference, it applies a formal cybernetic control loop
to the output across multiple iterations.
    ReAct [Yao et al., 2023] introduced the Thought→Action→Observation loop. CAAF extends
this paradigm by externalizing the “Observation” phase into a computationally isolated, determin-
istic Reviewer—enforcing the Strict Role Isolation that Huang et al. [2024] demonstrate is necessary
for reliable complex reasoning.
    Orchestration and Multi-Agent Frameworks. LangGraph [LangChain, Inc., 2024] pro-
vides durable graph-based orchestration but admits “Node Logic Leakage” absent manual per-node
guards. AutoGen [Wu et al., 2023] and Multiagent Debate [Du et al., 2024] enable social-handoff
actor patterns; in constraint-satisfaction settings these are susceptible to Stochastic Oscillation
(Section 6) and False Consensus (Section 8). CAAF replaces qualitative social handoffs with unar-
guable semantic gradients mechanically mapped to UAI results. AgentForge [Anbar Jafari et al.,
2026b] represents a recent class of lightweight modular agent frameworks that compose skills as a
DAG with YAML-based configuration; CAAF complements this direction by adding a deterministic
external validator (UAI) and a convergence loop on top of the same compositional primitives.
    Recursive Context Decomposition. Recursive task decomposition with isolated subcon-
texts has become a commodity primitive, formalized recently as Recursive Language Models [Zhang
et al., 2025] and shipped in production developer-facing agent SDKs. CAAF’s RAD contribution
is the harness coupling described in Section 3.2: each isolated subcontext receives only the harness



                                                33
slice declared in its scope, so isolation functions as a compliance firewall, not just a context-window
economy measure.

10.2    Declarative LLM Programming and Computational Assertions
The closest precedent for CAAF’s Pillar 2 (Harness as an Asset) is DSPy Assertions [Singhvi
et al., 2023] within the DSPy declarative LLM programming model [Khattab et al., 2023]. dspy.Assert
and dspy.Suggest introduce computational constraints on LLM pipeline outputs as Python pred-
icates that drive both generation (via assertion-driven backtracking and self-refinement) and vali-
dation, with a reported +164% constraint compliance improvement over unconstrained chains.
    CAAF’s HaaA shares this central insight—a single executable specification driving generator
and reviewer alike—and differs in two respects oriented to safety-critical engineering. First, HaaA is
asset-shaped : a versioned registry binds YAML constraint rules to external validators (simulation
tools, EDA, Hardware-in-the-Loop benches, formal verifiers such as TLA+) dispatched through
the UAI, under the harness lifecycle described in Section 3.2 (test-driven validation, freezing, role-
based access control, Change Approval Board); the registry therefore persists across products and
regulatory revisions rather than being authored per-pipeline, and the constraint surface is not
limited to what fits inside a Python predicate. Second, HaaA’s failure semantics are designed as
safety-case evidence: each UAI verdict carries the rule identifier, the deterministic error trace,
and the locked state in a form fit for the evidence-of-compliance argumentation required by safety
standards such as ISO 26262, rather than for self-refinement alone.

10.3    LLM Guardrails and Safety
Constitutional AI [Bai et al., 2022] encodes safety principles into model behavior through
training-time feedback. This internalizes constraints into model weights. CAAF externalizes con-
straints into UAI assertions: a model weight can drift or be overridden by fine-tuning; a Python
assertion cannot.
    NeMo Guardrails [Rebedea et al., 2023] and Guardrails.ai [Guardrails AI, 2023] provide
programmable single-shot output validation. CAAF differs by targeting physical-semantic compli-
ance over a topological dependency graph, with intercept plus convergence rather than pass/fail
intercept alone.
    Consequence-Aware Agentic AI (CA2I) [Anbar Jafari et al., 2026a] is concurrent work
that introduces a pre-execution outcome-assessment module for responsible LLM agents, sharing
CAAF’s premise that constraint violations should be caught before the agent acts. The two are
complementary: CA2I evaluates projected consequences against high-level responsibility criteria,
whereas CAAF formalizes domain invariants as an executable Harness Registry and uses a deter-
ministic UAI plus monotonic-convergence loop to drive the agent toward a verifiable artifact.

10.4    Textual Gradients and Optimization
A line of recent work treats textual feedback as the central optimization signal for LLM-driven
systems. ProTeGi [Pryzant et al., 2023] introduced “natural language gradients” for prompt search
via beam search. TextGrad [Yuksekgonul et al., 2024] formalized this metaphor into an end-to-
end framework that backpropagates textual gradients through arbitrary LLM workflows. Trace
[Cheng et al., 2024] (NeurIPS 2024) generalized the same idea via the Optimization with Trace
Oracle (OPTO) formalism over execution traces. GEPA [Agrawal et al., 2025] (ICLR 2026 Oral)
demonstrates that reflective prompt evolution leveraging natural-language feedback can outperform
reinforcement learning baselines requiring thousands of rollouts.

                                                  34
    CAAF’s Structured Semantic Gradient sits in the same metaphor and differs along two dimen-
sions. First, the optimization target: TextGrad, Trace, and GEPA optimize program parameters
(prompts, sub-prompts, workflow code) across many episodes, whereas CAAF’s gradient drives
in-context monotonic convergence toward a verified artifact within a single inference, with no
parameter or prompt update. Second, symbolic anchoring: the Dimension and Direction compo-
nents of CAAF’s gradient are produced by a deterministic boolean failure from the UAI’s Python
assertion engine; only the Magnitude is LLM-inferred. The two lines compose: an offline-optimized
DSPy/GEPA pipeline could be deployed inside a CAAF Executor whose runtime artifacts are then
verified by the UAI.

10.5   Neuro-Symbolic and Formal Methods
CAAF instantiates a practical Neuro-Symbolic architecture [Schick et al., 2023]: the LLM handles
unstructured language and heuristic search, while symbolic components (Python assertion engine,
simulation tools, TLA+ verifiers) provide rigorous mathematical evaluation.
    SMT Solvers (Z3, CVC4). Satisfiability-modulo-theories solvers [de Moura and Bjørner,
2008, Barrett et al., 2011] are the gold standard for deciding constraint satisfaction over formal
theories. The key differentiator is the input boundary: Z3 requires the full problem to already
be expressed in SMT-LIB, whereas CAAF accepts natural-language requirements and lifts them
into executable assertions through the Orchestrator/RAD pipeline. The two are complementary:
an SMT solver is a legitimate UAI implementation choice for a mixed-integer linear subproblem.
What CAAF adds is (i) the natural-language-to-assertion lift, (ii) monotonic convergence with
State Locking rather than a single yes/no verdict, and (iii) a paradox-surfacing protocol that
returns quantified trade-offs to a human operator rather than an unsat core.
    Soft-FSM. Liao [2026] introduces an explicitly named “monotonic progress” mechanism: a
neuro-symbolic architecture in which an external deterministic state controller enforces monotonic
accumulation of Key Information Units across a long-horizon LLM inquiry, with reported gains from
< 40% baseline completeness to > 97% on legal cross-examination tasks. CAAF’s State Locking
achieves the same monotonicity invariant declaratively at the constraint-dimension level (Eq. 2)
rather than via an up-front procedural FSM topology—more appropriate when the constraint set
is declarative and the convergence shape is emergent.
    Agent-C. Kamath et al. [2025] interleaves SMT solving with constrained generation to enforce
temporal safety properties on LLM agents at decode time. This is a stricter formal guarantee than
CAAF provides for any individual rule but operates at a different granularity: Agent-C polices the
action sequence of an executing agent, while CAAF polices the artifact content produced by an
Executor.
    Constrained / Guided Decoding. Systems such as Guidance [Microsoft Research, 2023] and
Outlines [Willard and Louf, 2023] enforce constraints at the token level by masking the decoder’s
output distribution. This is effective for structural constraints (valid JSON, valid SQL) but does
not address semantic-physical constraints: a schema-compliant JSON document can still specify
vt5 =120 km/h under heavy rain. CAAF operates at a higher layer—the artifact layer —and verifies
constraints requiring arbitrary computation. The two are compositional: constrained decoding
guarantees a parseable Harness-conformant artifact, after which CAAF’s UAI performs the semantic
validation and gradient-based revision that constrained decoding cannot express.




                                               35
10.6    Compliance-Domain Constrained Generation
The most direct prior art to CAAF’s overall positioning is ATLAS [Ma et al., 2025], a constraint-
guided generation framework for structured engineering artifacts in LLM-assisted Model-Driven
Engineering. ATLAS places generation inside a model-driven workflow that separates domain rep-
resentation, constraint compilation, and post-generation validation, demonstrated on AUTOSAR
ARXML generation with a layered combination of XSD schemas, GBNF grammar masking, SHACL
graph validators, and SMT post-validation; it reports 100% schema validity vs. 0% for uncon-
strained prompting. Blueprint First, Model Second [Qiu et al., 2025] argues the broader thesis
that workflow logic should be separated from the generative model via an expert-defined Execution
Blueprint codified as source code, with the LLM invoked only as a bounded sub-task tool.
    CAAF agrees with both directions and contributes two ingredients absent from either: a closed
control loop with State Locking that drives monotonic convergence to a verified artifact rather than
terminating after a single constrained pass (ATLAS) or a single blueprint pass (Blueprint First);
and a HaaA registry whose constraints are accumulated as a long-lived organizational asset rather
than authored per-blueprint or compiled from formal artifacts alone.

10.7    Harness Engineering as an Emerging Discipline
Practitioner Foundations. Böckeler [2026] established patterns for managing LLM interaction
environments to improve reliability in developer productivity tools. CAAF formalizes these pat-
terns into a rigorous framework with guaranteed convergence properties, shifting the application
domain from coding assistance (Agent-as-Tool) to safety-critical engineering governance (Agent-
as-Controller). Rajasekaran [2026] at Anthropic reports a Generator–Evaluator architecture for
long-running application development that is structurally isomorphic to CAAF (Planner ≈ RAD;
Generator ≈ Executor; Evaluator ≈ UAI + Reviewer). The critical difference is that their Eval-
uator is itself an LLM (Playwright browser automation), whereas CAAF’s UAI is a deterministic
assertion engine—a distinction Finding 9 demonstrates is decisive: LLM-based evaluation achieves
0% paradox detection across 80 trials. Zhang [2026] independently maps Harness Engineering onto
the ISO 21448 (SOTIF) safety lifecycle in autonomous driving.
    Concurrent Academic Work. Lee et al. [2026] introduce Meta-Harness, an outer-loop search
over harness code itself; Meng et al. [2026] survey 22 harness systems and propose labeled-transition-
system semantics for agent execution loops. These confirm “Agent Harness” as established 2026
vocabulary. CAAF’s positioning differs in that the harness is treated as a long-lived domain asset
(versioned, frozen under RBAC, accumulated across products) rather than synthesized per task,
and the target domain is safety-critical engineering artifacts rather than developer-tool reliability.

10.8    Comparative Summary
Table 12 contrasts CAAF with prior agent and constraint-checking frameworks along the four
capabilities highlighted throughout this paper: deterministic constraint checking, convergence be-
havior, paradox detection on irreconcilable inputs, and structured negotiation of trade-offs. To our
knowledge, no prior system provides all four in a unified architecture.


11     Discussion
Provenance of the Three Pillars. The mechanisms underlying CAAF’s three pillars—computational
assertions, structured textual feedback, monotonic state preservation, and recursive decomposition—
each have independent prior art (see Section 10). Our contribution is the integration: a single

                                                 36
Table 12: Comparative summary of frameworks. Dashes (—) indicate absence. CAAF is the only
framework providing all four capabilities in a unified architecture.
 Framework                                Constraint Check                Convergence             Paradox Detection      Structured Negotiation

 AutoGPT / BabyAGI                                —                             —                        —                         —
 LangGraph [LangChain, Inc., 2024]          Manual guards                Manual trapping                 —                         —
 AutoGen [Wu et al., 2023]                        —                      Qual. reflection                —                         —
 NeMo / Guardrails.ai                          Pass/fail                        —                        —                         —
 OPA [CNCF, 2019]                            Deterministic                      —                        —                         —
 DSPy Assert [Singhvi et al., 2023]        Python predicate             Backtrack & retry                —                         —
 TextGrad [Yuksekgonul et al., 2024]          LLM-judged                  LLM gradient                   —                         —
 GEPA [Agrawal et al., 2025]                  LLM-judged               Reflective evolution              —                         —
 Z3 / SMT [de Moura and Bjørner, 2008]   Formal (SMT-LIB in)            Decision procedure            unsat core                   —
 Outlines / Guidance                      Token-level (schema)                  —                        —                         —
 Soft-FSM [Liao, 2026]                     Determ. controller      Monotonic FSM transitions             —                         —
 ATLAS [Ma et al., 2025]                 XSD + SHACL + SMT          Single-pass + post-validate          —                         —

 CAAF (ours)                             Deterministic (UAI)     State Lock + Boundary Grad.      Topological RCA     Quantified Trade-offs + HITL




coherent framework that couples these mechanisms with a long-lived, versioned domain harness
library targeted at safety-critical engineering. This positioning makes CAAF incremental at the
mechanism level and novel at the system level: removing any one pillar from the architecture
is feasible (DSPy Assertions, Soft-FSM, or ATLAS each subsume one), but no prior system, to
our knowledge, exposes the full set as a single asset-shaped framework with the harness lifecycle
governance described in Section 3.2.

On Multi-Agent Decomposition. Cognition AI [2024] argues against multi-agent decompo-
sition on the grounds that isolated subagents lose the implicit shared state required for coherent
behavior. The case is well taken in open-ended application development. In safety-critical engi-
neering, however, shared implicit state is precisely the contamination vector we wish to eliminate:
the “compliant hallucination” paradox of Section 2.1 occurs when budgetary context leaks into a
safety reasoning step. CAAF therefore takes the opposite normative position for the safety-critical
regime—isolation is a feature, and explicit cross-node validation through the Constraint Awareness
Layer takes the place of implicit shared state.


12       Limitations and Future Work
12.1       Orchestrator Context Horizon
CAAF’s RAD mitigates structural hallucination via deterministic parsing of Harness metadata.
However, in hyper-complex industrial systems (e.g., Very-Large-Scale Integration (VLSI) chip de-
sign, macro-scale supply chains), even the Orchestrator may eventually face context saturation
when managing thousands of interdependent sub-graphs.
    We propose Recursive Sub-Graph Partitioning (RSP) as the mitigation strategy. The
master Orchestrator applies a topological clustering algorithm (e.g., Louvain or Spectral Clustering)
to divide the global graph into semantically cohesive sub-domains, each managed by a dedicated
Sub-Orchestrator. Global convergence is achieved via a recursive merge-and-audit step at domain
interfaces. This hierarchical approach scales CAAF logic to systems of arbitrary complexity.




                                                                          37
12.2    Harness Fidelity Bottleneck
CAAF’s determinism guarantees are bounded by Harness completeness. For domains where physical
invariants are poorly understood or mathematically unformalized (e.g., emergent market sentiment,
aesthetic design preferences), the UAI cannot provide grounding signals. In such domains, CAAF’s
structural advantages are reduced, and the system degrades gracefully toward a structured multi-
agent orchestration framework without convergence guarantees.

12.3    Convergence Guarantees
The monotonic non-regression property (Eq. 2) holds for the set of modeled constraints under
the assumption that (a) the Harness is internally consistent (no contradictory assertions), and
(b) UAI assertion evaluations are deterministic. These assumptions are guaranteed by the Harness
Lifecycle process (Section 3.2). What we do not claim is finite-time convergence in the formal
dynamical-systems sense: termination is enforced by a bounded max iters retry budget, not by a
contraction-mapping proof. The mathematical conditions under which Vt → C within a bounded
number of iterations (e.g., constraint independence, bounded solution space, step-size admissibility)
remain an area for formal analysis. Recent work by Anbar Jafari et al. [2025] develops conditions
and bounds for recursive-improvement convergence at a more abstract level; importing such tools to
characterize the per-iteration contraction behavior of CAAF’s Reviewer→UAI loop is a promising
direction.

12.4    Computational Overhead and Latency
The CAAF-all-mini configuration incurs a 4.5× API cost premium relative to a monolithic GPT-
4o-mini call ($0.0027 vs. $0.0006 per run), due to multi-stage orchestration overhead. Notably,
CAAF-all-mini is 5.4× cheaper than a monolithic GPT-4o call ($0.0027 vs. $0.0145)—the only
configuration that produces a physically verified artifact—making cost a non-objection for the
primary comparison. Latency overhead from serialized node execution remains a practical concern
for time-sensitive workflows. Future iterations will explore Speculative Verification, where low-
confidence Executors pre-compute multiple candidate branches in parallel to reduce serialization
overhead.

12.5    Two-Domain Validation Scope
The empirical claims of this paper rest on two benchmark domains: L3 autonomous driving require-
ments engineering (Section 4) and pharmaceutical continuous flow reactor design (Section 7). The
two benchmarks are structurally complementary: the AD paradox involves 2 scalar constraints
with a linear gap, while the pharma paradox involves 7 constraints with nonlinear (Arrhenius-
exponential) interactions and a 3-way minimal unsatisfiable subset. This structural diversity
strengthens the domain-agnosticism claim. Nevertheless, both benchmarks have analytically trans-
parent ground truth. Future work will validate CAAF on domains where ground truth is less an-
alytically transparent (e.g., financial risk modeling, supply chain optimization) and on constraint
systems with even higher dimensionality (15+ constraints).

12.6    Broader Multi-Domain Empirical Validation
Extend the empirical evaluation to additional constraint-paradox benchmarks beyond the two do-
mains validated here (e.g., financial regulatory compliance, supply chain logistics, energy grid


                                                 38
optimization). Each benchmark requires a formalized Harness with verifiable ground truth. Vali-
dating CAAF on constraint systems where single-pass reasoning degrades (15+ constraints, multi-
page specifications) would substantiate the hypothesis that RAD’s contribution becomes critical at
scale—a prediction arising from the Mono+UAI ablation results (Section 7).

12.7    Automated Multi-Objective Constraint Negotiation
Currently, constraint relaxation requires human-in-the-loop authorization. Future iterations will
formalize the negotiation phase by extending the Harness schema with hierarchical variable defi-
nitions (fixed vs. negotiable) and cost attributes encoding multi-dimensional penalty functions
(time, cost, safety margin, brand reputation). When the UAI detects an unresolvable paradox, a
symbolic solver (e.g., SymPy-based algebraic engine) will automatically formulate the resolution
as a Multi-Objective Constrained Optimization problem, presenting human operators with
mathematically verified, cost-optimal relaxation paths.


13     Conclusion
As AI transitions from creative exploration to industrial governance, the primary engineering chal-
lenge shifts from maximizing raw intelligence to enforcing deterministic control. CAAF addresses
this challenge by supplanting fragile probabilistic self-correction with a rigorous cybernetic feedback
loop anchored in physical reality. By formalizing domain knowledge into an executable Harness
and utilizing RAD to maintain context fidelity, CAAF provides a pathway toward substantially
higher-reliability AI-driven engineering systems within the scope of a well-maintained Harness.
     The three-tier Mono+UAI ablation (Section 7, Findings 8–10) reveals a more nuanced story
than a single-primitive account. The deterministic UAI assertion engine is necessary but not suf-
ficient: prompt-simulated UAI on commodity GPT-4o-mini reaches 95%, true tool-call UAI on
frontier Opus 4 thinking reaches 100%, but true tool-call UAI on commodity-tier Haiku 4.5 reaches
0%—every trial oscillates between the conversion and impurity boundaries without declaring para-
dox. Frontier reasoning is a viable substitute for CAAF’s scaffolding, but at ∼114× the per-trial
cost of a CAAF-orchestrated commodity model. The architectural value of CAAF is therefore
twofold—enforcement (UAI invocation is an orchestrator-imposed primitive rather than an agent-
discretionary tool call) and oscillation control (Structured Semantic Gradients with State Locking
prevent the stochastic-oscillation trap that destroys commodity Mono+UAI)—and the resulting
cost structure makes deterministic constraint satisfaction practical at industrial scale, including in
fully offline regulated environments. The three pillars remain complementary, but the reliability-
load-bearing ones at commodity-model cost are UAI (Pillar 2) and Structured Semantic Gradients
with State Locking (Pillar 3). RAD (Pillar 1) contributes context fidelity at scale; we hypothe-
size its independent reliability contribution becomes measurable at higher constraint counts (15+)
where single-pass reasoning degrades—a key axis for future validation.
     More broadly, we propose CAAF as a candidate architectural pattern—a constraint satisfac-
tion layer for LLM-generated artifacts—intended to apply wherever the output of an LLM
must simultaneously satisfy formally verifiable constraints. Just as type systems catch program-
ming errors at compile time before code reaches production, CAAF catches constraint violations
at generation time before engineering artifacts enter downstream processes. The domain-specific
component is exclusively the Harness Registry; the convergence mechanism, paradox detection,
and structured negotiation are designed to be domain-agnostic. On the two reported benchmarks
the architectural behavior is identical: either the artifact satisfies all constraints, or the system
formally reports which constraints are irreconcilable and presents quantified resolution options for

                                                  39
human authorization. Extending this validation to regulatory, financial, and infrastructure-SLA
constraint families is the primary direction for future work (Section 12.6). Subject to that broader
validation, we view CAAF not as a domain-specific tool but as a prospective reliability layer for
the emerging class of LLM-augmented engineering workflows in constraint-governed industries.


A       Domain-Specific Harness Assets (AD Degradation)
The harness below is the exact production file used in the experiment (see harness/data/ad_
degradation.yaml in the repository). Physics constants (e.g., vehicle speed kmph t0) are in-
jected by the UAI at assertion time and are never sent to the LLM, preventing the model from
reasoning around physical boundaries.

                                   Listing 4: AD Degradation Harness (YAML)
# OpenCAAF Domain Constraints : L3 Autonomous Driving Degradation
rules :
  - id : R E A R _ C O L L I S I O N _ P R E V E N T I O N _ D E C E L E R A T I O N
    description : " Rear Safety Constraint : To prevent rear - end collisions
        during the takeover window , the velocity drop must not exceed
        the deceleration limit ."
    target_field : " v e h i c l e _ s p e e d _ k m p h _ t 5 "
    condition : "( v e h i c l e _ s p e e d _ k m p h _ t 0 - v e h i c l e _ s p e e d _ k m p h _ t 5 ) /
        ( transition_window_seconds * m_per_sec_to_km_per_h_factor )
        <= m a x _ d e c e l e r a t i o n _ l i m i t "
    assertion : "( input . get ( ’ vehicle_speed_kmph_t0 ’)
        - input . get ( ’ vehicle_speed_kmph_t5 ’) ) /
        ( input . get ( ’ transition_window_seconds ’)
        * input . get ( ’ m_per_sec_to_km_per_h_factor ’) )
        <= input . get ( ’ max_deceleration_limit ’) "
    severity : " CRITICAL "

    - id : F O R W A R D _ C O L L I S I O N _ P R E V E N T I O N _ P E R C E P T I O N
      description : " Forward Safety Paradox : To prevent a blind forward
         collision , the physical braking distance at the target speed
         MUST be strictly less than the perception range ."
      target_field : " v e h i c l e _ s p e e d _ k m p h _ t 5 "
      condition : "(( v e h i c l e _ s p e e d _ k m p h _ t 5 / m _ p e r _ s e c _ t o _ k m _ p e r _ h _ f a c t o r )
         ** 2) / (2 * road_friction_mu * g ) < p e r c e p t i o n _ r a n g e _ l i m i t "
      assertion : "(( input . get ( ’ vehicle_speed_kmph_t5 ’)
         / input . get ( ’ m_per_sec_to_km_per_h_factor ’) ) ** 2)
         / (2 * input . get ( ’ road_friction_mu ’) * input . get ( ’g ’) )
         < input . get ( ’ perception_range_limit ’) "
      severity : " FATAL "



B      Multi-Agent Convergence Trace (AD Paradox)
The trace below shows the CAAF pipeline reaching FAILED PARADOX. All roles (Orchestrator, Ex-
ecutor, Reviewer) use gpt-4o-mini, consistent with the all-commodity-model configuration vali-
dated in the batch experiment.

                                   Listing 5: CAAF Convergence Trace (JSON)


                                                               40
{
    " step ": " Decomposition " ,
    " role ": " strategy_engine " ,
    " model ": " gpt -4 o - mini " ,
    " nodes ": {
       " node_1 ": {
          " id ": " node_1 " ,
          " parent_id ": null ,
          " description ": " Define safe - state speed limit from perception data " ,
          " context_keys ": [] ,
          " expected_schema ": { " pe rc ep ti on _r an ge _m ": " float " }
       },
       " node_2 ": {
          " id ": " node_2 " ,
          " parent_id ": " node_1 " ,
          " description ": " Calculate stopping distance at target speed " ,
          " context_keys ": [" pe rc ep ti on _r an ge _m "] ,
          " expected_schema ": { " v e h i c l e _ s p e e d _ k m p h _ t 5 ": " int " }
       }
    },
    " review ": {
       " id ": " F O R W A R D _ C O L L I S I O N _ P R E V E N T I O N _ P E R C E P T I O N " ,
       " status ": " FAIL " ,
       " error ": " Stopping distance (82 m ) > perception limit (30 m ) "
    }
}



C      Formal Deadlock Evidence Package

                           Listing 6: Formal Deadlock Evidence Package
[ SYSTEM DEADLOCK ] Formal Paradox Report
Status : FAILED_PARADOX
Domain : L3 Autonomous Driving Degradation

--- Conflict Summary ---
The system has encountered a mathematical deadlock between two
non - negotiable physical red lines :
  1. REAR_COLLISION : To prevent highway rear - end collision ,
       target speed must be >= 84 km / h .
  2. FO RWARD_ COLLIS ION : To stop within 30 m perception range ,
       target speed must be <= 55 km / h .

--- Evidence ---
  - Attempting speed = 84 km / h : Forward Safety FAIL
    (70 m stopping distance > 30 m vision )
  - Attempting speed = 55 km / h : Rear Safety FAIL
    ( decel = 3.6 m / s ^2 > 2.0 m / s ^2 limit )

--- Resolution ---
Human strategic authorization required .
See Strategic Resolution Menu .


                                                41
D     Reproducibility and Code Availability
All experiments described in this paper are fully reproducible. The complete codebase, including
the OpenCAAF framework implementation, harness definitions, experiment scripts, and raw result
logs, is available at:
    Repository (Apache-2.0; see project README for setup instructions): https://github.com/
TianbaoZhang001/OpenCAAF
    How to run. Each benchmark is a self-contained Python module invoked from the project
root. Setup requires an OpenAI API key in .env (OPENAI API KEY) and pip install -r re-
quirements.txt. The sample size for any benchmark can be overridden via the N TRIALS envi-
ronment variable (default n=20, except benchmark full experiment.py which defaults to n=30).
Example:
N_TRIALS =20 python -m OpenCAAF . demos . b e n c h m a r k _ a d _ p a s s _ p a t h

Each run writes a timestamped directory under OpenCAAF/demos/logs/ containing results.json
(aggregate metrics), *_runs.jsonl (per-trial records), and, for CAAF runs, a *_traces/run_NN/
subtree of per-iteration strategy plans, expert outputs, UAI feedback, and final artifacts.
   Key experiment files:
    • OpenCAAF/demos/benchmark_full_experiment.py — 7-condition AD batch experiment
      (n=30, Table 1)
    • OpenCAAF/demos/benchmark_ad_pass_path.py — AD PASS-path convergence on satisfiable
      variant (n=20, Table 3, Figure 8)
    • OpenCAAF/demos/benchmark_pharma_reactor.py — Pharmaceutical Flow Reactor bench-
      mark (n=20, Table 7)
    • OpenCAAF/demos/benchmark_debate_baseline.py — Multi-agent debate baseline (n=20,
      Table 8)
    • OpenCAAF/demos/benchmark_sequential_baseline.py — Sequential checker baseline
      (n=20, Table 8)
    • OpenCAAF/demos/benchmark_context_rot_v2.py — Context Rot benchmark (n=20, Ta-
      ble 4)
    • OpenCAAF/demos/benchmark_oscillation_v2.py — Oscillation benchmark (n=20, Table 5)
    • OpenCAAF/demos/benchmark_pharma_pass_path.py — Pharma PASS-path variant
      (τmax =180 s) — companion to the PASS-path study, retained as a harder-setting benchmark
      for stronger executor models (not used in the reported results)
    • OpenCAAF/harness/data/ad_degradation.yaml — AD Harness Registry (Appendix A)
    • OpenCAAF/harness/data/ad_degradation_pass.yaml — AD Harness Registry (PASS-path
      variant, §4.5)
    • OpenCAAF/harness/data/pharma_flow_reactor.yaml — Pharmaceutical Flow Reactor
      Harness Registry
    • OpenCAAF/harness/data/pharma_flow_reactor_pass.yaml — Pharmaceutical Flow Reac-
      tor Harness Registry (PASS-path variant, τmax =180 s)

                                                    42
   • OpenCAAF/demos/generate_paper_figures_v2.py — regenerates paper figures (AD and
     Pharma) from logged results, including Figure 8

   • OpenCAAF/demos/aggregate_v2_results.py — scans OpenCAAF/demos/logs/ and emits
     the unified results matrix and per-trial cost roll-up consumed by the figure script

   Raw result logs are archived in OpenCAAF/demos/logs/ and include per-run API traces,
CAAF decision trees, and UAI assertion outputs.
   The total API cost of all experiments reported in this paper—including the primary AD exper-
iment ($1.27), pharmaceutical reactor benchmark ($0.14), debate and sequential baselines ($0.34),
context rot / oscillation benchmarks, and the AD PASS-path study ($0.36)—was under $2.20
USD total, demonstrating the reproducibility economics of the CAAF approach.


References
Lakshya A. Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-
  Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J. Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts,
  Koushik Sen, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khat-
  tab. GEPA: Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2507.19457, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.19457. Submitted Jul 2025; re-
  vised Feb 2026. Accepted to ICLR 2026 (Oral). Reflective prompt evolution leveraging natural-
  language feedback as the optimization signal; outperforms reinforcement learning baselines re-
  quiring thousands of rollouts.

Akbar Anbar Jafari, Cagri Ozcinar, and Gholamreza Anbarjafari. A mathematical framework
 for AI singularity: Conditions, bounds, and control of recursive improvement. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2511.10668, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.10668.

Akbar Anbar Jafari, Cagri Ozcinar, and Gholamreza Anbarjafari. Consequence-aware agentic AI:
 A pre-execution outcome assessment framework for responsible large language model agents.
 PhilArchive, 2026a. URL https://philarchive.org/rec/JAFCAA.

Akbar Anbar Jafari, Cagri Ozcinar, and Gholamreza Anbarjafari. A lightweight modular framework
 for constructing autonomous agents driven by large language models: Design, implementation,
 and applications in AgentForge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.13383, 2026b. URL https://arxiv.
 org/abs/2601.13383.

Anthropic.    Model context protocol, 2024.         URL https://www.anthropic.com/news/
 model-context-protocol. Open protocol for connecting AI assistants to external data sources
 and tools. Specification available at https://spec.modelcontextprotocol.io.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
  Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson
  Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez,
  Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson,
  Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann, and Jared
  Kaplan. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08073.




                                               43
Clark Barrett, Christopher L. Conway, Morgan Deters, Liana Hadarean, Dejan Jovanović, Tim
  King, Andrew Reynolds, and Cesare Tinelli. CVC4. In Computer Aided Verification (CAV),
  volume 6806 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 171–177. Springer, 2011. doi: 10.
  1007/978-3-642-22110-1 14.
Birgitta Böckeler. Harness engineering for coding agent users. MartinFowler.com, April 2026. URL
  https://martinfowler.com/articles/harness-engineering.html. Initial memo published
  17 February 2026; full article 2 April 2026.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choro-
 manski, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818.
Ching-An Cheng, Allen Nie, and Adith Swaminathan. Trace is the next AutoDiff: Generative opti-
 mization with rich feedback, execution traces, and LLMs. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
 cessing Systems 37 (NeurIPS 2024), 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.16218. Frames
 optimization of non-differentiable workflows as “Optimization with Trace Oracle” (OPTO);
 generalizes back-propagation by capturing and propagating execution traces. Implemented as
 PyTorch-like Python library (microsoft/Trace).
CNCF. Open policy agent, 2019. URL https://www.openpolicyagent.org. CNCF Graduated
 Project. Policy-as-Code engine using the Rego language.
Cognition AI. Don’t build multi-agents. Cognition Engineering Blog, 2024. URL https:
  //cognition.ai/blog/dont-build-multi-agents. Argues against multi-agent decomposition
  on the grounds that isolated subcontexts lose shared implicit state. CAAF responds in the Dis-
  cussion section: in safety-critical domains, shared implicit state is a contamination vector and
  isolation is a feature.
Leonardo de Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. Z3: An efficient SMT solver. In Tools and Algorithms for
  the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS), volume 4963 of Lecture Notes in Computer
  Science, pages 337–340. Springer, 2008. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-78800-3 24.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving
  factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. In Proceedings of the 41st
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research. PMLR, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14325.
Guardrails AI. Guardrails: Adding guardrails to large language models, 2023. URL https:
 //github.com/guardrails-ai/guardrails. Open-source Python library for structured and
 validated LLM outputs.
Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xinying Song,
  and Denny Zhou. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2310.01848.
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 26262: Road vehicles – functional safety.
  International Standard ISO 26262, ISO, 2018. Parts 1–12. Second edition (first published 2011).
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, et al.
  Language models (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05221.

                                                44
Adharsh Kamath, Sishen Zhang, Calvin Xu, Shubham Ugare, Gagandeep Singh, and Sasa Mi-
 sailovic. Enforcing temporal constraints for LLM agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.23738,
 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.23738. Submitted Dec 2025; accepted to ICLR 2026
 Workshop VerifAI-2. Agent-C: DSL for temporal properties → first-order logic → SMT solver
 interleaved with constrained generation; backtracks on non-compliant token sequences. Reports
 100% conformance / 0% harm on retail and airline benchmarks.

Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vard-
 hamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller,
 Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. DSPy: Compiling declarative language model calls into
 self-improving pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03714, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
 abs/2310.03714. Reference implementation: dspy library, >16k GitHub stars.

LangChain, Inc. LangGraph: Build stateful, multi-actor applications with LLMs, 2024. URL
  https://github.com/langchain-ai/langgraph. Open-source library for building stateful
  multi-agent LLM applications.

Yoonho Lee, Roshen Nair, Qizheng Zhang, Kangwook Lee, Omar Khattab, and Chelsea Finn.
  Meta-Harness: End-to-end optimization of model harnesses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.28052,
  2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.28052. Submitted Mar 2026. Searches over harness
  code (storage / retrieval / presentation logic) using an agentic proposer that accesses source
  code, scores, and execution traces through a filesystem. Argues existing optimizers under-perform
  because they over-aggressively compress feedback.

Hsien-Jyh Liao. Enforcing monotonic progress in legal cross-examination: Preventing long-horizon
  stagnation in LLM-based inquiry. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.04206, 2026. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2602.04206. Submitted Feb 2026. Identifies “procedural stagnation” as failure mode
  and proposes Soft-FSM, a neuro-symbolic architecture enforcing monotonic progress over Key
  Information Units via an external deterministic state controller. Reports baseline collapse below
  40% completeness vs. Soft-FSM consistently above 97% on criminal homicide cases.

Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and
  Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 12:157–173, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2307.03172.

Tong Ma, Hui Lai, Hui Wang, Zhenhu Tian, Chaochao Li, Fengjie Xu, and Ling Fang. ATLAS:
  A layered constraint-guided framework for structured artifact generation in LLM-assisted MDE.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.25890, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.25890. Submitted
  Oct 2025. Constraint-guided generation framework for structured engineering artifacts that must
  satisfy schemas, domain rules, and audit requirements. Generation is placed inside a model-
  driven workflow separating domain representation, constraint compilation, and post-generation
  validation. This paper is the most direct prior art to CAAF’s overall positioning
  (LLM-assisted Model-Driven Engineering, not just AUTOSAR ARXML as the demo vertical).

Qianyu Meng, Yanan Wang, Liyi Chen, et al. Agent harness for large language model agents:
  A survey. Preprints.org, manuscript 202604.0428, 2026. URL https://www.preprints.org/
  manuscript/202604.0428. Surveys 22 systems, identifies 9 cross-cutting challenges, proposes 12
  research directions. Provides formal definition of agent harness with labeled-transition-system se-
  mantics distinguishing safety and liveness. Traces “harness” concept from software test harnesses


                                                 45
  through RL environments to modern LLM agent infrastructure. Confirms “Agent Harness”
  is established 2026 terminology.

Bertrand Meyer. Applying “design by contract”. Computer, 25(10):40–51, 1992. doi: 10.1109/2.
  161279.

Microsoft Research. Guidance: A guidance language for controlling large language models. GitHub,
 2023. URL https://github.com/guidance-ai/guidance. Open-source toolkit for constrained
 (token-level) LLM generation.

Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, et al.
 Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12213.

Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Tat Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng. Automatic
  prompt optimization with “gradient descent” and beam search. In Proceedings of the 2023
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2305.03495. ProTeGi: textual “gradients” from LLM critic guide prompt
  search.

Libin Qiu, Yuhang Ye, Zhirong Gao, Xide Zou, Junfu Chen, Ziming Gui, Weizhi Huang, Xiaobo
  Xue, Wenkai Qiu, and Kun Zhao. Blueprint first, model second: A framework for deterministic
  LLM workflow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02721, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.
  02721. Submitted Aug 2025. Source Code Agent framework: separates workflow logic from
  generative model via expert-defined Execution Blueprint codified as source code. LLM invoked
  as bounded sub-task tool; never decides workflow path. Closest prior art to CAAF’s overall thesis.

Prithvi Rajasekaran.    Harness design for long-running application development. An-
  thropic Engineering Blog, March 2026. URL https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/
  harness-design-long-running-apps.

Traian Rebedea, Razvan Dinu, Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar, Christopher Parisien, and Jonathan
  Cohen. NeMo Guardrails: A toolkit for controllable and safe LLM applications with pro-
  grammable rails. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing: System Demonstrations, pages 431–445. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10501.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessı̀, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
  Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04761.

Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hug-
  gingGPT: Solving AI tasks with ChatGPT and its friends in Hugging Face. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.17580.

Arnav Singhvi, Manish Shetty, Shangyin Tan, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Matei Zaharia, and
  Omar Khattab. DSPy assertions: Computational constraints for self-refining language model
  pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13382, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.13382.



                                                46
  Submitted Dec 2023; revised Feb 2024. Introduces dspy.Assert / dspy.Suggest as a program-
  ming construct for computational constraints in LM pipelines, with assertion-driven backtracking
  and compilation strategies for more reliable systems.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1706.03762.

Diane Vaughan. The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at
  NASA. University of Chicago Press, 1996.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, 2022. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903.

Brandon T. Willard and Rémi Louf. Efficient guided generation for large language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2307.09702, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09702. Reference imple-
  mentation: outlines library.

Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Shaokun Zhang, Erkang Zhu, Beibin Li,
  Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, and Chi Wang. AutoGen: Enabling next-generation LLM applications
  via multi-agent conversation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2308.08155.

Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Irina Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629.

Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, and James Zou. TextGrad:
 Automatic “differentiation” via text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496, 2024. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2406.07496.

Alex L. Zhang, Tim Kraska, and Omar Khattab. Recursive language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2512.24601, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.24601. Submitted Dec 2025; re-
  vised Jan 2026. Treats long prompts as external environment; LLM programmatically examines,
  decomposes, and recursively calls itself over snippets. Processes inputs up to two orders of mag-
  nitude beyond context window.

Yuxin Zhang.        Harness engineering in intelligent driving:  A cross-domain appli-
  cation.      AutoZYX Blog, April 2026.           URL https://blog.autozyx.com/posts/
  harness-engineering-intelligent-driving/. In Chinese. Maps Harness Engineering pat-
  terns onto ISO 21448 (SOTIF) automotive safety lifecycle.

Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
  Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
  Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-Bench and chatbot arena. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 36, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05685.




                                                47
