                                               P ROBE - AND -R EFINE T UNING OF R EPOSITORY G UIDANCE
                                                                  FOR C ODING AGENTS

                                                                                                A P REPRINT


                                                                      Asa Shepard                                     Jeannie Albrecht
                                                                    Williams College                                  Williams College
                                                                  as66@williams.edu                                 jra1@williams.edu




arXiv:2606.20512v2 [cs.SE] 19 Jun 2026
                                                                                                June 23, 2026

                                                                                               A BSTRACT

                                                  LLM-based coding agents need higher-level operational knowledge about a repository (which files
                                                  house which subsystems, how to run the test suite, which workflows have historically led to wrong
                                                  fixes) that does not exist in the code itself. Engineers typically maintain AGENTS.md files to supply
                                                  this context as instructions for coding agents, but whether they help is contested: recent studies
                                                  disagree on whether LLM-generated guidance improves or harms agent performance. In this paper
                                                  we show that how the guidance is produced is the decisive variable, and introduce probe-and-refine
                                                  tuning: a procedure that uses synthetic bug-fix probes to iteratively diagnose and patch a repository’s
                                                  guidance file through single-shot LLM calls, with no agent loop or tool use during tuning. On SWE-
                                                  bench Verified across four independent trials with Qwen3.5-35B-A3B at 200 steps, probe-and-refine
                                                  achieves 33.0 % mean resolve rate vs. 28.3 % for the static knowledge base used to initialize it and
                                                  25.5 % for an unguided baseline (p < 0.001 for both probe-and-refine contrasts). The improvement
                                                  comes from coverage rather than precision: refined guidance produces evaluable patches for 14.5
                                                  percentage points (pp) more instances while per-patch precision remains statistically constant (∼59 %,
                                                  p = 0.119), showing that improved guidance helps agents reach the correct file rather than improving
                                                  the quality of the changes they make. Further, a step-budget experiment shows that guidance is what
                                                  lets the agent use a larger step budget productively, and a cross-model experiment with NVIDIA-
                                                  Nemotron-3-Nano-30B-A3B finds that the tuning loop degrades when the model cannot generate
                                                  sufficiently diagnostic output, though per-patch precision remains constant even then.


                                         1   Introduction

                                         LLM-based coding agents operate in a loop of reading code, running commands, and proposing edits to code. They
                                         are increasingly being deployed and used for software engineering tasks in real-world contexts. The effectiveness of
                                         the agents depends on more than just the model’s underlying capability. A code repository is a body of accumulated
                                         decisions: subsystem boundaries, naming conventions, debugging workflows that experienced contributors have
                                         internalized but that are not documented in the code itself. A model that has never worked in a particular codebase
                                         has to reconstruct this implicit knowledge on the fly, often by trial and error, and frequently lands in the wrong file or
                                         proposes a fix that breaks orthogonal subsystems.
                                         Engineers have responded by maintaining repository-level context files (variously named AGENTS.md, CLAUDE.md, or
                                         similar) that document conventions, entry points, test-running instructions, and debugging strategies for use by coding
                                         agents. These files have proliferated rapidly: Chatlatanagulchai et al. (2025) survey 2,303 such files in active use across
                                         public repositories. Whether these context files help coding agents is still debatable. Lulla et al. (2026) find that curated
                                         AGENTS.md files reduce agent runtime by 28.6 % and output tokens by 16.6 % on focused pull requests, measuring
                                         efficiency rather than correctness. Gloaguen et al. (2026) find the opposite: LLM-generated context files reduce resolve
                                         rates by ∼3 % on SWE-bench Lite (Jimenez et al., 2024) and on AGENTBENCH, a benchmark they introduce of
                                         bug-fix and feature-addition tasks drawn from repositories with developer-written context files, with agents following
                                    Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                               A P REPRINT



instructions literally even when those instructions are counterproductive. The disagreement leaves practitioners with no
principled basis for deciding whether to invest in such guidance, what should go in it, or how to produce it.
A natural question is whether the problem lies with guidance as a concept or with how it is produced. Single-pass
LLM generation yields generic advice; perhaps iteratively refined, failure-informed guidance would behave differently.
What an experienced contributor knows about a repository is operational and specific: which test file to run for a
particular subsystem, which module to trace through when debugging a particular class of bug, which kinds of fixes
to avoid because they have historically broken downstream consumers. This kind of knowledge cannot be produced
by introspection alone; it has to be learned from observed failures. Yet the agent’s own instructions, the text that tells
it how to approach a repository, have received surprisingly little systematic attention, with most improvement efforts
focused on models, scaffolds, or context windows.
A parallel question exists in the fine-tuning literature. Betley et al. (2025a) show that fine-tuning a model on a single
(narrow) bad behavior, writing insecure code, causes it to behave maliciously on unrelated tasks, such as giving harmful
advice. Betley et al. (2025b) show the effect does not even require a harmful training signal: fine-tuning a model only
to emit archaic names for bird species makes it answer unrelated questions as though it were living in the 19th century,
e.g. citing the electrical telegraph as a recent invention. The implicit question motivating our work is whether a similar
narrow-to-broad effect can be induced at the prompt level. That is, whether iterative refinement against a small set of
synthetic probes, or self-generated bug-fix tasks, can shape an agent’s behavior across a much larger and unrelated set
of issues. We claim no mechanistic equivalence, but the empirical pattern is structurally analogous: a narrow signal
produces broad behavioral change. Here, the narrow signal is a set of self-generated software engineering tasks, and the
broad behavioral change is in performance on a larger, unrelated set of bug-fix tasks. This motivates the procedure we
describe next.
We introduce probe-and-refine tuning,1 a lightweight procedure that produces such operational guidance by repeatedly
probing a candidate guidance file with synthetic bug-fix tasks, observing where it fails, and patching it. The procedure
is composed entirely of single-shot LLM calls, with no multi-step agent loop, no tool use, and no reinforcement
learning. It produces a compact (≤3000-character) text artifact for each repository in a few iterations. The simplicity is
intentional: we wanted to know whether the bottleneck in current coding agents is reasoning capability or instruction
quality, and a procedure that does no agentic reasoning during tuning makes the answer more obvious. Our central
finding is that instruction quality matters substantially, and that a feedback loop driven by synthetic failures is sufficient
to produce instructions that measurably improve agent behavior.
This paper describes four contributions in this context:

1. Probe-and-refine tuning (Section 3): We describe a lightweight procedure composed entirely of single-shot LLM
   calls that refines a statically generated repository knowledge base into specialized guidance, achieving a mean 33.0 %
   resolve rate across four independent trials and 31 consistently unique solves.
2. Mechanistic analysis (Section 4): We show that the improvement comes from evaluation coverage rather than patch
   correctness. Specifically, the refined-guidance agent produces well-formed, evaluable patches for 14.5 pp more
   instances than the baseline while per-patch precision is statistically constant (∼59 %, p = 0.119).
3. Budget moderation (Section 6): We perform a twelve-cell experiment showing that step budget moderates the
   effect of guidance, with different guidance types activating at different thresholds and unstructured exploration
   saturating quickly regardless of budget.
4. Cross-model generalization (Section 7): We show that a capacity-constrained model cannot sustain the tuning loop,
   and guidance calibrated for one model’s behavioral profile actively destabilizes a different model’s agent loop while
   per-patch precision remains constant.

The remainder of the paper presents the procedure, the four-trial replication that establishes these claims quantitatively,
the qualitative localization analysis that explains them, the budget experiment that situates them, and a cross-model
analysis that identifies the procedure’s model-fit requirements.

2       Related Work
AGENTS.md and context files. The two studies closest to ours ask directly whether repository context files help, and
reach opposite conclusions. Lulla et al. (2026) find that curated AGENTS.md files improve agent efficiency on focused
pull requests (28.6 % less runtime, 16.6 % fewer output tokens), measuring cost rather than correctness. Gloaguen
et al. (2026) instead find that LLM-generated context files reduce resolve rates on SWE-bench Lite and on their own
    1
        Code: https://github.com/asashepard/probe-and-refine-tuning


                                                              2
                                   Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                             A P REPRINT



AGENTBENCH (a collection of issues from repositories with developer-committed context files), with agents following
the files’ instructions literally even when doing so is counterproductive (e.g., a tool named in the file was used 160×
more often than without it). We reconcile this disagreement by showing it turns on how the guidance is produced and
on a variable neither study manipulates: neither varies the agent’s step budget, and Gloaguen et al. (2026) report steps
only as a cost metric rather than asking how a fixed budget interacts with guidance (Section 6). Two further studies
characterize what such files contain rather than whether they help. Chatlatanagulchai et al. (2025) survey 2,303 context
files and find developers prioritize build commands, implementation details, and architecture, the same categories
probe-and-refine arrives at automatically (Section 3.3, Table 2). Vasilopoulos (2026) argue that single-file manifests do
not scale beyond ∼100k lines and propose a tiered architecture, a limitation our compact (≤3000-character) single-file
artifacts share and do not attempt to overcome.


Coding-agent scaffolds and benchmarks. We evaluate on SWE-bench (Jimenez et al., 2024) and its human-validated
Verified subset (SWE-bench, 2024), the standard benchmark for this setting: each instance is a real GitHub issue from a
popular open-source Python repository, the agent edits the repository to address it, and the instance counts as resolved
only if the agent’s patch makes the project’s held-out test suite pass. An agent is driven by a scaffold: the harness
that wraps the language model, deciding what the model sees at each step and what actions it may take. Existing
scaffolds span a wide design space, from custom command interfaces built specifically for the agent to read and edit
code (Yang et al., 2024), to fixed pipelines that replace the open-ended agent loop with a prescribed localize-then-repair
sequence (Xia et al., 2024), to tree search over many candidate solution trajectories (Antoniades et al., 2025). Our
contribution is orthogonal to this line of work: rather than proposing a new scaffold, we hold a single scaffold fixed
across all conditions and vary only the repository guidance the agent is given, isolating the guidance as the cause of any
performance difference.


Repository-level knowledge and self-refinement. A line of work supplies agents with structured repository
knowledge: RepoGraph (Ouyang et al., 2025) injects a graph of code entities and their relationships, and Au-
toCodeRover (Zhang et al., 2024) navigates an abstract syntax tree representation of the code. These inject structural
knowledge directly; probe-and-refine instead distills structure into natural-language operational guidance, and pairs
it with procedural and quality-gate rules that a code graph does not capture. A separate line iteratively improves an
agent’s outputs: Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023) and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) feed an agent’s own critiques
back into its next attempt at the same task. Probe-and-refine differs in what it refines and what it produces: it refines a
persistent guidance artifact across many synthetic tasks, yielding reusable guidance for an entire repository rather than
per-task corrections that are discarded once the task ends. Most directly, SWE-ContextBench (Zhu et al., 2026) finds
that curated experience improves agent performance while unfiltered experience does not, consistent with our finding
that iteratively refined guidance helps where single-pass generation does not.


Meta Context Engineering. The most conceptually adjacent work is Meta Context Engineering (MCE; Ye et al.
(2026)), a bi-level optimization framework that co-evolves “context engineering skills” and the context artifacts they
produce. MCE shares our core premise that context should be refined through feedback rather than generated in a single
pass. It differs in scope and weight: MCE is a general-purpose meta-learning system with full agentic tool use at both
optimization levels, whereas probe-and-refine is deliberately minimal, using only single-shot LLM calls to produce
one ≤3000-character text artifact per repository. Because MCE was not evaluated on SWE-bench or coding tasks, the
relationship is conceptual rather than empirical.


Narrow signals, broad effects. A final line of work, further from ours in domain but closest in mechanism, documents
how a narrow training signal can drive broad behavioral change. Betley et al. (2025a) show that fine-tuning a model on
the single narrow task of writing insecure code makes it misbehave on unrelated tasks, including advocating for AI
dominance and giving harmful advice. Betley et al. (2025b) extend this to a range of innocuous narrow signals; in one
setting, a sparse-autoencoder analysis shows the fine-tuning strengthens broad persona features that activate even on
unrelated inputs, rather than narrowly task-specific ones. Cloud et al. (2025) report a related effect in distillation: a
teacher’s preferences transfer to a student through training data containing no semantic trace of them, but only between
models sharing initialization; cross-family transmission collapses. Probe-and-refine operates in prompt space rather
than weight space, but the structure is the same: ten synthetic probes per iteration reshape behavior on a much larger,
unrelated set of evaluation issues, and the cross-model collapse we observe (Section 7) parallels the cross-family failure
reported for subliminal transmission.


                                                            3
                                   Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                               A P REPRINT



3     Design and Implementation

This section describes the probe-and-refine procedure and the experimental apparatus around it. We first give a system
overview, then define the three context conditions we compare, detail the probe-and-refine tuning loop itself, and
describe the coding agent and fallback that consume the resulting guidance. The four sections that follow (Sections 4–7)
each report a separate experiment—the main four-trial comparison (Section 4), a localization analysis (Section 5), a
step-budget sweep (Section 6), and a cross-model study (Section 7)—and share a common structure: what we wanted
to test, how we tested it, the results, and what we learned.

3.1   System Overview

At a high level, the goal of our work is to compare how a coding agent performs on SWE-bench Verified under
three different repository-context conditions: with no guidance, with a two-layer static knowledge base comprising
tree-sitter-assisted parsing (tree-sitter is a source-code parser) of the repository structure and one-shot LLM-generated
generic guidance, and with guidance produced by our probe-and-refine procedure. The procedure itself is the only novel
system component; everything else (the agent scaffold, the evaluation harness) is held fixed across conditions in the
main experiment so that any performance difference is attributable to the guidance. The four pipeline stages we describe
in this section are: building the repository context, running probe-and-refine tuning to produce the refined-guidance
condition, generating patches with an interactive coding agent, and evaluating those patches with the official SWE-bench
Verified harness.
Most of our analysis uses Qwen/Qwen3.5-35B-A3B (Qwen Team, 2026); the cross-model experiment in Section 7
substitutes NVIDIA-Nemotron-3-Nano-30B-A3B but is otherwise identical in design. We use an effective 16k-token
context window (a hard truncation we impose to keep prompt costs uniform across conditions; the model natively
supports longer contexts), 2048 max output tokens per turn, and 512 max tokens for fallback generation. Command
outputs are truncated to ∼3000 characters. These constraints result in absolute resolve rates well below what larger-
context configurations achieve. Thus the main contribution of our work in this space is the relative comparison across
conditions, not the absolute numbers.

Model selection. We selected Qwen3.5-35B-A3B as a model because it is open-weight, inexpensive to serve (3B
active parameters via a mixture-of-experts design), and supports the tool-use patterns required by our scaffold. We
cannot rule out SWE-bench data appearing in the model’s training corpus, since Qwen’s training composition is not
fully disclosed. However, any potential contamination would affect all three conditions equally (since the same model is
used throughout), so it cannot explain why probe-and-refine guidance outperforms the other conditions in a controlled
comparison. We return to this point with additional analysis of unique solves in Section 8.

3.2   Context Conditions

Next, we describe the three context conditions that define our independent variable. They differ only in the repository-
specific guidance the agent receives; the scaffold, model, and harness are held fixed across all three, so any performance
difference is attributable to the guidance alone. no_context measures the agent alone, static_kb adds generic
guidance, and probe_refined adds iterative refinement on top.

no_context.      The bare agent prompt with no repository-specific guidance.

static_kb. A fixed per-repo knowledge base (so named for its content, which is structured repository knowledge
derived via tree-sitter parsing, rather than its format, which is a natural-language artifact rather than a symbolic
or vector-indexed store) constructed in two layers. The structural layer uses tree-sitter-assisted parsing to extract
repository-specific signals: major hubs, entry points, and import relationships compiled into a compact natural-language
summary unique to each repository. The procedural layer adds LLM-generated best-practice recommendations that are
deliberately repository-agnostic (e.g., “reproduce the failure before editing,” “run the smallest relevant test first”). This
two-layer design controls for two confounds: the structural layer ensures that both guided conditions share the same
repo-specific foundation, and the procedural layer ensures that any gains from probe-and-refine tuning are attributable
to the iterative refinement process rather than to the mere presence of generic advice.

probe_refined. Starting from static_kb, the probe-and-refine procedure (Section 3.3) produces specialized repo-
specific guidance over 3–5 iterations, subject to a 3000-character cap (chosen to fit within ∼750 tokens, roughly 5 % of
the 16k effective context window, leaving the bulk of the context for issue text and command output).


                                                             4
                                                  Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                                A P REPRINT



                                       Repository                      static_kb          probe_refined     Iters
                                       django/django                        1,823                 2,949          5
                                       sympy/sympy                          1,847                 2,908          5
                                       sphinx-doc/sphinx                    1,672                 1,992          3
                                       matplotlib/matplotlib                1,616                 2,948          5
                                       scikit-learn/scikit-learn            2,060                 2,948          4
                                       astropy/astropy                      1,887                 2,955          5
                                       pydata/xarray                        1,753                 2,759          4
                                       pytest-dev/pytest                    1,568                 2,903          4
                                       pylint-dev/pylint                    1,911                 2,972          5
                                       psf/requests                         1,158                 1,935          4
                                       mwaskom/seaborn                      1,671                 2,891          5
                                       pallets/flask                        1,280                 2,886          5
                                       Average                              1,687                 2,754       4.5

Table 1: Guidance character counts by repository. The refinement process expands guidance from an average of 1,687
to 2,754 characters, with the added content predominantly comprising repo-specific rules (Section 3.3).




                                  1: Generate
                                  probes (10)                initial
                                                                           no_context
            AGENTS.md
                                                     final
                   per-probe:
                      x10
                                 2: Attempt fix                                                     SWE-bench Verified
                                                                                                      issues (500)
                                                                            static_kb
           3-5
          iters    per-probe:
                                3: Judge attempt
                      x10


                                                                          probe_refined              fixed coding agent   evaluate

                                 4: Aggregate +
                                   apply edits




Figure 1: Probe-and-refine tuning pipeline. The static_kb artifact feeds both the static_kb condition directly and
the refinement loop, which transforms it into the refined guidance using synthetic probes and single-shot diagnosis. No
SWE-bench evaluation instances are used during refinement. All three conditions feed the same fixed coding agent.


Guidance length. The static_kb artifacts average 1,687 characters (range: 1,158–2,060) and the probe_refined
artifacts average 2,754 characters (range: 1,935–2,972), making the refined guidance 63 % longer on average (Table 1).
This length difference is an inherent consequence of the refinement process: each iteration adds repo-specific rules (test
paths, subsystem tracing instructions, output quality requirements) that are absent from the generic static_kb. We
cannot fully disentangle the effects of guidance content and guidance length. However, simply adding more generic
text would not produce the structural, repo-specific knowledge that the content analysis in Section 3.3 identifies as
the primary addition, and Gloaguen et al. (2026) show that longer LLM-generated context files can actively reduce
performance. The question is not whether more text helps but whether the right text helps, and the probe-and-refine
procedure’s contribution is identifying what that text should say.

3.3   The Probe-and-Refine Procedure

The probe-and-refine procedure (Figure 1) transforms generic structural knowledge into repo-specific operational
guidance through iterative failure feedback. Every step in the procedure is a single-shot call to the same model
(Qwen3.5-35B-A3B) that will later be used by the coding agent during patch generation. Using the same model
keeps the experiment controlled: the guidance is written at the level the consuming model can understand, and any
improvement must come from the content of the guidance rather than from a capability mismatch between a stronger
tuning model and a weaker execution model.
Each of 3–5 iterations proceeds through four types of single-shot LLM call, with steps 2 and 3 repeated per probe (10
probes per iteration, ∼22 total calls):


                                                                             5
                                    Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                           A P REPRINT



                     Category        Count   %     Example
                     Procedural         49   47    “Document the failing test name before fixing”
                     Structural         31   30    “Trace through subclasses.py for inheritance”
                     Quality gate       24   23    “Show actual test output, not fabricated summaries”

Table 2: Content analysis of 104 lines added by probe-and-refine tuning across all 12 repositories. The procedure
predominantly adds procedural guardrails and repo-specific structural knowledge.



1. Generate probes. A single call generates a batch of 10 synthetic bug-fix tasks from the repository’s codebase
   at temperature 0.9, targeting diverse subsystems and failure modes. These probes are distinct from SWE-bench
   evaluation instances, preventing benchmark contamination. Probes are deduplicated against all prior iterations; if
   fewer than 10 survive deduplication, top-up generation rounds fill the gap.
2. Attempt a solution (per probe). For each probe, a single-shot call produces a candidate patch given the repository
   context and the current guidance artifact. This simulates what the coding agent would attempt.
3. Judge the attempt (per probe). For each probe, a single-shot call assesses the attempted solution against expected
   behaviors (strong/partial/missing) and proposes per-probe edits to the guidance where shortcomings are identified.
4. Aggregate diagnostics and apply edits. A single call aggregates all probe results and proposes a final set of
   edits targeting specific guidance sections. The per-probe edits from step 3 and the aggregated edits are merged,
   deduplicated, and capped at 5 per iteration. The edits are then applied mechanically (no LLM call): a deterministic
   procedure inserts, modifies, or strengthens guidance sections, filters boilerplate, and trims the longest bullets to
   enforce the 3000-character budget.

The loop runs up to 5 iterations but stops early if guidance stabilizes: two consecutive iterations with no guidance
change (or no surviving probes after deduplication) trigger termination. In practice, 1 of 12 repositories stopped after 3
iterations and 4 stopped after 4; the remaining 7 used the full budget of 5 (Table 1).
There is no multi-step agent loop anywhere in this procedure. There is also no tool use, no reinforcement learning, and
no gradient updates. The coding agent’s ReAct-style multi-step loop (Section 3.4) is used only during the downstream
patch-generation phase, which is identical across all three conditions. We show that a procedure composed entirely of
single-shot LLM calls can significantly improve a multi-step agent’s performance.


What the procedure discovers. After running the procedure, we see that the output is a qualitative shift from
generic to specific (Figure 2). For Django, generic rules like “Verify repo priors with targeted reads” become “Trace
through subclasses.py to map parent-child relationships.” Rules like “Run the smallest relevant test first” become
“Always reference the specific test class/method (e.g., django/core/tests/test_checks.py::CheckTestCase)
before proposing changes.” A pattern emerges independently across all 12 repositories: the procedure tends to add
a reproduce-first diagnostic workflow (reproduce the failure, trace it to the responsible module, then patch) with
repo-specific navigation and quality-gate strategies filling in subsequent phases. The removed rules are reasonable but
vague, while the added rules encode the kind of operational knowledge that distinguishes a developer who has spent
months in a codebase from one reading the README for the first time.
To characterize the refinement systematically, we categorized all 104 lines added across all 12 repositories by type
(Table 2). Procedural additions (47 %) encode general debugging workflows the model failed to follow spontaneously
(e.g., “reproduce the error with a minimal test case before fixing”). Structural additions (30 %) reference specific
files, functions, or module relationships within a repository (e.g., “trace _eval_simplify call chain” for sympy).
Quality-gate additions (23 %) address output-quality failures such as fabricated test results or empty patches (e.g.,
“show actual test command output, not fabricated summaries”). The dominance of procedural rules suggests the agent’s
primary failure mode is jumping to fixes without sufficient diagnosis, a behavioral problem that the reproduce-first
workflow corrects. The structural rules encode the repo-specific knowledge that makes the procedural rules actionable.


Cost and reusability. Both static_kb and refined guidance artifacts were generated once per repository and held
fixed across all experimental conditions. Each repository requires 3–5 iterations of ∼22 single-shot LLM calls each
(Table 1), with ∼8k input and ∼2k output tokens per call. The artifact is then reusable across all future issues in that
repository.


                                                             6
                                   Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                            A P REPRINT



      Removed by tuning loop (django__django)                    Added by tuning loop (django__django)
      - Verify repo priors with targeted reads before            - Django core tests: Always reference the specific
      editing.                                                   test class/method (e.g.,
      - Localize, trace deps, then apply minimal scoped          'django/core/tests/test_checks.py::CheckTestCase')
      edit.                                                      before proposing changes
      - Run the smallest relevant test first, broaden only       - Multi-table inheritance: Trace through
      if needed.                                                 subclasses.py to map parent-child relationships;
      - Reproduce the failure before editing when                document inheritance chain in comments
      possible.                                                  - Django Admin Debugging: When fixing
      - Read target files and nearby callers before              autocomplete/filter issues, document the exact field
      patching.                                                  lookup chain from get_autocomplete_fields() through
      - Keep first patch minimal; inspect call sites if          to the queryset filter, including the incorrect vs
      public API changes.                                        expected field names.
      - Require evidence from file reads or command output       - django/db/backends/sqlite3/schema.py: When
      — no fabricated edits.                                     modifying constraints, trace through
      - Patches must be syntactically complete; remove           migrations/executor.py to understand the full
      unused imports.                                            constraint handling chain
      - No speculative changes or broad refactors without        - For Django management command fixes: analyze
      evidence.                                                  migration executor logic, verify flag propagation
      - Every touched file must tie to the diagnosed path.       paths, ensure backward compatibility with existing
                                                                 migration scenarios
                                                                 - Before any code changes: document the suspected
                                                                 regression source, affected files, and reasoning for
                                                                 file selection
                                                                 - Include actual test output showing test names,
                                                                 pass/fail status, and execution time for all
                                                                 validation runs
                                                                 - After editing: Run
                                                                 django/db/backends/sqlite3/tests/test_schema.py to
                                                                 verify no regressions in SQLite schema operations
                                                                 - Always capture and display test failure output
                                                                 (traceback, assertion details) before proposing
                                                                 fixes. Include the exact test command used.
                                                                 - Before proposing fixes, reproduce the error with a
                                                                 minimal test case and verify the fix resolves the
                                                                 specific lazy loading scenario.
                                                                 - For settings-related fixes, verify the change
                                                                 doesn't break model imports. Test with both default
                                                                 and custom AUTH_USER_MODEL settings.
                                                                 - Document session middleware dependency: ensure
                                                                 session is available before CSRF token lookup,
                                                                 handle cases where user.is_authenticated but session
                                                                 is None



Figure 2: Guidance evolution for django/django. Generic rules (left) are replaced with repo-specific strategies (right)
over 5 iterations. The procedure independently converges on a reproduce-first workflow with subsystem-specific tracing
instructions, test paths, and middleware dependencies.


3.4    Coding Agent and Fallback

The coding agent operates in a ReAct-style loop (Yao et al., 2023): at each step it emits a bash command, observes
the (truncated) output, and decides the next action, alternating between acting and observing until it produces a patch
or exhausts its step budget. This is the only multi-step process in the entire system; the probe-and-refine procedure
described above does not use it. If the agent fails to produce a patch within the step budget, a single-shot fallback
generates a patch from the issue description and any context accumulated during exploration. The fallback uses the same
temperature (0.0) and context window as the agent’s regular inference calls. Patches from both sources are sanitized
(removing test-file modifications, enforcing diff format) before evaluation. Mean fallback rates across the four trials
differ substantially across conditions (14.8 % for probe-and-refine vs. 30.8 % for static-KB and 25.6 % for no-context at
200 steps), so the fallback pathway is not a uniform noise source; the guided agent more often succeeds within its main
loop.

4     Evaluation
4.1    Motivation

We wanted to know whether an agent produces more solves on SWE-bench Verified with probe-refined guidance versus
our static-KB guidance and an unguided baseline.


                                                             7
                                                     Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                                                                                 A P REPRINT



                                                 Repository                         Pinned SHA (first 8)                                Instances
                                                 django/django                      0ae0029c                                                        231
                                                 sympy/sympy                        2f7e7af9                                                         75
                                                 sphinx-doc/sphinx                  cc7c6f43                                                         44
                                                 matplotlib/matplotlib              829a9cc1                                                         34
                                                 scikit-learn/scikit-learn          3acced3f                                                         32
                                                 astropy/astropy                    8a7b4e12                                                         22
                                                 pydata/xarray                      37f2d49b                                                         22
                                                 pytest-dev/pytest                  ced0a8d4                                                         19
                                                 pylint-dev/pylint                  71caace2                                                         10
                                                 psf/requests                       0e4ae38f                                                          8
                                                 mwaskom/seaborn                    32088bbc                                                          2
                                                 pallets/flask                      3a9d54f3                                                          1
Table 3: Pinned repository commits. Django accounts for 46 % of instances; we report results separately for both
subsets in Table 7.



                                               Resolve Rate (mean ± SD, 4 trials)                                                              Unique Solves ( ¸ 3/4 trials)

                                                                                        33.0%
                             35                                                                                                   35
                                                                                                                                                                               31
                                                            28.3%
                             30    25.5%                                                                                          30




                                                                                                       Unique Consistent Solves
                                                                                                                                  25




          Resolve Rate (%)
                             25


                             20                                                                                                   20


                             15                                                                                                   15


                             10                                                                                                   10       8

                             5                                                                                                     5                         4


                             0                                                                                                     0
                                  No Context               Static KB                Probe-and-Refine                                   No Context         Static KB   Probe-and-Refine


Figure 3: Mean resolve rate across four independent trials on SWE-bench Verified (500 instances per trial). Bars
show four-trial means; error bars show ±1 SD across trials. Probe-and-refine guidance significantly outperforms both
the unguided baseline and the static knowledge base under a mixed-effects logistic regression on the pooled 6000
observations (p < 0.001 for both contrasts).



4.2   Methodology

We evaluate all three conditions, no_context, static_kb, and probe_refined, at 200 agent steps on 500 SWE-bench
Verified instances across four independent trials.
All guidance artifacts are generated from a single pinned commit per repository (Table 3). The same guidance is then
applied to all SWE-bench instances from that repository, regardless of which commit the instance originally targets.
The temperature is 0.0 for all inference calls (including the single-shot fallback) except probe generation (0.9). The
temperature of 0.0 makes the model as reproducible as possible between runs, while the probe generation temperature
of 0.9 ensures that the model still has the variance necessary to avoid generating the same probes repeatedly. The
four trials at 200 steps were run on the same hardware under identical settings, independently, allowing us to estimate
run-to-run variance and report effect sizes with appropriate uncertainty rather than relying on single-run point estimates.


Statistical tests. Our main significance test pools all 4 × 500 × 3 = 6000 trial-by-instance outcomes into a single
model that accounts for both which instances are harder than others and which trial each result came from (a mixed-
effects logistic regression). We also confirm each pairwise comparison within individual trials. We report means ±SD
across the four trials.


                                                                                        8
                                    Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                           A P REPRINT



                       Trial               Condition          Resolve     Coverage        Precision
                                           no_context         22.8 %       37.4 %          61.0 %
                       T1                   static_kb         27.4 %       47.2 %          58.1 %
                                          probe_refined       34.2 %       57.4 %          59.6 %
                                           no_context         27.8 %       43.6 %          63.8 %
                       T2                   static_kb         30.2 %       52.2 %          57.9 %
                                          probe_refined       30.6 %       54.4 %          56.2 %
                                           no_context         24.8 %       43.2 %          57.4 %
                       T3                   static_kb         27.0 %       51.0 %          52.9 %
                                          probe_refined       32.4 %       55.0 %          58.9 %
                                           no_context         26.4 %       42.8 %          61.7 %
                       T4                   static_kb         28.6 %       52.0 %          55.0 %
                                          probe_refined       34.6 %       58.0 %          59.7 %
                                           no_context     25.5 ± 2.2 %   41.7 ± 2.9 %    61.0 ± 2.6 %
                       Mean ± SD            static_kb     28.3 ± 1.4 %   50.6 ± 2.3 %    56.0 ± 2.5 %
                                          probe_refined   33.0 ± 1.8 %   56.2 ± 1.8 %    58.6 ± 1.6 %
Table 4: Per-trial resolve rate, coverage, and precision by condition. The ordering probe-refined > static > no-context
holds in 4/4 trials for both resolve rate and coverage. Precision is approximately constant across conditions in every
trial.


Table 5: Mixed-effects logistic regression results: resolved ∼ condition + (1 | instance) + (1 | trial), fit on pooled
n=6000 observations.
                               Contrast                             β    Odds Ratio        p
                               probe_refined vs. no_context     +0.748      2.11        < 0.001
                               static_kb vs. no_context         +0.293      1.34         0.004
                               probe_refined vs. static_kb      +0.456      1.58        < 0.001



4.3   Results

Across four independent trials, probe-and-refine guidance achieves a mean resolve rate of 33.0 % (SD 1.8 pp), compared
with 28.3 % (SD 1.4 pp) for static-KB and 25.5 % (SD 2.2 pp) for no context (Table 4, Figure 3). The ordering
probe-refined > static > no-context holds in 4/4 trials with no exceptions, for both resolve rate and coverage. Per-trial
Wilson 95 % CIs on the resolve rates do not overlap between probe-refined and no-context in three of the four trials (T1,
T3, T4); in T2 the CIs overlap by a small margin, though the within-trial McNemar test remains significant (p < 0.001)
due to the paired structure.

Hierarchical model. A mixed-effects logistic regression on the pooled 6000 observations, with instance and trial as
crossed random effects, confirms both key contrasts at p < 0.001 (Table 5).

Per-trial McNemar tests. We supplement the hierarchical model with per-trial McNemar’s tests on the within-trial
paired observations. Probe-refined vs. no-context is significant in 4/4 trials (p < 0.001 in every trial). Probe-refined
vs. static-KB is significant in 4/4 trials (p < 0.05 in every trial; p < 0.001 in T1 and T4). Static-KB vs. no-context is
significant in 3/4 trials, borderline in T3.

Decomposing the improvement. The mean gain from no-context to probe-and-refine across the four trials is 7.5 pp.
Of this, 2.8 pp comes from the static knowledge base (structural layer plus generic advice), and 4.7 pp from the iterative
refinement process. The structural layer thus accounts for roughly 37 % of the total improvement, confirming that
repository-specific structural information is valuable in its own right. The probe-and-refine procedure adds value on top
of this foundation by replacing generic procedural advice with repo-specific operational strategies and quality gates.
Probe-and-refine has the lowest fallback rate (mean 14.8 %, vs. 25.6 % for no-context and 30.8 % for static-KB across
the four trials), meaning it most often produces patches through the coding agent’s own loop rather than the single-shot
fallback. It also consumes roughly 56 % more prompt tokens than the unguided baseline, but resolves 29 % more
instances: more tokens per instance, but proportionally more correct patches. Per-repository variation is substantial; for


                                                                9
                                   Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                            A P REPRINT



Table 6: Unique solves by condition and step budget. The 50- and 100-step columns are single-trial counts; the 200-step
column uses the four-trial consistent-solve threshold (≥3 of 4 trials). Probe-refined dominates the contested middle at
the highest budget while all conditions explore different solution paths at lower budgets.
                     Condition          50 steps   100 steps       200 steps (4-trial)   Easy / Hard core
                     probe_refined         20         29                   31
                     no_context            25         21                   8                 65 / 342
                     static_kb             26         16                    4


Table 7: Mean resolve rates across four trials by repository subset at 200 steps. The probe-and-refine advantage is
present in both subsets.
                          Subset                   no_context        static_kb      probe_refined
                          Django (n=231)             27.7 %            31.2 %            35.3 %
                          Non-Django (n=269)         23.5 %            25.8 %            30.9 %
                          All (n=500)                25.5 %            28.3 %            33.0 %



example, on matplotlib, probe-and-refine achieves 76.9 % precision at 100 steps (single-trial measurement), the largest
per-repo gap in the study.

Unique solves and consistency. Across the four trials, instances can be characterized by how consistently each
condition resolves them. At a strict threshold of ≥ 3 of 4 trials, probe_refined resolves 31 instances that neither
no_context nor static_kb resolves consistently, compared with 8 unique-consistent solves for no_context and 4 for
static_kb (Table 6). 65 instances are resolved consistently by all three conditions (the “easy core”), and 342 are never
resolved by any condition in ≥ 3 trials (the “hard core” where guidance does not help). The middle 93 instances are
where guidance matters, and probe-refined dominates this contested middle.

Django vs. non-Django performance. Because Django accounts for 46 % of instances, we verify that results are
not driven solely by this repository (Table 7). The probe-and-refine advantage is present in both subsets and roughly
proportional, with no evidence that the effect is Django-specific.

4.4   Analysis

The resolve-rate differences are driven entirely by evaluation coverage: the fraction of instances for which the agent
produces a patch that can be evaluated by the SWE-bench harness. A mixed-effects logistic regression on the evaluated
subset only (i.e., resolved ∼ condition + (1 | instance) + (1 | trial) restricted to evaluable patches, n=2971) finds no
significant effect of condition on precision: likelihood-ratio test χ2 (2) = 4.26, p = 0.119. Pairwise contrasts on the
evaluated subset are also non-significant (probe-refined vs. no-context: p = 0.47; static vs. no-context: p = 0.078).
Conditional on producing a patch the harness can evaluate, the three conditions resolve issues at approximately the
same rate.
Precision also holds constant across step budgets in the single-trial runs: 55–60 % at 50 steps and 57–60 % at 100 steps
across all three conditions, consistent with the four-trial finding at 200 steps.
Probe-and-refine produces evaluable patches for 56.2 % of instances on average vs. 41.7 % for no-context (Figure 4), a
14.5 pp gap, or roughly 72 additional evaluable patches per trial. Were these to resolve at probe-and-refine’s evaluated
precision (58.6 %), they would yield about 42 additional resolves; we observe about 38 (the 7.5 pp resolve-rate gap).
The close agreement between predicted and observed means the resolve-rate gain is essentially what extra coverage
alone predicts at constant precision, the small shortfall reflecting probe-and-refine’s marginally (and non-significantly)
lower precision rather than any precision gain.
The coverage ordering probe-refined > static > no-context replicates in 4/4 trials with low SDs (1.8 pp for probe-refined,
2.3 pp for static, 2.9 pp for no-context); notably, the guided conditions are more stable across trials than the unguided
baseline.

What “evaluable” means. The SWE-bench harness rejects malformed patches, patches that do not apply cleanly, or
patches that crash the test suite before assertions can be checked; reaching evaluation therefore requires syntactically


                                                              10
                                                         Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                      A P REPRINT



                                                            Coverage Drives Resolve Rate (200 Steps, 4 Trials)
                                                   Evaluated
                                            300    Resolved                                                 56% evaluated

                                                                                  51% evaluated

                                            250




             Instances (mean of 4 trials)
                                                  42% evaluated

                                            200


                                            150


                                            100
                                                                                                                 165
                                                                                       142
                                                      127
                                             50


                                              0
                                                  No Context                       Static KB              Probe-and-Refine

Figure 4: Mean evaluation coverage across four trials at 200 steps. Probe-and-refine produces evaluable patches for
56.2 % of instances on average (SD 1.8 pp) vs. 41.7 % (SD 2.9 pp) for no context. Precision (∼59 %) is similar across
conditions and not statistically distinguishable in a hierarchical model on the evaluated subset.


Table 8: Mean precision (resolved / evaluated) across four trials at 200 steps. Differences across conditions are not
statistically significant in a hierarchical model on the evaluated subset (p = 0.119).
                                                                  Condition       Precision (mean ± SD)
                                                                  no_context           61.0 ± 2.6 %
                                                                  static_kb            56.0 ± 2.5 %
                                                                  probe_refined        58.6 ± 1.6 %



valid, well-scoped, correctly targeted output. The coverage gap therefore reflects a genuine difference in output quality:
the guided agent produces more coherent patches, not merely more patches.


Fallback precision. To verify that the overall precision constancy is not an artifact of mixing agent and fallback
patches, we computed precision separately for each source across the four trials. Agent-loop patches resolve at 60.1 %
when they reach evaluation (1,729 of 2,875 pooled across conditions and trials); fallback patches resolve at 5.2 % (5 of
96). The fallback pathway is effectively a last-ditch probe rather than a recoverable path to a correct patch: across the
four trials, only five fallback-produced patches resolved at all. This has two implications. First, the precision constancy
across conditions (Table 8) is driven almost entirely by agent-loop patches. Second, conditions that trigger the fallback
less often (probe-and-refine at 14.8 % vs. static-KB at 30.8 % vs. no-context at 25.6 %) are not merely avoiding a
slightly worse pathway; they are avoiding a pathway that almost never produces correct patches. This reinforces the
coverage interpretation: what matters is whether the agent can produce an evaluable patch within its main loop at all.


The Agent Uses Late Steps Productively. The step distribution (Figure 5) shows where the coverage advantage
originates. Across the four trials, the unguided agent produces only 4.0 % of its agent-loop patches after step 100, vs.
9.6 % for static-KB and 12.6 % for probe-and-refine, a roughly 3× gap in late-step productivity between probe-and-
refine and no-context. The unguided agent patches early or not at all. Probe-and-refine uses late steps productively
because the reproduce-trace-patch workflow it prescribes creates opportunities for informed patch attempts later in the
trajectory, and these late patches are well-formed at the same ∼59 % precision rate as earlier patches.


                                                                                  11
                                                         Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                          A P REPRINT



                                                                       Patch Timing (200 Steps)

                                                                                                                 No Context
                                             40                                                                  Static KB




       % of Condition's Agent-Loop Patches
                                                                                             100-step            Probe-and-Refine
                                                                                             boundary


                                             30
                                                                                                             After step 100 (pooled):
                                                                                                                   No Context: 4.0%
                                                                                                                     Static KB: 9.6%
                                                                                                            Probe-and-Refine: 12.6%
                                             20



                                             10



                                              0
                                                  1–25         26–50            51–100            101–150        151–200
                                                                              Step Bucket

Figure 5: Patch timing at 200 steps, pooled across four trials. The unguided agent produces the bulk of its patches in the
first 25 steps and very few thereafter; probe-and-refine produces a substantially larger fraction of its patches after step
100.


5     Localization
5.1   Motivation

We wanted to understand what kind of instances refined guidance helps with. If refined guidance helps with a specific
kind of instance, such as in a particular type of repository or of a particular difficulty, that would have implications
for the generalization of probe-and-refine tuning. The localization hypothesis is that probe-refined guidance increases
solves primarily by helping the agent find the right file locations for a given fix.

5.2   Methodology

To understand what kind of instances refined guidance helps with, we examined the 31 instances that probe_refined
resolves consistently (≥ 3 of 4 trials) and that neither no_context nor static_kb resolves consistently, the cleanest
available signal of what probe-refined guidance uniquely contributes.

5.3   Results

The unique solves are not the hard instances. Contrary to the natural prediction that additional guidance would
help on harder bugs, the 31 probe-refined-only consistent solves are easier than the benchmark average. Median patch
size is 5 added lines (vs. 4 across the full benchmark); 13 % are multi-file (vs. 14 %); 13 % include a traceback in the
problem statement (vs. 14 %); 45 % are SWE-bench-rated as < 15 minute fixes (vs. 39 %) and only one exceeds one
hour. Roughly a third are small additive feature requests (e.g., “expose warm_start”, “add fill_value”, “make
element_id optional in json_script”) where the task is not writing a complex fix but locating the correct plumbing
point for a small change.

The unique solves share a localization mismatch. Reading the 31 problem statements qualitatively, a single
pattern dominates: the problem statement names a user-facing API surface (e.g., IsolationForest, FITSDiff,
TruncDate, DataArray.quantile, strip_accents_unicode, SubFigure.legend) while the actual fix lives in
a non-obvious internal module (BaseBagging plumbing inside sklearn.ensemble._iforest, VLA column com-
parison inside astropy.io.fits.diff, TruncBase.as_sql, xarray.core.variable, NFKD handling inside
sklearn.feature_extraction.text, the Legend.__init__ parent-type check, etc.). A model searching by
named symbol is likely to land in the wrong file. Refined guidance, which encodes repo-specific subsystem structure
and tracing instructions, may point the model to the correct module. More broadly, even when the guidance does not


                                                                              12
                                         Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                                                   A P REPRINT



                                   Localization Hypothesis: Probe-Refined Unique Solves by Repository
              pytest 0/1.2                                                                                    Over-represented (ratio > 1)
                                                                                                              Under-represented (ratio < 1)
             django                       9/14.3

             astropy                          1/1.4

             sphinx                                           3/2.7

             sympy                                                    6/4.7

          matplotlib                                                          3/2.1

              pylint                                                                  1/0.6

            requests                                                                                1/0.5

         scikit-learn                                                                               4/2.0

              xarray                                                                                        3/1.4

                             0.0           0.5          1.0              1.5                  2.0                   2.5             3.0
                                          Observed / Expected (probe-refined-only consistent solves)

Figure 6: Probe-refined-only consistent solves per repository, expressed as a ratio of observed to expected (base-rate).
Dot size is proportional to repository size; larger dots represent more reliable estimates. Repositories with predictable
layouts (django, pytest) fall below the reference line; those with idiosyncratic internal organization (xarray, scikit-learn)
exceed it.



name the specific file implicated in an issue, exposure to concrete paths and module references may shift the agent
toward path-oriented search strategies across the repository as a whole, a hypothesis the current data cannot directly test
but that would explain partial localization benefits outside the cleanly matched cases.


5.4   Analysis

The repository distribution supports the localization hypothesis. If probe-refined guidance functions primarily
as a localization aid, repositories with more predictable layouts, where symbol names map cleanly to file locations
from pretraining, should benefit less than repositories with idiosyncratic internal organization. This is what we observe
(Figure 6). Django, with its standardized MVC layout (django/db/models/, django/views/, django/template/),
is underrepresented among probe-refined-only consistent solves (9 observed vs. 14.3 expected from base rate, ratio 0.63).
Scientific and numerical libraries with flatter or more idiosyncratic layouts (scikit-learn 2.02×, xarray 2.20×, matplotlib
1.42×, sympy 1.29×) are over-represented. Pytest, which has a flat and consistent module structure, contributes zero of
1.2 expected probe-refined-only consistent solves.


Synthesis with the coverage finding. The localization hypothesis is one interpretation consistent with both the
coverage and precision results, though we emphasize that we have not run the file-structure ablation (Section 6) that
would directly test it. Under this reading, refined guidance helps the agent reach the correct file for small mechanical
fixes; this would produce the coverage gap we observe, because patches that target the wrong file are rejected by the
harness or fail to apply cleanly. Conditional on reaching the right file, the fix is small and either works or does not,
which is why per-patch precision is constant across conditions. The pattern is consistent with refined guidance helping
the agent find the right file rather than improving the quality of the changes it makes. This reading would also explain
the ceiling we hit: across all four trials combined, probe-and-refine resolves at most ∼58 % of instances (and only
∼32 % in at least three of four trials). Instances requiring genuinely complex multi-file refactors or hard algorithmic
insight fall outside the population that localization can help, and no amount of guidance reaches them.


                                                                13
                                             Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                                      A P REPRINT



Table 9: Resolve rates across step budgets. The 200-step results are the four-trial means reported in Section 4; the 25,
50, and 100-step results are single-trial measurements.
                                         Condition            25          50    100        200 (mean)
                                         no_context         24.4 %    27.6 %   23.6 %          25.5 %
                                         static_kb          21.8 %    29.8 %   29.6 %          28.3 %
                                         probe_refined      24.2 %    23.4 %   30.8 %          33.0 %


                                                          Resolve Rate Across Step Budgets
                                37.5
                                       No Context
                                35.0   Static KB
                                                                                                                         32.9%
                                       Probe-and-Refine
                                32.5




             Resolve Rate (%)
                                30.0                                                                                     28.3%

                                27.5

                                25.0
                                                                                                                         25.5%
                                22.5

                                20.0

                                17.5                                                    200 steps: 4-trial mean § SD
                                                                                            25–100 steps: single trial

                                       25                    50                   100                              200
                                                                   Agent Step Budget

Figure 7: Resolve rate across step budgets. At 25 steps, all conditions are equivalent. As budget increases, the
conditions progressively separate. The unguided baseline is flat at ∼25 % regardless of budget. Probe-and-refine is
the only condition that continues improving beyond 100 steps. The 200-step point is the four-trial mean with ±1 SD;
lower-budget points are single-trial.


6     Step Budget

6.1   Motivation

We wanted to test how guidance moderates the value of step budget, the number of steps the agent is allowed to take
before it must provide a solution. No prior study of AGENTS.md files reports or controls for the agent’s step budget.

6.2   Methodology

We ran all three conditions at four step budgets—25, 50, 100, and 200 steps—to study how guidance interacts with the
number of steps an agent is permitted to take (Table 9). The 200-step condition was replicated four times (Section 4);
the 25, 50, and 100-step conditions are single-trial measurements, so the patterns we report across budgets should be
read as descriptive rather than as replicated effects.

6.3   Results

Three patterns are visible in Figure 7. First, all conditions are equivalent at 25 steps (21.8–24.4 %, all pairwise p > 0.3
via single-trial McNemar), because 44–68 % of instances exhaust their budget and fall through to the single-shot
fallback. Second, each guidance type activates at a different budget: static-KB improves sharply from 25 to 50 steps
(p = 0.004, single-trial McNemar) then plateaus, while probe-and-refine is flat from 25 to 50 then rises from 23.4 %
at 50 to 30.8 % at 100 and continues to a four-trial mean of 33.0 % at 200. Third, the unguided baseline is flat at
22.8–27.6 % across all four budgets (p = 0.551 for 25 vs. 200, single-trial McNemar), consuming roughly 2.3× more
tokens at 200 as at 25 with no resolve-rate gain.


                                                                     14
                                    Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                              A P REPRINT



The 50-step dip for probe-and-refine. The probe-and-refine condition drops from 24.2 % at 25 steps to 23.4 % at 50
steps, while static-KB jumps from 21.8 % to 29.8 %. At 50 steps, probe-and-refine actually underperforms static-KB
(p = 0.022 in the single-trial McNemar test). We attribute this to a workflow-budget mismatch: the reproduce-trace-
patch workflow prescribed by probe-and-refine requires more steps to complete than the simpler recommendations in
the static-KB guidance artifact. At 50 steps the agent has enough budget to begin the prescribed workflow (spending
steps on reproduction and tracing) but not enough to reach the patching phase, leaving it worse off than if it had patched
immediately. By contrast, the static-KB artifact’s lighter-weight advice (e.g., “run the smallest relevant test first”) fits
within 50 steps. This pattern directly supports the activation-threshold hypothesis: more complex guidance requires a
higher step budget before its benefits materialize. Practitioners should note that deploying probe-and-refine guidance
with an insufficient step budget can actively reduce performance relative to simpler alternatives.
This last observation pairs with the token-consumption data: the unguided baseline spends 2.3× more tokens at 200
steps than at 25 and gets nothing for it, while probe-and-refine spends 2.8× more and converts the additional steps
into a 7–10 pp improvement. The lesson is not that “scaling steps without scaling guidance is ineffective” in general;
we cannot rule out that the unguided agent would benefit from budget beyond 200 steps, or that different scaffolds
would show different scaling behavior. Rather, the data show that unstructured exploration saturates quickly within this
scaffold: without a prescribed workflow, additional steps produce more exploration but not better patches. Guidance is
the mechanism that converts additional steps into additional coverage and, because precision is constant, into additional
resolves. Different forms of guidance have different activation thresholds, and matching the step budget to the guidance’s
workflow complexity is necessary to realize its benefits.

6.4   Analysis

Why the baseline is flat. We analyzed 43 instances that no_context resolved at 50 steps but failed at 100, to check
whether additional steps actively harm the agent. The dominant failure mode is exploration-path divergence (18 of 43):
the two runs are independent executions that explore different trajectories, and the 50-step run happened to find better
paths. Genuine self-sabotage (the agent producing a correct patch then degrading it) accounts for only 2 of 43 cases.
The agent does not harm itself with more steps; it simply lacks a structured plan for converting extra budget into better
patches.

Toward a causal test of localization. A direct test of the localization hypothesis (Section 5) would compare
probe_refined guidance against a variant with the file-structure portions stripped out, leaving only the procedural
and quality-gate advice; if the localization hypothesis is correct, this stripped variant should regress toward static_kb
performance while remaining above no_context. We did not run this ablation in the present work but identify it as the
highest-priority follow-up experiment.

7     Cross-Model Generalization
7.1   Motivation

We wanted to test whether the procedure generalizes beyond Qwen3.5-35B-A3B, and in particular whether the guidance
it produces encodes transferable repository knowledge or merely calibration tuned to the model that produced it. The
answer determines whether guidance can be tuned once on a capable model and reused, or must be re-tuned per model.

7.2   Methodology

We ran the full experiment with NVIDIA-Nemotron-3-Nano-30B-A3B (Nemotron; NVIDIA 2026), a mixture-of-
experts model with ∼3.5B active parameters, similar to Qwen3.5-35B-A3B’s 3B active parameters but a different
architecture and training profile. We used the same scaffold, the same 500 SWE-bench Verified instances, and the same
evaluation harness. All Nemotron experiments were conducted as single trials; the four Qwen trials established that
trial-level variance is negligible at n=500, so a single trial is sufficient to answer the qualitative question of whether the
procedure generalizes.

7.3   Results

The Tuning Loop Cannot Sustain on a Capacity-Constrained Model. The probe-and-refine loop requires three
capabilities: generating diverse synthetic bugs, producing attempted patches rich enough to diagnose, and judging those
attempts with enough specificity to propose actionable edits. Nemotron satisfies the first but struggles with the second
and third. Its attempted patches are too sparse for the judging step (which critiques each attempt and proposes edits) to


                                                             15
                                  Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                             A P REPRINT



Table 10: Tuning loop output by model. Nemotron’s loop degrades after the first iteration; five of twelve repositories
produce zero new probes and zero edits in later iterations (average version reached: 3.8 of 5). Qwen generates 341 total
probes and 175 edits versus Nemotron’s 165 and 78, reaching an average of 4.5 of 5 iterations.
                                  Metric                       Nemotron       Qwen
                                  Avg. version reached        3.8 / 5        4.5 / 5
                                  Total probes generated       165            341
                                  Total edits applied           78            175
                                  Avg. chars per repo         2,295          2,753
                                  Growth over static_kb     +608 chars    +1,065 chars



Table 11: Resolve rates on SWE-bench Verified (500 instances, 200 steps). Qwen results are four-trial means; Nemotron
results are single-trial. The two models respond oppositely to the same guidance conditions.
                            Condition          Qwen (mean, n=4)       Nemotron (single trial)
                            no_context                25.5 %                  28.4 %
                            static_kb                 28.3 %                  24.6 %
                            probe_refined             33.0 %                  27.0 %




find anything to act on, so the loop stalls: five of twelve repositories produce zero new probes and zero edits after the
first iteration, and Nemotron reaches an average of 3.8 of 5 iterations versus Qwen’s 4.5 (Table 10). Matplotlib, flask,
pytest, xarray, and sympy all plateau at iteration 2 or earlier, with sympy’s guidance text essentially unchanged from its
initial version.
Qwen’s guidance contains concrete, repo-specific strategies (for matplotlib, “trace _draw_3d_patch, _plot_surface,
and zorder calculation paths”), while Nemotron’s degraded loop produces generic elaborations of its initial boilerplate:
“list candidate files and functions.” The gap suggests a model-fit dependency: probe-and-refine appears to require a
model that can generate diagnostic output rich enough for the judge step to act on. The loop prompts were developed
around Qwen’s output format, so Nemotron’s weaker loop participation may reflect prompt mismatch as much as raw
capacity. A Nemotron-adapted prompt design remains untested.


Static Guidance Hurts a Capacity-Constrained Model. Nemotron’s results, using guidance tuned on Nemotron
itself, show the opposite pattern to Qwen’s (Table 11): all guidance conditions underperform the unguided baseline, and
the ordering is no-context > probe-refined > static-KB. Compare to Qwen, where the same guidance text monotonically
improves performance and static-KB alone adds 2.8 pp over baseline.
The 3.8 pp gap between no-context and static-KB on Nemotron has two roughly equal contributing factors (∼9 and
∼10 instances each). On coverage: with static-KB guidance, Nemotron produces 328 patches through its own loop vs.
345 for no-context (17 fewer) and leaves 131 instances with no usable output vs. 107 (24 more); the extra ∼500 tokens
of guidance per turn make the model more likely to drift from issuing commands into writing prose about what it might
do. On patch quality: among the 261 instances where both conditions produce a patch, no-context resolves 44.1 %
vs. static-KB’s 39.8 %; the guidance instructs the agent to “keep the first patch minimal,” and Nemotron interprets
this literally. For django-11276 it adds the import without connecting it, for django-14238 it produces a shallow
one-liner, and for sympy-11618 it imports zip_longest without using it. The root cause is instruction-following
interference: Nemotron’s different behavioral profile leaves it more susceptible to behavioral steering by prescriptive
language, shifting it from executing to deliberating. Qwen absorbs the same guidance as context while maintaining
action-oriented behavior; Nemotron cannot. The probe-refined condition partially recovers over static-KB (27.0 % vs.
24.6 %), likely because the degraded loop removes some of the most harmful prescriptive language rather than adding
useful repo-specific content.


Cross-Model Guidance Transfer Is Catastrophic. Qwen-tuned guidance applied to Nemotron does not merely fail
to help: it actively collapses agent performance, while leaving per-patch precision intact. To test whether high-quality
guidance produced by a capable model can transfer to a less capable one, we applied Qwen’s probe-refined guidance to
Nemotron without modification (Table 12). The result is a collapse: 66 resolved instances (13.2 %), compared with 135
(27.0 %) for Nemotron’s own probe-refined baseline and 142 (28.4 %) for no-context.


                                                           16
                                   Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                              A P REPRINT



Table 12: Agent behavior under Qwen-to-Nemotron cross-model transfer vs. Nemotron self-tuned baseline. Qwen’s
guidance triggers compliance by analysis rather than action in Nemotron, collapsing agent-loop patch production and
generating a large fallback cascade. Per-patch precision when the loop completes is unchanged (bottom row).
                       Metric                                   Qwen guidance     Nemotron baseline
                       Resolved                                     66 (13.2 %)      135 (27.0 %)
                       Agent-loop patches produced                      174              351
                       Fallback patches triggered                       324                3
                       Avg. steps / instance                            81.0             39.2
                       Instances hitting max steps                       83               11
                       Eval errors (patch-apply failures)               246               14
                       No-command prose events                         2,141            1,252
                       Repeated-command stall instances                 172               41
                       Agent-loop precision (resolved/patch)          37.9 %           38.5 %



7.4   Analysis

The transfer collapse is the most striking of the three findings, so we analyze its mechanism in detail before drawing the
cross-cutting lesson. The mechanism is what we call compliance by analysis: rather than running commands, Nemotron
reads Qwen’s detailed, prescriptive guidance and writes out an analysis of what it would do, producing 71 % more turns
that issue no command and stalling (repeating itself) four times as often. This triggers a fallback cascade: when the
agent loop produces no patch, the single-shot fallback fires carrying 81 steps of accumulated but unfocused context; the
fallback then generates patches that are long but malformed (mean 901 characters versus 280 for the baseline), 243 of
246 evaluation errors are patch-apply failures originating from these fallback patches, and none of the 324 fallback
patches resolve the target issue. Crucially, when the loop does complete and produce a patch, that patch resolves its
issue just as often as before: 37.9 % under Qwen’s guidance vs. 38.5 % for the Nemotron baseline, a difference well
within noise. The guidance breaks the agent’s control loop, producing far fewer evaluable patches, without touching the
quality of the patches it does produce. This is the precision-constancy finding from our main experiment (Section 4.4)
reappearing from an unexpected direction: across models, across guidance conditions, and under cross-model transfer,
the fraction of patches that resolve once they reach evaluation stays stable. The catastrophe is entirely in coverage.
These results establish that guidance encodes model-specific behavioral calibration, not transferable repository knowl-
edge. The gains probe-and-refine produces on Qwen reflect guidance tailored to Qwen’s specific failure modes; the
same text is actively harmful to a model with a different behavioral profile. This pattern parallels Cloud et al. (2025)’s
finding that subliminal transmission of behavioral traits via training data succeeds between models sharing initialization
but collapses across families. Behavioral-calibration artifacts, whether produced by weight updates, training data, or
prompt-level tuning, appear to encode model-family-specific signals that do not transfer cleanly. Whether guidance
explicitly designed for cross-model use, or tuned to avoid model-specific behavioral cues, could support positive transfer
is an open question; this experiment tests only incidental transfer, and a targeted multi-model tuning regime might not
trigger the same failure mode.

8     Discussion
Instruction quality as a first-order variable. The central claim of this paper is that the quality of the instructions
given to a coding agent is a first-order determinant of its reliability, comparable in magnitude to choices about model
capability or step budget within a fixed scaffold. This reframes a question that has received surprisingly little systematic
attention: while models, context windows, and scaffolds have all been subject to careful ablation, the content of the
agent’s own instructions has rarely been varied or optimized. Guidance does not improve the quality of the changes
the agent makes (precision is constant at ∼59 %), but, as the budget experiment shows (Section 6), it is what makes
additional steps productive at all. The 42 % of instances resistant to all three conditions at the any-trial threshold are
unlikely to be reached by guidance improvements alone; these appear to require stronger reasoning or longer context
rather than better localization.

A speculative interpretation: prompt-level cluster activation. A more speculative reading of these results connects
them to recent work on narrow fine-tuning. Betley et al. (2025a) report that narrow weight updates can produce broad
behavioral change, and Betley et al. (2025b) provide mechanistic evidence, via a sparse-autoencoder analysis in one
of their experiments, that this happens by strengthening broad persona features already present in the model rather
than narrow task-specific ones. Probe-and-refine’s empirical signature is similar. Ten synthetic probes per iteration


                                                               17
                                   Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                            A P REPRINT



shape an agent’s behavior on hundreds of unrelated SWE-bench instances, and the added guidance is dominated by
procedural workflows the model could in principle execute when prompted (Table 2). One reading is that the procedure
does not teach the agent new capabilities but locates and activates dormant ones from outside the weights. We make
no mechanistic claim for the prompt-space case. The present results are consistent with this interpretation but do not
test it directly, and a representation-level or probing study analogous to Betley et al. (2025b)’s would be required to
distinguish it from alternatives.

Reconciling prior findings. Lulla et al. (2026) evaluate focused pull requests where budgets are likely generous
relative to task complexity; Gloaguen et al. (2026) evaluate complex benchmark tasks under default settings. Our
budget experiment shows that the same guidance can appear beneficial, neutral, or harmful depending on available steps.
Additionally, Gloaguen et al. (2026)’s context files are generated in a single LLM pass, while probe-and-refine guidance
is iteratively refined through failure feedback, consistent with Zhu et al. (2026)’s finding that curated experience helps
while unfiltered experience does not. Critically, the Nemotron self-tuned experiment provides a within-study replication
of Gloaguen et al. (2026)’s finding: the same static_kb guidance that adds 2.8 pp to Qwen’s resolve rate reduces
Nemotron’s by 3.8 pp. The disagreement between prior studies may reflect differences in the models evaluated as
much as differences in how guidance was produced or what tasks were attempted. To our knowledge, this is the first
systematic variation of step budget across guidance conditions in the SWE-bench literature; existing studies report a
single fixed budget without examining how it interacts with the guidance provided.

Model capacity as a moderating variable. Practitioners should treat guidance complexity as a three-way match:
workflow depth, step budget, and model capacity must all be commensurate for probe-and-refine to help rather than
harm. A capacity-constrained model cannot sustain the feedback loop (Section 7), and prescriptive guidance calibrated
for a more capable model triggers mode-switching rather than execution.

Guidance is model-specific. The cross-model transfer experiment (Section 7) demonstrates that guidance encodes
model-specific behavioral calibration. Practitioners should tune guidance with the model that will consume it.

Contamination robustness. The 31 unique consistent solves from probe-and-refine are distributed across 9 of 12
repositories (Figure 6) and mirror the overall difficulty distribution, suggesting the improvement comes from guidance
content rather than memorization. We cannot rule out that guidance triggers recall of memorized solutions the unguided
prompt fails to elicit, but the unique solves show no skew toward older or more-starred issues.

Absolute performance. Resolve rates (22–35 %) reflect a constrained pipeline: a 35B mixture-of-experts model with
16k effective context and aggressive output truncation. Frontier systems achieve >55 % on SWE-bench Verified. The
contribution is a controlled experiment showing that iteratively refined guidance significantly outperforms alternatives
within the same pipeline.

9   Limitations
Variance characterization. Each condition was run in four independent trials at 200 steps, allowing us to characterize
but not eliminate run-to-run variance. Additional trials would tighten confidence intervals further but are unlikely to
change conclusions: the hierarchical model already gives p < 0.001 on the key contrasts at n=4 trials. The lower-budget
runs (25, 50, 100 steps) in Section 6 are single-trial measurements and lack the same uncertainty quantification.

Guidance length confound. The refined guidance is 63 % longer on average than the static-KB guidance (Table 1),
so we cannot fully disentangle content quality from prompt length. The content analysis (Table 2) shows that the added
material is predominantly repo-specific knowledge (procedural guardrails, structural references, and quality gates) rather
than generic padding. Furthermore, Gloaguen et al. (2026) demonstrate that longer LLM-generated context files can
actively reduce performance, which is the opposite of what a pure length effect would predict. The localization analysis
(Section 5) provides additional support: the instances probe-refined guidance uniquely resolves are concentrated in
repositories where naive symbol-based localization fails, a pattern that generic-text padding would not produce. Two
ablations would isolate this confound completely (padding static_kb to match refined-guidance length, and truncating
refined guidance to static_kb length); we did not run these due to compute constraints, and the possibility that the
model simply benefits from additional prompt tokens remains open.

Single model with demonstrated capability. The probe-and-refine procedure has been demonstrated on one model,
Qwen3.5-35B-A3B. A cross-model experiment with Nemotron suggests the procedure has model-fit requirements: the
model must generate diagnostic output rich enough for the judge step to act on, though the loop prompts were designed


                                                           18
                                   Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                             A P REPRINT



around Qwen’s output format and a Nemotron-adapted design remains untested. Nemotron’s loop degrades and even
static guidance hurts rather than helps it on this scaffold. The open question is whether the procedure generalizes to a
second model that can run it: a larger dense model with strong tool-use behavior, for instance. Scaffolds with context
summarization or tree-search may interact with guidance differently regardless of model capacity.

Probe sensitivity. We generate 10 probes per iteration at temperature 0.9 with deduplication and provide a qualitative
analysis of what the procedure discovers (Section 3.3), but do not conduct a systematic sensitivity analysis of how
the final guidance changes under different probe sets or random seeds. Whether the procedure converges to similar
guidance from different random seeds is an open question; the early-stop behavior (3–5 iterations) suggests some runs
may be more productive than others.

Single benchmark with Django concentration. Findings are specific to SWE-bench Verified (500 instances), with
Django accounting for 46 %. Table 7 shows the effect holds in both subsets, but the non-Django subset contains 11
repositories with as few as 1–2 instances each, making per-repo significance testing infeasible and limiting claims about
cross-repository generality. The effect could be primarily a Django effect with modest support from other repositories;
evaluation on benchmarks with more balanced repository distributions is needed.

10    Conclusion
We introduced probe-and-refine tuning, a lightweight procedure that iteratively refines a statically generated repository
knowledge base into specialized operational guidance through ∼22 single-shot LLM calls per iteration: generate a
batch of probes, attempt and judge each probe against expected behaviors, and aggregate diagnostics into mechanically
applied guidance edits. Across four independent trials on SWE-bench Verified, the resulting guidance achieves a mean
resolve rate of 33.0 % (mixed-effects logistic regression p < 0.001 vs. both baseline and static-KB) and produces 31
instances solved consistently (≥ 3 of 4 trials) that no other condition resolves. The mechanism is evaluation coverage:
the guidance gives the agent a structured workflow that converts exploration into well-formed, evaluable patches more
reliably, without improving the correctness of any individual evaluated patch. A qualitative analysis suggests the
procedure functions as a localization aid, helping the agent reach the correct file for small mechanical fixes, rather than
enabling fundamentally harder repairs.
The procedure is simple enough to be surprising. That a procedure composed entirely of single-shot LLM calls (∼22
per iteration), with no tool use and no multi-step reasoning, can encode repo-specific operational knowledge sufficient
to significantly outperform both an unguided agent and a static knowledge base suggests that the instructions given to
coding agents matter at least as much as the agents’ own reasoning capabilities.
A cross-model analysis with Nemotron reveals a model-fit dependency: the procedure appears to require a model that
can produce rich diagnostic output and judge its own patch attempts with enough specificity to drive the feedback loop.
Below this threshold the loop degrades, guidance interferes rather than helps, and the precision-constancy finding (that
per-patch quality is unaffected by guidance) still holds, now replicated under cross-model transfer.
For practitioners: invest in iteratively refined guidance for repositories where your agent will handle many issues, ensure
the step budget accommodates the prescribed workflow, and tune guidance with the model that will consume it, as
guidance calibrated for a different model’s behavioral profile may actively harm performance.

Author Contributions. A.S. designed and ran the experiments, performed the analysis, and wrote the manuscript.
J.A. supervised the project and provided feedback on the methodology and manuscript.

References
SWE-bench. SWE-bench Verified. 2024. https://www.swebench.com/verified.html.
Carlos E. Jimenez et al. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-World GitHub Issues? ICLR, 2024.
Douglas Bates et al. Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67(1):1–48,
   2015.
Qwen Team. Qwen3.5-35B-A3B. 2026. https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3.5-35B-A3B.
Jai Lal Lulla et al. On the Impact of AGENTS.md Files on the Efficiency of AI Coding Agents. ICSE JAWs, 2026.
   arXiv:2601.20404.
Thibaud Gloaguen et al. Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?
   arXiv:2602.11988, 2026.


                                                            19
                                Probe-and-Refine Tuning of Repository Guidance                       A P REPRINT



Aman Madaan et al. Self-Refine: Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback. NeurIPS, 2023.
Noah Shinn et al. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning. NeurIPS, 2023.
Shunyu Yao et al. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. ICLR, 2023.
John Yang et al. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering. NeurIPS, 2024.
Chunqiu Steven Xia et al. Agentless: Demystifying LLM-based Software Engineering Agents. arXiv:2407.01489,
   2024.
Antonis Antoniades et al. SWE-Search: Enhancing Software Agents with Monte Carlo Tree Search and Iterative
   Refinement. ICLR, 2025.
Siru Ouyang et al. RepoGraph: Enhancing AI Software Engineering with Repository-level Code Graph. ICLR, 2025.
   arXiv:2410.14684.
Yuntong Zhang et al. AutoCodeRover: Autonomous Program Improvement. ISSTA, 2024.
Worawalan Chatlatanagulchai et al. Agent READMEs: An Empirical Study of Context Files for Agentic Coding.
   arXiv:2511.12884, 2025.
Aristidis Vasilopoulos. Codified Context: Infrastructure for AI Agents in a Complex Codebase. arXiv:2602.20478,
   2026.
Jared Zhu et al. SWE Context Bench: A Benchmark for Context Learning in Coding. arXiv:2602.08316, 2026.
Haoran Ye et al. Meta Context Engineering via Agentic Skill Evolution. arXiv:2601.21557, 2026.
Jan Betley et al. Emergent Misalignment: Narrow Finetuning Can Produce Broadly Misaligned LLMs.
   arXiv:2502.17424, 2025.
Jan Betley et al. Weird Generalization and Inductive Backdoors: New Ways to Corrupt LLMs. arXiv:2512.09742, 2025.
Alex Cloud et al. Subliminal Learning: Language Models Transmit Behavioral Traits via Hidden Signals in Data.
   arXiv:2507.14805, 2025.
Quinn McNemar. Note on the Sampling Error of the Difference Between Correlated Proportions or Percentages.
  Psychometrika, 12(2):153–157, 1947.
Alan Agresti. Categorical Data Analysis. Wiley, 3rd edition, 2013.
Thomas G. Dietterich. Approximate Statistical Tests for Comparing Supervised Classification Learning Algorithms.
  Neural Computation, 10(7):1895–1923, 1998.
NVIDIA.             NVIDIA-Nemotron-3-Nano-30B-A3B. 2026.                    https://huggingface.co/nvidia/
   NVIDIA-Nemotron-3-Nano-30B-A3B-BF16.




                                                       20
