                                         TAHOE: Text-to-SQL with Automated Hint Optimization
                                                          from Experience

                                                                          Zhiyi Chen1,2,∗ , Jie Song1 , Peng Li1
                                                                  1
                                                                      ByteDance Inc., 2 Georgia Institute of Technology
                                                         ∗
                                                             Work done during an internship at the ByteBrain team, ByteDance




arXiv:2606.12387v1 [cs.DB] 10 Jun 2026
                                                                                        Abstract
                                           Large Language Models (LLMs) have democratized access to databases via Text-to-SQL, yet
                                           bridging the gap between prototypes and production remains challenging. Real-world deployments
                                           face strict dialect constraints (e.g., Snowflake), massive schemas, and evolving user preferences
                                           that vanilla LLMs struggle to handle. Existing solutions like Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) are
                                           costly and rigid, while manual prompt engineering and agentic test-time scaling are unscalable in
                                           latency and computation.
                                           We present Tahoe, a system that transforms prompt optimization into a dynamic data management
                                           problem. Tahoe runs an error-driven hint learning pipeline over a two-phase lifecycle (Development
                                           and Deployment) to consolidate debugging traces into a structured Hint Bank. Compiler feedback
                                           is distilled into reusable Syntax Hints that enforce dialect-specific rules, while execution and
                                           user feedback are converted into Semantic Hints that capture schema- and user-specific logic.
                                           A novel Strategy Layer models conflicting user intents as competing strategies under shared
                                           natural-language triggers; each strategy is annotated with a learning-time recency signal and,
                                           after learning, with post-learning attribution statistics that summarize its empirical success, harm,
                                           inertness, and support on actual generations. At inference time, Tahoe performs context-aware
                                           retrieval and guides the LLM through a two-stage process: Logic Planning to select and combine
                                           strategies, followed by SQL Synthesis to generate dialect-correct queries. We implement and
                                           evaluate the development-phase workflow, while leaving deployment-time human-feedback updates
                                           for future work.
                                           Evaluations on the Spider 2.0–Snow benchmark show that Tahoe substantially improves hint-
                                           guided Text-to-SQL without updating model parameters. In the development-phase evaluation on
                                           the 113 supervised Spider 2.0–Snow-0212 examples, with our primary backbone (GPT-5.5), Tahoe
                                           lifts pass rate from 61.95% to 79.42% and pass@4 from 72.57% to 87.61%, drives the Snowflake
                                           syntax pass rate to 100%, and reduces average compiler-feedback critic rounds from 2.79 to 0.12
                                           per sampled candidate. The same Hint Bank, plugged into weaker backbones without retraining,
                                           also yields large gains (e.g., +19.7 pp pass rate on Doubao-2.0-lite), demonstrating cross-model
                                           transferability. On held-out examples, syntax transfer remains strong, while semantic gains are
                                           more modest, suggesting that semantic benefits depend on how well the development set covers
                                           the target workload. By converting transient feedback into a persistent and interpretable Hint
                                           Bank, Tahoe provides a practical framework for robust and adaptable database interfaces.

                                           Date: June 11, 2026
                                           Correspondence: Zhiyi Chen, zchen798@gatech.edu
1   Introduction
Translating natural language (NL) questions into executable SQL queries, or Text-to-SQL, is a long-standing
goal of database research. Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have brought remarkable
progress. However, a significant gap persists between prototype demos and realistic deployments. In real-world
scenarios—characterized by strict dialects (e.g., Snowflake), massive schemas, and evolving user preferences—
generic LLMs frequently fail. As illustrated in Figure 1, models often violate dialect constraints (e.g., failing
to quote mixed-case identifiers like "name" in Snowflake) or misinterpret subtle user intents (e.g., using
LIMIT 1 for “top product” instead of handling ties). These failures are not merely corner cases; on the recent
Spider 2.0–Snow benchmark, even top-tier coding models (e.g., Qwen-Coder) achieve only ≈30% execution
accuracy, with general-purpose models like GPT-4o often performing worse due to a lack of domain-specific
discipline [1].
To bridge this gap, recent research has diverged into several paradigms. As summarized in Table 1, while
each offers partial solutions, they face distinct limitations in production environments:
The ‘‘Compute Trap’’ (Test-Time Scaling): A growing trend involves Test-Time Scaling or agentic workflows,
where models engage in multi-turn iterative refinement, generate massive numbers of candidates, or rely on
“fixer” agents to correct errors [17]. While this can improve accuracy, it incurs substantial latency and financial
costs—often requiring dozens of LLM calls for a single query. As highlighted in recent studies on long-term
interaction, these systems suffer from total amnesia: they effectively “reset” between sessions, repeating the
same errors on every new query and learning nothing from previous failures [3]. Consequently, an error fixed in
one session is committed again in the next, necessitating redundant correction loops that waste computation
and frustrate users.
The ‘‘Rigidity Trap’’ (Supervised Fine-Tuning): Another approach applies Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT)
to internalize domain knowledge [14]. Although effective for static tasks, SFT presents significant data
management challenges in dynamic database environments. Adapting to a schema change, a new SQL dialect,
or evolving user preferences introduced by newly onboarded users requires expensive retraining. Furthermore,
the learned weights are opaque and non-transferable; switching the base model renders the SFT investment
obsolete.
The ‘‘Context Noise’’ (Documentation RAG): Finally, simple Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) over
database documentation or schemas often fails due to the “Context Window Fallacy.” As recent memory
research indicates, simply extending context windows does not ensure effective utilization of information due
to attention degradation over distant tokens [3, 6]. Retrieving excessive raw schema descriptions introduces
significant noise, leading to hallucinations when critical information is buried under voluminous metadata.
These methods lack the precision to distill documentation into the actionable, concise logic required for
complex reasoning.
In this paper, we propose Tahoe, a system that addresses these challenges by transforming prompt optimization
from a transient computational process into a persistent data management problem. Our core insight is that
neither raw documentation retrieval (too noisy) nor iterative agentic reasoning (too slow and repetitive) is the
right trade-off for production. Instead, we identify that retrieving concise, error-driven hints—summarized by
LLM agents from past successful debugging—offers a balance of precision and efficiency. Unlike raw RAG
that floods the context, Tahoe retrieves only the distilled logic needed to solve the current problem. For
instance, rather than retrieving pages of SQL dialect docs, the system might provide a specific syntax hint:
Quote every database, schema, table, column, CTE, and alias exactly as it is stored; quote each element of a
fully-qualified path separately. Similarly, for ambiguous business logic, it retrieves precise semantic guidance:
in a Google Analytics 4 (GA4) e-commerce schema, use user_pseudo_id instead of user_id to uniquely
identify customers (see Section 5.6 for a concrete walkthrough).
Crucially, Tahoe addresses a major limitation of existing RAG and memory systems: the inability to handle
dynamic and conflicting interpretations. Real-world queries often contain ambiguities where different users or
contexts demand different valid solutions. Standard RAG treats these variations as noise or retrieves them
randomly (the “static retrieval” problem). In contrast, we design a structured Semantic Hint model that maps
a single NL Trigger to multiple competing Strategies. Each strategy explicitly encapsulates a distinct solution


                                                        2
                      Table 1 Comparison of Tahoe with existing Text-to-SQL adaptation paradigms.

 Paradigm                       Representative Works      Latency       Continuous Evolution    Model Agnosticism      Generalizability        Accuracy
                                                         (Efficiency)   (Learns from Errors?)   (Switchable Base?)   (Avoids Overfitting?)   (Performance)
 Vanilla LLMs                      Qwen-Coder [18]          Low                  Low                  N/A                    High                Low
 Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT)       PICARD [14]             Low                  Low                   Low                   Low                 High
 Test-Time Scaling (Agents)     Agentar-Scale-SQL [17]      High                 Low                  High                   High                High
 Retrieval-Augmented (RAG)          SQLGenie [5]            Low               Medium                  High                 Medium              Medium
 Tahoe (Ours)                             –                 Low                  High                 High                   High                High




path with a rationale and contrastive examples. This allows Tahoe to store conflicts explicitly and resolve
them at runtime by ranking strategies based on flexible metrics, including a learning-time recency signal and
post-learning attribution statistics that summarize each strategy’s empirical success, harm, inertness, and
support, ultimately offering the model a more reliable or user-preferred solution.
Beyond resolving ambiguity, constructing this structured Hint Bank gives Tahoe three advantages that are
especially valuable for enterprise deployment: Continuous Evolution, Model Agnosticism, and Generalizability.
First, because hints are external and human-readable, users can audit, revise, and extend them directly,
allowing the system to continuously evolve as new errors, schemas, and user preferences emerge. Second,
the Hint Bank is model-agnostic: unlike black-box SFT weights, it remains reusable even when the base
LLM changes. Third, Tahoe improves generalizability by decoupling Syntax Hints from Semantic Hints
and organizing semantic logic by scope (General, Database-specific, and User-specific), preventing localized
conventions from contaminating unrelated settings. As a result, the system can adapt by updating or
re-configuring the relevant hint subset rather than retraining model parameters.
To operationalize this idea, Tahoe uses an error-driven hint learning pipeline to extract reusable syntax and
semantic hints from failures and consolidate them into the Hint Bank. Hint learning is performed outside the
critical inference path: the Hint Bank is initialized before deployment (i.e., development phase) and further
refreshed during deployment through periodic batch updates over accumulated user feedback. This design
separates background hint construction and maintenance from online query serving. At query time, Tahoe
combines lightweight hint retrieval with two-stage hint-guided generation, reducing latency and monetary
cost while mitigating repeated user-facing failures. Tahoe is orthogonal to schema linking and can be
seamlessly integrated with existing schema pruning techniques to support large databases. This paper focuses
on validating the development-phase hint learning and reuse pipeline; deployment-time human-feedback
refresh is part of the architecture but is not empirically evaluated in this benchmark setting.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
    • Hint-Based Long-Term Memory Paradigm: We introduce a hint-based long-term memory paradigm for
      Text-to-SQL that reframes prompt optimization as managing a persistent Hint Bank. Tahoe employs
      an error-driven hint learning pipeline that consolidates debugging traces and accumulated feedback into
      reusable Syntax and Semantic Hints, while keeping hint learning and maintenance outside the critical
      inference path. This design shifts most reasoning and correction overhead to background construction
      and periodic batch refresh, thereby mitigating context noise and alleviating the latency bottlenecks of
      agentic workflows while preserving compatibility with different base LLMs.
    • Structured and Transferable Hint Architecture: We design a modular Hint Bank that decouples syntax
      from semantics and organizes semantic logic into hierarchical scopes (General, Database-specific, User-
      specific). A trigger–strategy abstraction captures multiple competing solution paths under the same
      natural-language trigger and ranks them using flexible signals (e.g., recency and success rate). This
      structure makes the Hint Bank both interpretable and model-agnostic, and adaptable to diverse industry
      contexts without expensive retraining.
    • Empirical Effectiveness: On the 113 supervised development examples of Spider 2.0–Snow-0212, Tahoe
      substantially outperforms strong vanilla baselines for our primary backbone GPT-5.5 (pass rate 61.95% →
      79.42%, pass@4 72.57% → 87.61%, syntax pass rate 96.24% → 100%, avg. critic rounds 2.79 → 0.12 per



                                                                             3
                                             NL Question: ‘‘Show me
                                            the top-selling product.’’
                                        (Context: Snowflake SQL Dialect)


                               Case A: Syntax Error

                                WITH top_product AS (
                                  SELECT name, "sales" FROM "PRODUCTS" ... – Unquoted
                                ’name’ vs quoted "name"
                                ) SELECT name, sales FROM top_product;


                                 × Compiler Error: Invalid identifier ’NAME’.
                                 Reason: Unquoted identifiers are upcased in Snowflake.




                               Case B: Semantic Error
                                SELECT "name", "sales" FROM "PRODUCTS"
                                ORDER BY "sales" DESC LIMIT 1;
                                – Returns only one row, ignoring ties

                                 × User Feedback: ‘‘Incomplete result.’’
                                 Intent: I want all products with the top value (ties in-
                                 cluded).



Figure 1 Motivating Example. Case A: A syntax error where the model fails Snowflake’s case-sensitivity rules. Case
B: A semantic error where the model uses LIMIT 1 instead of handling ties, mismatching user intent.


      sampled candidate), and the same Hint Bank also lifts weaker backbones (Doubao-2.0-lite, GPT-5) by
      double-digit pp without any model-specific adaptation, evidencing cross-model transferability.

2     Related Work
2.1   Automatic Prompt Optimization
Recent work in automatic prompt optimization aims to reduce the reliance on manual prompt design by
using automated search or reflective mechanisms. AutoHint [15] automatically generates and refines textual
“hints” for a target task by prompting an LLM to propose, evaluate, and update task-specific guidance. Other
methods optimize prompts via gradient-inspired updates and search over discrete prompt candidates, such as
the “Automatic Prompt Optimization with Gradient Descent and Beam Search” framework [12]. More recently,
reflective prompt evolution approaches such as GEPA [2] use natural-language reflection over rollouts and
genetic-style mutation of prompts, and show that prompt-space optimization can outperform reinforcement
learning in weight space on several benchmarks.
These methods demonstrate the promise of automated prompt design, but typically operate at the level
of a single (or small set of) global prompts tuned for a fixed task. They inherently struggle with the
context-dependent conflicts common in enterprise data (e.g., different users needing different logic for the same
query). In contrast, Tahoe reframes prompt optimization from a transient search process into a persistent
data management problem. Rather than converging to one “golden prompt,” Tahoe manages a structured
Hint Bank. By keying hints by triggers, scopes, and strategies, Tahoe enables query-specific retrieval and
explicit conflict management, allowing the system to adapt dynamically to distinct user needs.

2.2    Prompting and Retrieval for Text-to-SQL
Prompt-based improvements for Text-to-SQL have been explored in both research and practical systems.
DIN-SQL [10] decomposes Text-to-SQL into modular sub-tasks (e.g., schema linking, SQL sketching, self-
correction) and uses in-context prompting of LLMs for each step. DAIL-SQL [4] systematically evaluates
prompt design and proposes an integrated strategy with an emphasis on token efficiency.


                                                             4
A parallel line of work augments prompting with retrieval. ReFSQL [20] introduces a structure-enhanced
retrieval framework that retrieves samples with comparable specific knowledge to aid generation. Beyond
research prototypes, industrial systems such as SQLGenie [5] adopt an example-based RAG design, retrieving
verified query–SQL pairs from an Example Bank.
These retrieval-augmented approaches primarily provide implicit guidance through raw examples. This design
faces the “Context Noise” challenge: retrieving large or weakly matched examples can introduce irrelevant
tokens, ambiguous patterns, and conflicting logic [6]. Tahoe takes an orthogonal approach by retrieving
explicit, abstracted hints derived from error analysis rather than raw (question, SQL) pairs. First, instead of
implicitly encoding dialect quirks through examples, Tahoe factors dialect-specific syntax knowledge into
minimal reusable rules (Syntax Hints). Second, rather than collapsing all behaviors into a flat retrieval space,
Tahoe organizes semantic hints by explicit Scope (General, Database-specific, and User-specific). Third, when
multiple valid behaviors exist, Tahoe uses a Strategy Layer to model mutually exclusive alternatives and
rank them using explicit signals—namely a learning-time recency timestamp augmented by post-learning
attribution statistics (success/harm/inert/support summaries that capture empirical evidence of when a
strategy helped, hurt, or was merely retrieved)—instead of relying solely on similarity scores.

2.3   Test-Time Scaling and Agentic Workflows
A growing trend in Text-to-SQL focuses on Test-Time Scaling, which enhances performance by increasing
computational spend during inference. Agentar-Scale-SQL [17] represents the state-of-the-art, proposing an
orchestrated framework that combines RL-enhanced reasoning, iterative refinement, and parallel tournament
selection. While achieving high accuracy on benchmarks like BIRD, these methods fundamentally trade
latency for performance. As noted by the authors of Agentar-Scale-SQL, the reliance on multiple LLM calls
results in “substantial computational overhead,” making them “less suitable for real-time applications”. In
typical benchmark-oriented test-time scaling workflows, corrections are not persisted across sessions, so the
system may repeat similar errors on new queries, learning little from previous failures.
Tahoe addresses this by “shifting left” the computational burden. Instead of relying on heavy online
computation to correct errors at runtime, we perform reasoning during the Development Phase or batch
updates. By consolidating error corrections into a persistent Hint Bank, Tahoe substitutes expensive iterative
re-reasoning with efficient memory retrieval. This enables the system to avoid recurring errors without the
latency penalties of agentic loops.

2.4   LLM Memory and Knowledge Management
There is a growing body of work on equipping LLM-based systems with explicit long-term or external memory.
The Generative Agents architecture [9] extends an LLM with a memory stream that stores natural-language
records of an agent’s experiences. MemGPT [8] introduces an OS-inspired hierarchical memory system to
support long-running conversations. ChatDB [7] augments LLMs with databases as symbolic memory for
complex multi-hop reasoning. More recently, Mem0 [3] proposes a scalable memory layer that dynamically
extracts and consolidates user preferences into a structured store, explicitly addressing the “reset problem” by
detecting and resolving conflicts in long-term interactions.
These works share the goal of separating parametric knowledge from an explicit, inspectable memory store.
Tahoe applies a similar philosophy to Text-to-SQL but introduces a specialized structure tailored for
ambiguity management: the Strategy Layer. Many generic memory systems are optimized toward maintaining
a single consistent user profile, whereas Tahoe organizes hints hierarchically to explicitly preserve competing
interpretations. This structure allows the system to manage the lifecycle of knowledge effectively—preserving
mutually exclusive behaviors (e.g., varying metric definitions) as parallel strategies rather than treating them
as noise. By tracking lightweight per-strategy signals—a learning-time recency timestamp and post-learning
attribution statistics (success/harm/inert/support summaries that capture empirical evidence of when a
strategy helped, hurt, or was merely retrieved)—Tahoe dynamically resolves these semantic conflicts at
inference time based on the specific user context.




                                                       5
2.5     Other Approaches to Robust Text-to-SQL
A large body of work tackles Text-to-SQL via supervised learning (SFT). Classical parsers like SyntaxSQL-
Net [19] and RAT-SQL [16] train on labeled pairs to achieve strong performance. Recent approaches like
PICARD [14] fine-tune models with constrained decoding. While effective for static tasks, SFT presents the
“Rigidity Trap”: adapting to a schema change or new dialect necessitates expensive retraining. Furthermore,
the learned weights are opaque and non-transferable.
By contrast, Tahoe keeps the underlying LLM fixed and updates only the external Hint Bank. This yields a
lightweight adaptation strategy that is inherently model-agnostic. Unlike SFT parameters, which are discarded
when upgrading the base LLM, our Hint Bank persists as a reusable, transferable asset. By decoupling syntax
from semantics, Tahoe ensures that semantic hints remain valid even if the SQL dialect changes, providing a
level of modularity that parameter-based methods cannot match.

3     Background and Problem Formulation
3.1     Text-to-SQL and Real-World Challenges
The Text-to-SQL task aims to translate a natural language (NL) question q and a database schema S into an
executable SQL query y. While vanilla LLMs perform well on academic benchmarks with standard SQL dialects
and simplified schemas, their effectiveness degrades significantly in real-world deployments. As captured
by the recent Spider 2.0–Snow benchmark [1], realistic scenarios expose the intrinsic limitations of generic
models—specifically their lack of domain-specific parametric knowledge and tendency to hallucinate—through
three distinct challenges:
      • Strict Dialect Adherence: Industrial environments strictly enforce dialect rules that diverge from standard
        SQL. For instance, in Snowflake SQL, unquoted identifiers are automatically uppercased. A generic LLM,
        biased by its pre-training on standard SQL, lacks this specific dialect knowledge and often hallucinates
        valid ANSI-SQL syntax (e.g., unquoted names) that triggers immediate compilation errors in strict
        environments.
      • Massive Schema Reasoning: Real-world databases contain hundreds of inter-related tables with obscure
        column names. The massive context required to describe such schemas often exceeds the model’s effective
        attention span, leading to schema hallucinations where the model invents non-existent join paths or
        misinterprets column definitions.
      • Ambiguous and Evolving User Intent: Unlike academic datasets where questions are precise, real users
        often use domain jargon or imply constraints (e.g., “top products” might imply distinct counting).
        Furthermore, these preferences are dynamic—definitions of metrics often evolve over time, creating a
        “moving target” that static model weights struggle to track without expensive retraining.

3.2     Error Taxonomy
To address these challenges systematically, we categorize Text-to-SQL failures into two orthogonal types
based on their feedback source. This taxonomy underpins the error-driven hint learning pipeline developed in
Section 5.2.
      • Syntax Errors (Compiler-Level): The generated SQL is invalid and rejected by the database engine.
        These errors stem from dialect mismatches (e.g., keywords, quoting, function names) rather than logic.
        They are objectively verifiable via compiler feedback.
      • Semantic Errors (Execution-Level): The SQL executes successfully but yields incorrect data. These
        errors arise from misaligned business logic or user intent (e.g., incorrect filters, wrong aggregation scope).
        Detecting them requires execution feedback against ground truth or human verification.
Figure 1 grounds this taxonomy: the top panel is a syntax error (an unquoted Snowflake identifier rejected by
the compiler), and the bottom panel is a semantic error (the SQL compiles but uses LIMIT 1, mismatching
the user’s intent to include ties).


                                                           6
3.3     Problem Formulation
Traditional approaches treat Text-to-SQL as learning a direct mapping fθ (q, S) → y, where θ represents the
model parameters. In Tahoe, we freeze the LLM parameters θ and instead optimize an external knowledge
structure: the Hint Bank H.
We formally define the inference process and the optimization objective as follows:
Execution Equivalence (Exec): Let Exec(y, D) denote the result set obtained by executing SQL query y on a
database instance D conforming to schema S. A generated query ŷ is semantically correct with respect to the
ground truth y ∗ if and only if Exec(ŷ, D) = Exec(y ∗ , D).
Interaction Cost (C ): We define the interaction cost C(ŷ, y ∗ ) as the number of feedback rounds required to
transform an initial prediction ŷ into a correct query. In a vanilla setting, if ŷ fails compilation, C ≥ 1 (syntax
correction rounds). If ŷ executes but returns incorrect results, C ≥ 1 (user feedback rounds). The ideal case
is C = 0 (correct on the first attempt).
Optimization Objective: The Hint Bank decomposes into two disjoint registries, H = Hsyn ∪ Hsem , that are
accessed by different mechanisms at inference time. We therefore decompose the retrieval function as
                                                  (dialect)
                                    h(q, S, H) = Hsyn       ∪ Rsem (q, S, Hsem ),

           (dialect)
where Hsyn       is the complete syntax-hint registry for the target dialect (always injected, not retrieved), and
Rsem performs scope filtering followed by trigger-based semantic retrieval over Hsem . Rsem implies a conflict
resolution mechanism: it does not merely fetch similar examples but ranks competing strategies based on
flexible signals—a learning-time recency timestamp and post-learning attribution summaries (success/har-
m/inert/support produced by a post-learning attribution pass)—to maximize alignment with current user
needs (as detailed in Sections 5.3 and 5.4). The LLM generation is modeled as a conditional probability
distribution Pθ (y | q, S, h).
Our ultimate goal is to minimize the expected interaction cost E[C] during deployment. Since the interaction
cost is minimized (i.e., C = 0) if and only if the initial generation is correct, minimizing the expected cost is
equivalent to maximizing the expected accuracy of the hint-guided inference. Therefore, we aim to maintain a
Hint Bank H∗ that maximizes:


                           H∗ = arg max E(q,S,D,y∗ )∼P [I [Exec(ŷ0 , D) = Exec(y ∗ , D)]]                        (1)
                                      H

where ŷ0 ∼ Pθ (· | q, S, h(q, S, H)) denotes a single sampled generation conditioned on the retrieved hints (before
any compiler-feedback or execution-feedback loop). At evaluation time we separately report the candidate-level
pass rate (averaged over multiple sampled ŷ0 ) and the example-level pass@4 (any-of-k correctness over k = 4
samples). By maximizing the probability that ŷ0 is correct, we effectively obviate the need for expensive
feedback loops (minimizing E[C] towards 0).
Crucially, the cost of optimizing H (e.g., error analysis, strategy merging) is incurred asynchronously—during
the Development Phase or via batch updates in deployment—so that it is decoupled from the synchronous
user interaction.

4     System Architecture
Figure 2 illustrates the high-level architecture of Tahoe. Unlike traditional pipelines that treat prompts
as transient strings, Tahoe centers around a persistent, evolving knowledge base: the Hint Bank (H). This
centralized asset stores all learned Syntax Hints (Hsyn ) and Semantic Hints (Hsem ).
The system operates in two distinct phases, designed to “shift left” the computational burden of error correction.
The key distinction lies in the availability of ground truth:
      • Phase I: Development Phase. The system bootstraps an initial H using a small offline dataset where
        explicit Ground Truth SQL (y ∗ ) and verified execution results are available. By iteratively exposing the


                                                         7
                                                                                                                    Deployment Phase
 Development Phase

                                                                                                 Online
       Offline                                                                               Unlabeled Data
    Labeled Data                                                                                 (q, S)
      (q, S, y ∗ )

                                                      Hint Bank (H)
                                                 1. Syntax Hints (Hsyn )                    Hint-Guided
   Hint Learning      Hint Management             (Dialect-specific)         Retrieval                                  Output
                                                 2. Semantic Hints (Hsem )               Inference Module
      Module               Module                                                                                        SQL
                                                  - General / DB / User                  (Logic Plan + Synthesis)
                                                  - Strategy Layer
                                                    (Conflict Resolution)
      Compiler
                                                                                                Compiler

                                                  Hint Learning Module
                                                                                                                    User Feedback
                                                   (Asynchronous Update)




Figure 2 The Tahoe system architecture. The Hint Bank (H) centrally manages both dialect-specific syntax hints
and strategy-aware semantic hints across the Development and Deployment phases. Note: This figure depicts the
high-level data lifecycle (how hints are generated, curated, and consumed); the detailed hint learning execution flow for
a single example—including multi-sampling, sequential syntax/semantic feedback, and multi-iteration refinement—is
presented in Figure 3.


      LLM to failures against y ∗ , the system extracts generalized Hsyn and Hsem to populate the Hint Bank.
      This phase incurs high computational cost upfront to ensure efficiency later, and corresponds to the
      fully supervised learning regime detailed in Section 5.2.
    • Phase II: Deployment Phase. Deployed in production, the system serves unseen queries and adapts via
      asynchronous updates. Syntax updates are automated via compiler feedback: failed online queries
      are batch-processed by the Syntax Learning Agent without blocking users. For semantic adaptation,
      the system relies on Human-in-the-Loop interaction: each user-accepted SQL candidate is treated as
      a pseudo-ground-truth (ỹ ∗ ), while a rejected candidate becomes a semantic error trace only when its
      execution result differs from that of an accepted candidate; if all candidates are rejected, the query is
      logged for manual review rather than learned from. This two-stream update process ensures robustness
      to both dialect updates and shifting user intents. We detail this deployment lifecycle in Section 5.5.
Tahoe comprises three core modules that manage the lifecycle of hints:
1. Hint Learning Module (Section 5.2). The “Writer.”
Input: A query context (q, S), the frozen global Hint Bank H(t) for the current batch, and available feedback
sources (the compiler, execution against y ∗ , or user feedback).
Output: Temporary-bank deltas (atomic diffs clustered into suggestions and applied to a per-example H̃),
and, when the stop criteria retain them, the eligible temporary-bank deltas to be later consolidated by the
Hint Management Module.
Given this input, the module invokes hint-guided inference to sample candidates and then converts observed
failures into temporary-bank deltas. As detailed in Figure 3 and Section 5.2, it implements a three-stage
learning pipeline: (1) diversity via multi-sampling, (2) sequential syntax–then–semantic feedback with error
clustering and reflection, and (3) multi-iteration hint refinement that re-injects updated hints to verify their
effectiveness. Concretely, it first interacts with a compiler to fix dialect-specific syntax errors (generating
Hsyn ), and subsequently compares execution results against the ground truth or user feedback to identify
semantic mismatches (generating Hsem ).
2. Hint Bank Management Module (Section 5.3). The “Curator.”
Input: The eligible per-example temporary-bank deltas (from each H̃) accumulated over a batch, together
with the frozen global Hint Bank H(t) .
Output: The merged next-version global Hint Bank H(t+1) (structured, deduplicated, and conflict-resolved).
After all examples in a batch finish, it consolidates their eligible deltas into H(t) by merging newly learned hints
with existing ones, deduplicating redundant triggers, and resolving conflicts. A key innovation is the Strategy


                                                               8
                                                      Input: (q, S, y ∗ )


                              H(t)        Step 1: Multi-Sampling Inference
                           Hint Bank                  (using H̃)
                       Initialize

                        Temp. Bank H̃            Pred SQLs: ŷ1 , ŷ2 , . . . , ŷN



                                                   Pass                     No             Critic Agent
                                                 Compiler?              Ksyn traces       (Runtime Fix)


                                                                                           Syntax diffs
                                          Yes (Svalid )                                    (Multi-step)
                                                          Step 2A: Syntax Feedback



                                                 Execution                   No            Semantic diffs
                                                Match (y ∗ )?            Ksem traces         (One-step)

                                                          Step 2B: Semantic Debugging
                                                   Yes


                                                                                       Step 3: Sugges-
                                     No          Success or                           tion & Clustering
                                Update & Loop    Max Retry?                   (M diffs → M suggestions
                                                                                    → C changes)

                                                   Yes

                                             Hint Management Module
                                    (Batch merge eligible deltas into H(t) → H(t+1) )


                                                              Stop

Figure 3 The per-example hint learning loop. A temporary bank H̃ is initialized from the frozen global bank H(t) ;
multi-sampled candidates undergo sequential Syntax and Semantic filtering, and the resulting atomic diffs drive
multi-iteration refinement of H̃ until success or max retry. After all examples in the batch finish, the Hint Management
Module consolidates the eligible temporary-bank deltas into H(t) to produce H(t+1) .


Layer, which models mutually exclusive behaviors (e.g., conflicting rounding conventions) as competing
strategies under a single trigger. For each strategy, the module maintains lightweight signals—a learning-time
recency signal and post-learning attribution statistics—that the retrieval and planning stages later use to
rank strategies during inference and to balance “correction” behaviors against common “vanilla” behaviors
learned from success cases. We defer the precise definition of these signals and the attribution procedure to
Section 5.3.
3. Hint-Guided Inference Module (Section 5.4). The “Reader.”
Input: A new user question q, schema S, and the Hint Bank H.
Output: A ranked list of executable SQL candidates.
At inference time, it retrieves relevant Hsem via trigger matching and combines them with the complete
                        (dialect)
syntax-hint registry Hsyn         for the target dialect. It then guides the base LLM through a two-stage
generation process that mirrors Section 5.4: Logic Planning followed by SQL Synthesis. Crucially, the Logic
Planning stage is designed to determine the optimal combination of strategies (especially when multiple
retrieved hints offer competing paths) and to resolve conflicts using the statistics maintained by the Hint


                                                                  9
Bank Management Module, forming a coherent solution plan before the final SQL is synthesized.

5     Methodology
5.1     Data Model: Structure of Hints
To effectively serve as the system’s long-term memory, the Hint Bank H employs an asymmetric design
tailored to the distinct nature of the errors identified in Section 3.2. We observe that syntax constraints are
objectively verifiable and static (determined by the compiler), whereas semantic logic is often ambiguous
and context-dependent (determined by users). Consequently, we use a lightweight, rule-based structure for
syntax hints, while employing a structured, conflict-aware schema for semantic hints to manage competing
interpretations (see Section 5.6 for concrete structured hints paired with each walkthrough example).

Syntax Hints (Hsyn ). These hints address dialect-specific compilation errors. Since syntax rules within a
target dialect are deterministic and conflict-free (e.g., a keyword is either reserved or it is not), we do not
require complex scoping or strategy selection. We structure each syntax hint simply as a tuple (R, E):
      • Rule (R): A concise natural language description of the constraint (e.g., “Quote every database element
        exactly as stored”).
      • Example (E ): A few-shot demonstration that grounds the rule, consisting of a specific schema context
        and the corresponding correct SQL snippet.

Semantic Hints (Hsem ). These capture logic adjustments required by specific schemas or user preferences.
Unlike syntax, semantic intents often carry ambiguity—for instance, a “log transformation” might imply
different mathematical handling of zeros depending on the context. To ensure precise retrieval and explicit
conflict resolution, we structure each semantic hint as a tuple (T, S, Σ):
      • Trigger (T ): A concise natural language pattern (e.g., “log10 transformation”) used as the index key for
        retrieval. This decouples the hint from exact lexical matching, allowing the system to activate logic
        based on semantic similarity.
      • Scope (S ): A classification tag indicating applicability: General, Database-specific, or User-specific.
        This design promotes knowledge transferability: general logic can be reused across projects, while
        database-specific conventions and user-specific preferences (e.g., tie-handling rules) remain isolated to
        their respective environments. We emphasize that General here is purely a context label: it states
        only that the hint is not tied to a specific database id or user id, in contrast to Database-specific and
        User-specific hints. It does not claim that the hint is universally frequent, highly reliable, or broadly
        useful across all workloads. Reliability and usefulness are tracked separately, after learning, by the
        Strategy Attribution pass through σ.eval_stats (Section 5.3); two General hints with very different
        empirical support can therefore coexist and be ranked accordingly at inference time.
      • Strategies (Σ): A set of competing strategies {σ1 , . . . , σk } associated with the trigger. This layer is
        critical for handling conflicts. For example, the trigger “log10 transformation” may map to two valid
        but mutually exclusive strategies: Strategy A (add 1 to avoid infinity) and Strategy B (nullify zeros).
        Crucially, each strategy σi contains: (1) a rationale, (2) a pair of contrastive few-shot examples (Positive
        vs. Negative) to distinguish the logic, and (3) two pieces of statistical metadata: the learning-time field
        recency, written by the Hint Learning Module to record when the strategy was last distilled, and the
        evaluation-time field eval_stats, written exclusively by the post-learning Strategy Attribution pass
        (Section 5.3) and used to quantify the strategy’s empirical effect on actual generations. The two fields
        are updated by disjoint mechanisms and never overwrite each other.

5.2     Hint Learning Module
Instead of treating prompt optimization as a one-off search, Tahoe adopts an iterative, debugging-based
approach. The core philosophy follows a standard engineering cycle: Execution → Feedback → Reflection
→ Re-evaluation. For each example, Tahoe does not directly modify the global Hint Bank. Instead, it


                                                         10
initializes a temporary Hint Bank H̃ as a working copy of the current frozen global bank H(t) , and all
multi-iteration revisions are applied exclusively to H̃. This design keeps the global bank stable during iterative
refinement. Importantly, the per-example output is not a new global bank: each example produces only a
set of temporary-bank deltas—the additions, revisions, and suspensions recorded in its own H̃ relative to
H(t) . After all examples in the current batch finish their per-example loops, the Hint Management Module
(Section 5.3) merges the eligible temporary-bank deltas into the frozen H(t) to produce the next version
H(t+1) , following the batch-sequential protocol detailed in Section 5.5.
The remainder of this subsection zooms in on the per-example learning loop: the three integrated stages
below all operate on a single example and its temporary Hint Bank H̃, and they repeat until a stop criterion
is met.

5.2.1   Step 1: Multi-Sampling Inference with the Temporary Hint Bank

Single-pass generation is inherently noisy due to LLM stochasticity. To ensure that revisions to H̃ cover the
full spectrum of potential errors and do not introduce regressions, we employ Multi-Sampling at the start of
each iteration. For a given input (q, S), we perform N inference runs via the Hint-Guided Inference Module
(Section 5.4), each conditioned on the temporary Hint Bank H̃ (initialized from H(t) , with H(0) = ∅ for the
first batch). The temporary-bank deltas accumulated in H̃ are not committed to the global bank one example
at a time; they are pooled across the current batch and consolidated into H(t+1) collectively (see §5.5).

5.2.2   Step 2: Sequential Feedback & Atomic diff Generation
We process the N generated candidates (i.e., samples) through a two-stage sequential filter, using the ground-
truth execution result as the reference. In the first stage, candidates that fail to compile form the set of syntax
error traces, denoted by Ksyn . We then apply runtime syntax fixes (Phase A) to obtain syntactically valid
SQL queries, including both originally valid and repaired candidates. All syntactically valid candidates are
subsequently executed, and those whose execution results still fail to match the ground truth form the set of
semantic error traces, denoted by Ksem .

Phase A: Syntax Correction & diff Generation (Compiler Feedback). The first barrier is the SQL compiler.
For each candidate in Ksyn , we enter a rapid Critic Loop that asks an agent to repair syntax without altering
semantics. Because this loop involves iterative interaction with compiler feedback, syntax correction is
inherently a multi-step process. From the resulting sequence of compiler errors and repairs, we extract atomic
syntax diffs that capture specific violations and their corresponding fixes. We extract atomic syntax diffs
only from candidates whose Critic Loop ultimately produces a syntactically valid query: a successful repair
trace gives an unambiguous (error → fix) pair from which a hint can be distilled. Candidates that exhaust
the Critic Loop’s iteration budget without compiling are discarded for the purpose of syntax hint learning,
since their final state offers no verified fix to generalize from.

Phase B: Semantic Debugging & diff Generation (Execution Feedback). Semantic debugging proceeds in
two steps. First, the execution-result mismatch (against the ground-truth result) identifies which candidates
are semantically wrong, yielding Ksem . Then, since offline learning has access to the ground-truth SQL y ∗ , a
semantic diff agent performs a one-step comparison between the logical steps of y ∗ and the predicted SQL
(optionally aided by their result summaries) to localize the specific logic gaps responsible for the mismatch
(e.g., an incorrect join condition or aggregation scope).
To make the feedback produced by these two phases comparable and reusable, Tahoe represents both syntax
and semantic deviations as atomic diffs. An atomic diff isolates a single, specific deviation between the
preferred solution and an error trace, avoiding the complexity of comparing full SQL queries or verbose
execution logs directly. The unified schema for atomic diffs is detailed in Appendix A.




                                                        11
5.2.3   Step 3: Hint Suggestion & Clustering (Updating the Temporary Hint Bank)
After processing the Ksyn syntax error traces and Ksem semantic error traces, we obtain a set of M atomic
diffs (from both compiler and execution feedback). We then prompt another LLM to produce a hint
suggestion for each diff. Specifically, the agent must decide to: (1) Add a new hint, if no hint in the current
H̃ would have prevented the error described by the diff; or (2) Revise an existing hint, if a hint already
in H̃ should have prevented the error but failed (e.g., due to ambiguity), and thus needs refinement; or (3)
Suspend a previously proposed change, i.e., roll back an addition or revision introduced earlier in the current
temporary-bank refinement loop if the latest diff indicates that the change is now misleading or no longer
applies—this lets the loop undo its own recent updates rather than only growing H̃ monotonically.
This yields M hint suggestions. Because different traces may trigger overlapping or duplicate suggestions,
we prompt an LLM to cluster these M suggestions into C final changes. These C changes are then applied
to update H̃. Each suggested semantic hint is also assigned a scope tag S at generation time based on the
current example’s DB/User context, following the scope rules in Section 5.1. The loop then restarts at Step 1,
leveraging the refined H̃. The core intuition is that complex traces are difficult to analyze holistically; the
pipeline of atomic diffs → suggestions → clustering distills actionable, empirically effective hints.

Stop Criteria and Conditional Merge.     The hint refinement loop terminates under one of two conditions, each
triggering a different merge policy:
   1. All samples correct (Success). All N candidates generated with the current H̃ pass both the compiler
      and execution checks against y ∗ . This confirms that the refined hints are strictly beneficial, so the
      temporary-bank deltas are unconditionally marked eligible for batch merge by the Hint Management
      Module (Section 5.3).
   2. Maximum iterations reached. The loop exhausts its revision budget Tmax without achieving full
      correctness. To guard against regressions introduced by over-revision, we apply a conservative merge
      policy: the temporary-bank deltas are retained for batch merge only if the number of correct samples
      produced under H̃ strictly exceeds that of the original frozen bank, i.e., |correct(H̃)| > |correct(H(t) )|.
      Both counts are measured under the same sampling budget (N samples) and decoding setting, so the
      comparison reflects the effect of the revised hints rather than sampling noise. If not, the deltas are
      discarded and do not enter the batch-level merge, preventing the global Hint Bank from being polluted
      by ineffective revisions.

5.3     Hint Management Module
A key challenge in automated hint learning is handling conflicts and maintaining distribution balance. If
the system learns solely from errors, the Hint Bank risks becoming a collection of edge cases, losing track of
general correct behaviors. We propose a management pipeline to ensure both consistency and coverage:
   1. LLM-Augmented Merging & Deduplication (Scope-Aware): After all examples in a batch finish, the
      Hint Management Module consolidates their eligible temporary-bank deltas into the global Hint Bank
      H. For each new or revised hint, we first determine its scope tag S (Section 5.1) and only compare
      it against existing global hints with the same scope. Within that scope, we check whether a similar
      Trigger already exists using a Hint-Merge Agent. If the temporary hint matches an existing strategy,
      we merge them (e.g., consolidating examples and updating statistics). If it proposes conflicting logic
      (e.g., Round-Up vs. Round-Down), the agent appends it as a new, mutually exclusive Strategy under
      the same trigger, enabling the system to model localized variations without polluting other scopes.
   2. Coverage Assurance (Preventing Error-Bias): To prevent the Hint Bank from biasing towards failures
      (“overfitting to mistakes”), we additionally process examples that are solved on the first iteration—i.e.,
      where all N candidates produced from the very first Multi-Sampling pass already pass both compiler
      and execution checks, so no error trace is generated. For such examples we still inspect the retrieved
      hints used during that first pass: an LLM judge compares the successful predicted SQL against the
      retrieved hints (via the same logical-diff analysis used for semantic debugging) to infer the strategy
      actually used. If the model succeeded via parametric knowledge but the retrieved hints did not explicitly


                                                       12
      cover that strategy, we distill this Vanilla Strategy and add it to the Hint Bank. This ensures that
      “normal” or “correct” behaviors are competing fairly with “correction” strategies during ranking, instead
      of being silently absent from the bank simply because they never produced an error.
  3. Strategy Attribution and Statistic Tracking: Each strategy σ carries two complementary signals. The
     first is a learning-time signal, recency: the timestamp of the most recent successful application during
     learning, used by the retriever to prioritize evolving user preferences. We deliberately do not rely on
     raw learning-time success counts, because they conflate “how often a strategy was learned ” with “how
     often it was useful ”, which inflates recall but hurts retrieval precision once the bank grows.
      The second signal is an evaluation-time attribution measured on a frozen Hint Bank. Periodically—e.g.,
      after every K learned examples or at the end of a learning round—we pause learning, freeze the current
      global Hint Bank H, and run a dedicated multi-sample evaluation pass on previously processed examples
      using H as the only knowledge source. This evaluation produces, for each example, the predicted SQL,
      the ground-truth SQL, the execution score, and the set of retrieved hint IDs; the resulting artifacts
      are then consumed by the Strategy Attribution step, which writes its results into a dedicated field
      σ.eval_stats that is never modified by the learning loop. Because retrieval is recorded at the hint level
      but a retrieved hint exposes all of its strategies, the exposed strategy set for a sample is the union of
      strategies under its retrieved hints. For every (example, exposed strategy) pair, an LLM judge inspects
      the predicted SQL against the ground-truth SQL and assigns one of three SQL-evidence-driven verdicts:
         • positive: the predicted SQL visibly applied σ’s preferred action and that choice was relevant to a
           correct execution result;
         • negative: the predicted SQL followed σ’s preferred action and that exact choice is where it diverged
           from the ground-truth SQL;
         • inert: σ was retrieved but not reflected in the SQL, or its application was irrelevant to correctness.
      Verdicts are aggregated to the example level across the N samples: an example is added to a strategy’s
      positive list if any correct sample applied σ, and to its negative list if any incorrect sample was misled by
      σ; inert exposures in incorrect samples are not counted as negative. Because attribution is aggregated
      across multiple samples, the positive and negative lists are not necessarily mutually exclusive: the same
      example may show that a strategy can help one sample while misleading another. We therefore do
      not force a single label per (example, strategy) pair; instead, the inference-time formatter (Section 5.4)
      reports success rate and harm rate as separate quantities over the retrieved support, so the planner
      can see partial-help cases for what they are. Concretely, eval_stats keeps three deduplicated lists per
      strategy—the examples on which it was retrieved, those it helped, and those it hurt—over the previously
      evaluated examples; storing the actual example references (rather than only counts) keeps the data
      deduplicated, auditable, and recomputable across attribution runs.

5.4   Hint-Guided Inference Module
During inference, Tahoe utilizes the Hint Bank to guide the LLM. The process proceeds in two sequential
stages:
  1. Step 1: Hint Retrieval and Logic Planning. Before generating the SQL query, we retrieve relevant semantic
     hints from the Hint Bank in two stages. We first apply a scope-aware filter (Section 5.1) over the
     global bank: General hints are always kept, while Database-specific and User-specific hints are kept
     only when their attached database id (resp. user id) matches the current query’s context. Scope filtering
     is performed before retrieval, so the candidate pool exposed to retrieval is already context-isolated. The
     remaining candidates’ Triggers (and aliases) are then serialized into a compact textual list and passed to
     a retrieval LLM (run with low temperature), which is instructed to use semantic judgment rather than
     keyword matching to return the subset of hint ids it considers relevant to q. The associated strategies
     are scored using the flexible signals defined in Section 5.3: the learning-time recency (used to prioritize
     recent user contexts) and the evaluation-time attribution stored in σ.eval_stats. Crucially, before any
     of this is exposed to the planning LLM we apply a lightweight formatting layer that turns the raw



                                                        13
        eval_stats lists into compact, anonymized statistics: it computes a per-strategy success rate (positive
        over retrieved), the corresponding harm rate (negative over retrieved), the inert share, and the support
        size, and drops the underlying example references. This serves two purposes simultaneously: it prevents
        leakage of any specific evaluation example into the prompt, and it presents the planning LLM with a
        single trustworthiness summary per strategy rather than raw bookkeeping. The LLM is then asked
        to use these summaries as a credibility signal: a strategy with a high success rate over many distinct
        examples is treated as well-supported and preferred; one that is frequently retrieved but rarely actually
        applied (high inert share) is surfaced as optional and may be safely ignored; one with a non-trivial harm
        rate or only a handful of supporting examples is flagged as low-confidence and can be down-weighted
        or skipped. The LLM then produces a Logic Plan that integrates the strategies it chooses to trust,
        resolving any remaining conflicts before code generation.
   2. Step 2: SQL Synthesis. Following logic planning, the system injects the complete set of dialect-specific
      Syntax Hints alongside the generated Logic Plan into the prompt for the final SQL synthesis. We
      consciously inject all available syntax hints for the target dialect rather than retrieving a subset. Because
      modern base LLMs already possess a strong foundational understanding of SQL, the number of persistent,
      dialect-specific compilation errors tends to be small. Consequently, the syntax registry for any single
      dialect remains highly compact. Injecting the complete set provides exhaustive dialect guidance and
      substantially improves adherence to compiler constraints without risking prompt context overflow,
      allowing the LLM to reliably synthesize the final executable SQL.

5.5     Deployment Lifecycle
Tahoe is designed for continuous adaptation, bridging the gap between static training and dynamic production
through a two-phase lifecycle.

Phase I: Development (Cold Start). We bootstrap the initial Hint Bank H using a small, manually curated
offline dataset. Crucially, each example in this phase includes not just the ground truth SQL (y ∗ ), but also the
verified Execution Result, allowing both the Syntax and Semantic Learning Agents to operate in full capacity:
validating syntax against the compiler and verifying logic by comparing execution outcomes against y ∗ .
Batch-Sequential Update Protocol. The offline dataset is processed in sequential batches B1 , B2 , . . . , BT .
We denote the Hint Bank available at the start of batch Bt as H(t) , with H(0) = ∅ (empty bank). For each
example in Bt , the Hint Learning Module executes the full per-example pipeline (Figure 3): a temporary Hint
Bank H̃ is initialized as a copy of the frozen H(t) , and all multi-iteration hint revisions operate exclusively on
H̃. Because all examples within Bt share the same frozen H(t) , their per-example H̃ copies are independent
and can be processed in parallel. Once all examples in Bt are processed, the Hint Management Module merges
all eligible temporary-bank deltas into H(t) to produce the updated bank H(t+1) . This batch merge is the
only point at which the global bank is updated. This sequential batch structure ensures every batch builds
cumulatively on all knowledge distilled by prior batches. After T batches, the resulting H(T ) serves as the
warm-started Hint Bank handed off to the Deployment Phase.

Phase II: Deployment. The fundamental challenge distinguishing deployment from the development phase is
the absence of ground truth SQL. In development, we have access to a verified y ∗ for every example, which
enables both the Syntax and Semantic Learning Agents to operate at full capacity. In production, no such
ground truth is predefined, so the two types of hint learning require different adaptation strategies.
      • Continuous Syntax Updates (Automated): Syntax learning is unaffected by the absence of ground truth
        SQL, because the SQL compiler itself is the sole source of truth for syntax validity. Failed queries
        from live traffic are batch-processed asynchronously by the Syntax Learning Agent exactly as in the
        development phase, allowing the system to adapt to dialect version updates or newly encountered errors
        without any human intervention.
      • Human-in-the-Loop Semantic Updates: Semantic learning requires knowing which SQL output is correct,
        which is precisely what ground truth provides in development. In deployment we approximate this via
        a user preference interaction. For each incoming question q, the system runs N inference calls with


                                                        14
       the current Hint Bank, generating N candidate SQL queries {ŷ1 , . . . , ŷN } ranked by strategy statistics
       (Section 5.3). These candidates are presented to the user, who accepts any that produce a correct result
       and rejects the rest.
       This labeling induces a preference dataset analogous to the signal used in Direct Preference Optimization
       (DPO) [13]:
          1. Positive signal (accepted): Each accepted candidate is treated as a pseudo-ground-truth ỹ ∗ .
          2. Negative signal (rejected): Each rejected candidate ŷrej whose execution result differs from an
             accepted one is treated as a semantic error.
          3. Hint learning: The pair (ỹ ∗ , ŷrej ) is fed directly into the Semantic Learning Agent, which generates
             atomic diffs, produces hint suggestions, and updates Hsem via the Hint Management Module—
             exactly as in the development phase.
        If the user rejects all candidates, the system logs the query for manual review, as this signals a knowledge
        gap that cannot be safely resolved by automated reflection alone.

5.6     Case Study: End-to-End Hint Learning
We trace three concrete examples through the learning pipeline; the corresponding structured hints appear
immediately after each example below. Recall the three steps in each iteration: Multi-Sampling Inference
(generating N candidates from the current H̃), Sequential Feedback (compiler and execution checks that
produce atomic diffs), and Hint Suggestion & Clustering (converting diffs into hint updates for H̃).
Examples 1–2 walk through both feedback channels in full; Example 3 illustrates a Database-specific semantic
hint. (No User-specific examples appear here, since this benchmark exposes no per-user identity; see
Section 6.1.)

Example 1 (Syntax): Snowflake Identifier Quoting. Consider the question “Count all orders placed” against an
orders table. In the Multi-Sampling Inference step with an empty H̃, all sampled candidates use bare, unquoted
identifiers (e.g., FROM SALES.ORDERS). During Sequential Feedback, the compiler rejects every candidate,
reporting that the table object does not exist—Snowflake requires every identifier to be double-quoted in
the exact stored casing. This compiler trace is converted into a SYNTAX-category atomic diff whose gold
strategy is “quote each path element separately in double-quotes”. In the Hint Suggestion & Clustering step,
this diff is translated into a syntax hint—a rule stating that every identifier must be quoted exactly as
stored, accompanied by a corrected SQL snippet—and added to H̃syn . In the next iteration’s Multi-Sampling
Inference step, the hint is injected into the prompt and all candidates now compile successfully. The success
stop criterion is met, and the resulting temporary-bank delta is marked eligible for the batch-level merge.

      Structured hint (Example 1)

      Rule: Quote every database, schema, table, column, CTE, and alias exactly as it is stored; quote each
      element of a fully-qualified path separately. System-generated columns from table-functions are already
      UPPER-CASE—leave them unquoted or quote them in UPPER-CASE only.
      Example: Schema: sales.orders(orderId, order_date) Question: Count all orders.
      SELECT COUNT(*) AS "total"
      FROM "SALES"."ORDERS";



Example 2 (Semantic, General): log10 Transformation. For the question “Compute the log10 -transformed
view count per event type”, the Multi-Sampling Inference step produces candidates that use NULLIF(col, 0)
to suppress zeros before taking the log. The queries compile, but during Sequential Feedback (execution
phase) the result set mismatches the ground truth: rows with a zero view count return NULL instead of the
expected 0 (i.e., log10 (0 + 1)). The LLM analyzes the ground-truth SQL versus the predicted output and
extracts a FORMULA-category diff: the gold strategy adds 1 before the log to handle zero-valued rows, while


                                                          15
the wrong strategy silently nullifies them. Hint Suggestion & Clustering converts this into a general-scope
semantic hint with trigger “log10 transformation of counts”, containing a strategy that prescribes adding one
before applying log10, i.e., log10 (column + 1), and flags nullifying zeros (e.g., NULLIF) as incorrect. Because
the scope is General, this hint is eligible for retrieval across databases and users; whether it should be trusted
for a specific query is still determined by attribution statistics during inference. In the next iteration the
retrieved hint guides the Logic Plan, and the corrected formula is used, matching the ground truth.

      Structured hint (Example 2)

      Trigger: log10 transformation of counts
      Strategy 1
      Rationale: When the question asks for a log10 transformation of count-type data that can contain
      zeros, keep zero-valued rows and avoid −∞ by adding 1 before the log.
      Preferred Action (logical): Apply log10 after adding one to the column: log10 (column + 1).
      Implementation example (Snowflake):
      LOG(10, "{COLUMN}" + 1)

      Wrong Action (logical): Replace zeros with NULL before taking the log, which silently drops the
      zero-valued rows.
      Implementation example of the wrong action (Snowflake):
      LOG(10, NULLIF("{COLUMN}", 0))



Example 3 (Semantic, DB-specific): GA4 Visitor ID. For the question “List unique visitors from last month”
on the GA4 database, sampled candidates filter on the USER_ID column, which is almost always NULL in the
GA4 sample schema, producing an empty result. The execution feedback identifies the correct column as
USER_PSEUDO_ID (which stores the actual visitor identifier). The learned hint is scoped to DB-specific (GA4),
so it is only retrieved for queries against the GA4 database and does not affect other schemas.

      Structured hint (Example 3)

      Database: GA4   Trigger: reference to column USER_ID in GA4 events tables
      Strategy 1
      Rationale: GA4 sample ecommerce tables store visitor IDs in USER_PSEUDO_ID, while USER_ID is
      almost always NULL.
      Preferred Action: Use the pseudo-ID column:
      ... WHERE USER_PSEUDO_ID LIKE ’{INT}.%’ ...

      Wrong Action: Avoid filtering directly on USER_ID:
      ... WHERE USER_ID = ’{INT}’ ...



6     Evaluation
6.1     Experimental Setup
We evaluate Tahoe on the Spider 2.0--Snow-0212 benchmark [1], which is designed to mimic realistic
enterprise challenges, featuring the strict Snowflake SQL dialect, complex multi-table schemas, and logic-heavy
questions that frequently confuse standard models.

Dataset Split. This paper focuses on the Development Phase (Phase I) of Tahoe: hint learning and evaluation
on examples that ship with usable supervision. The Spider 2.0–Snow-0212 release contains 547 examples in
total, of which only a subset ships with both ground-truth SQL and ground-truth execution results. After


                                                       16
filtering, we obtain 113 examples with usable supervision1, on which the Hint Bank is bootstrapped sequentially.
Following the development-phase protocol described in Section 5.5, we then re-evaluate on the same 113
examples using the final learned Hint Bank and compare against a vanilla baseline that uses no hints. We
additionally evaluate, in Section 6.4, on the remaining Spider 2.0–Snow-0212 examples that the development
phase did not learn from, in order to test how the development-phase Hint Bank generalizes outside its
learning set. The full Deployment Phase workflow—in which the same architecture continues to learn hints
from these examples through accumulated execution and user feedback rather than ground-truth SQL—is left
for future work (Section 7).

Models. We deliberately span three backbones of different capability tiers to test both end-to-end performance
and cross-model transferability of the learned Hint Bank:
    • Doubao-2.0-lite (weak): a lightweight open-style backbone used to test whether a Hint Bank distilled
      by a stronger model can lift a weaker generator.
    • GPT-5 (medium): a mid-tier OpenAI model used as a medium-capability transfer target.
    • GPT-5.5 (strong, primary): our core model. All learning agents (Syntax/Semantic Learning, Hint-Merge,
      Strategy Attribution) and the primary Hint Bank reported in Tables 2 and 4 use GPT-5.5.
Unless otherwise stated, the Hint Bank evaluated in every table is the one learned by GPT-5.5 on the 113
development examples; Doubao and GPT-5 inherit exactly this bank without any model-specific adaptation.
The final bank contains 11 syntax hints and 37 semantic hints (19 General + 18 Database-specific; no
User-specific hints arise in this single-tenant benchmark).

Baselines. For every backbone, our primary baseline is the Vanilla configuration of the same model: same
backbone, decoding parameters, and syntax critic budget, but without hint retrieval or hint-conditioned
planning. This isolates the contribution of the Hint Bank from raw model capability.
In addition, on the held-out split (Section 6.4) we compare against a reproduced SQLGenie-style Example-
Bank RAG baseline based on SQLGenie [5], the closest published RAG-style system from our related work
(Section 2). Since SQLGenie’s official inference code is not available, we implement a best-effort reproduction of
only its Example Bank RAG route, omitting non-RAG components such as table onboarding, self-refinement,
and feedback-driven bank augmentation. The bank stores the same 113 supervised development question–SQL
pairs used by Tahoe for hint learning; retrieval uses masked-question similarity and, for each query, returns the
top-3 most similar (question, SQL) pairs, which are injected verbatim into the generator prompt. Evaluation
is restricted to held-out examples whose gold SQL is not in the bank to avoid target leakage. This baseline
(referred to as SQLGenie-style RAG) is run with GPT-5.5 as the generator, with the same decoding parameters
as the Vanilla and Tahoe configurations.

Metrics. We report four metrics that jointly capture end-to-end correctness and the efficiency of iterative
refinement:
    • Pass Rate: the fraction of sampled candidates (across all examples) whose execution result matches
      the ground truth. We deliberately report this as a per-candidate rate because it is computed over all k
      samples per example, not just a single top-ranked candidate.
    • pass@4 (pass@k): an example counts as solved if at least one of the k=4 parallel candidates matches
      the ground truth.
    • Syntax Pass Rate: the fraction of sampled candidates that become syntactically valid Snowflake queries
      after the syntax critic loop terminates (i.e., either parsed successfully on initial generation or repaired
   1 Of the 547 examples, 120 are released with both a ground-truth SQL and a ground-truth execution result. We discard 7 of

these whose official ground-truth SQL produces a result set that does not match the official ground-truth result when executed
under the Snowflake engine, and treat them as having no usable ground truth. This leaves 113 examples with usable supervision
(used for both hint learning and evaluation); the remaining 547 − 113 = 434 examples do not have usable gold SQL for hint
learning, but they do provide official execution-result targets, which we use only for evaluation. These 434 examples form the
held-out split used in Section 6.4.


                                                             17
Table 2 Main results on Spider 2.0–Snow-0212 (113 development examples): Vanilla baseline vs. Tahoe using the
GPT-5.5-learned Hint Bank (11 syntax + 37 semantic hints).

         Backbone              Configuration    Pass Rate ↑     pass@4 ↑    Syntax Pass ↑     Avg. Critics ↓
                               Vanilla             29.42%        46.02%         62.17%            2.854
         Doubao-2.0-lite
                               Tahoe               49.12%        64.60%         96.46%            0.575
                               Vanilla             42.70%        61.06%         74.56%            2.148
         GPT-5
                               Tahoe               58.85%        78.76%         99.12%            0.602
                               Vanilla             61.95%        72.57%         96.24%            2.790
         GPT-5.5 (primary)
                               Tahoe               79.42%        87.61%        100.00%            0.124



        into valid SQL within the per-sample critic budget). We report this at the candidate level for consistency
        with Avg. Critics, which is also aggregated over candidates.
      • Avg. Critics: the average number of compiler-feedback critic rounds taken across all sampled candidates,
        where each candidate’s count is measured until it either becomes syntactically valid or exhausts the
        per-sample critic budget. This is an aggregate over candidates, not an example-level “first valid candidate”
        metric. Lower is better.

Implementation Details. All experiments are executed under the Snowflake dialect of Spider 2.0–Snow-0212.
For Tahoe’s Syntax Loop, we use the Snowflake SQL compiler for real-time validation; for the Semantic Loop,
correctness is measured by comparing execution result sets against the ground truth. We set the maximum
number of hint-learning iterations per example to 3, draw k=4 candidate samples in parallel at inference time,
and use a sampling temperature of 0.3. Both the Vanilla baseline and Tahoe runs share the same backbone,
decoding parameters, and syntax critic budget, so the comparison isolates the effect of Tahoe’s hint-guided
inference pipeline from raw model capability.

6.2     Main Results
Table 2 reports the four metrics on the 113 development examples for the three backbones, each in its Vanilla
and Tahoe-equipped configuration. Across every model and every metric, Tahoe delivers consistent and
substantial gains.
For our primary model GPT-5.5, Tahoe lifts pass rate from 61.95% to 79.42% (+17.47 pp) and pass@4 from
72.57% to 87.61% (+15.04 pp), while driving the Snowflake syntax pass rate to 100% and reducing average
critic rounds from 2.790 to 0.124 (≈ 22× reduction). The pass-rate gain is especially noteworthy: it shows
that the Hint Bank not only widens the candidate pool (pass@4) but also raises the density of correct queries
among all sampled candidates. The near-zero average critic rounds further indicate that essentially all queries
are emitted in the correct dialect on the first attempt, so the compiler-feedback loop almost never has to fire
during hint-guided inference.
A category-level breakdown of these aggregate gains over the three sub-categories of the development set
(sf_other, sf_local, sf_bq) shows that the improvement is concentrated on the harder local-Snowflake
and BigQuery-converted subsets while the small sf_other subset is already near-saturated; full numbers are
deferred to Appendix B.

6.3     Cross-Model Transferability of the Hint Bank
A central claim of Tahoe (Section 5) is that, unlike SFT-style adaptation, a Hint Bank is an external, model-
agnostic asset: it is learned once with one backbone and can be plugged into other backbones without retraining.
We test this directly by reusing the Hint Bank learned by GPT-5.5 on weaker backbones (Doubao-2.0-lite,
GPT-5) without any model-specific adaptation. The corresponding rows in Table 2 show that:




                                                         18
Table 3 Held-out evaluation (434 examples not used in development-phase hint learning); all configurations use
GPT-5.5 with identical decoding settings. SQLGenie-style RAG is our reproduced SQLGenie-style Example-Bank
RAG baseline [5], injecting top-3 retrieved (question, SQL) pairs.

              Configuration            Pass Rate ↑    pass@4 ↑    Syntax Pass ↑    Avg. Critics ↓
              Vanilla                    56.16%        65.90%         90.21%            1.184
              SQLGenie-style RAG         55.30%        65.44%         85.77%            0.446
              Tahoe                      58.06%        67.28%         99.14%            0.203



    • On Doubao-2.0-lite, the same bank lifts pass rate from 29.42% to 49.12% (+19.70 pp), pass@4 from
      46.02% to 64.60% (+18.58 pp), and the syntax pass rate from 62.17% to 96.46%, while reducing average
      critic rounds from 2.854 to 0.575 (≈ 5×).
    • On GPT-5, pass rate improves from 42.70% to 58.85% (+16.15 pp), pass@4 from 61.06% to 78.76%
      (+17.70 pp), and the syntax pass rate from 74.56% to 99.12%, with average critic rounds dropping from
      2.148 to 0.602 (≈ 3.6×).

The fact that a weaker backbone (Doubao) realizes the largest absolute pass-rate jump indicates that much of
the dialect and logic knowledge required by Spider 2.0–Snow can be externalized into hints; once externalized,
that knowledge transfers across backbones at zero retraining cost—a property that parameter-update-based
approaches such as SFT [14] and DPO [13] cannot match.

6.4   Generalization to Held-Out Examples
The 113 examples used above also served as the learning set, so the previous results characterize the Hint
Bank’s effect on its source distribution. To probe out-of-source generalization we additionally evaluate on the
remaining 434 Spider 2.0--Snow-0212 examples that the development phase did not learn from; execution
correctness is determined by comparing the predicted result set against the official ground-truth result set. To
put Tahoe’s held-out behavior in context, we also report the SQLGenie-style RAG baseline introduced in
Section 6.1.
Three observations follow. First, the syntax-level benefits of Tahoe transfer almost completely to the held-out
split: syntax pass rate climbs from 90.21% to 99.14% and average compiler-feedback critic rounds drop from 1.184
to 0.203 (≈ 5.8×) once the Hint Bank is enabled. This is intuitive—Snowflake dialect rules captured by Syntax
Hints are largely query-independent, so they generalize regardless of whether the example was seen during
development-phase learning. Second, the semantic gains are noticeably smaller (pass rate +1.90 pp, pass@4
+1.38 pp) than on the development split. We interpret this as evidence that the held-out and development
splits of Spider 2.0–Snow-0212 cover only loosely overlapping semantic distributions: the Semantic Hints
distilled in the development phase encode triggers and strategies frequent in those 113 examples that do not
all activate on the held-out queries. This suggests that semantic-side benefits scale with how representative
the development set is of the target workload—which is exactly the regime in which the Deployment Phase is
meant to operate.
Third, the SQLGenie-style RAG baseline is not able to convert the same 113-example supervision into held-out
gains. It actually trails the Vanilla GPT-5.5 baseline on both execution accuracy and syntax validity (−0.86 pp
pass rate, −0.46 pp pass@4, −4.44 pp syntax pass). Although it reduces average critic rounds (from 1.184 to
0.446), this efficiency gain does not translate into higher syntax validity or execution accuracy. One possible
explanation is that exemplar injection only helps when retrieved examples are sufficiently aligned; otherwise,
loosely matched SQL pairs can distract the generator. This is consistent with the fundamental difference
between exemplar-injection RAG and structured hint distillation: such a baseline can only paste in retrieved
(question, SQL) pairs, so when no nearly-isomorphic example exists in the bank—a common situation under
the loose semantic overlap noted above—the retrieved exemplars become a distraction rather than a signal,
dragging accuracy below the no-context baseline. Tahoe, in contrast, distills the same 113 examples into
trigger-conditioned, attribution-validated strategies, which generalize beyond verbatim question similarity and
mitigate this failure mode.


                                                       19
Table 4 Effect of Strategy Attribution (GPT-5.5, 113 development examples). Both configurations share the same
learned Hint Bank and reach 100% syntax pass rate (column omitted).

                       Configuration                Pass Rate ↑    pass@4 ↑    Avg. Critics ↓
                       Tahoe w/o Attribution          69.03%        79.65%          0.334
                       Tahoe with Attribution          79.42%        87.61%         0.124



6.5     Ablation: Effect of Strategy Attribution
The Hint Management Module’s Strategy Attribution pass (Section 5.3) is meant to address a specific failure
mode: the Hint Bank can be expanded with strategies that are retrieved often but rarely actually useful,
conflating “learned” with “useful” and dragging down inference quality. To isolate its effect, we compare two
Hint Banks that differ only in whether attribution has been run:
      • w/o Attribution. The bank produced directly by the Hint Learning Module on the 113 development
        examples; strategies carry only the learning-time recency signal and no eval_stats.
      • with Attribution. The same bank after a single Strategy Attribution pass populates each strategy’s
        eval_stats with example-level retrieved/helped/hurt evidence; the inference-time formatting layer then
        derives success, harm, and inert summaries.
Both runs use GPT-5.5 with identical decoding settings; results on the 113 development examples are shown
in Table 4. Both configurations already reach a 100% syntax pass rate, so we omit that column from the table.
Adding the attribution-derived credibility summaries lifts pass rate by +10.39 pp and pass@4 by +7.96 pp,
while further reducing average critic rounds by roughly 2.7×. Crucially, no new hints are learned between
these two configurations—only the planner’s view of the bank changes. This confirms our hypothesis from
Section 5.3: separating “learned” from “useful” and giving the planner an explicit per-strategy credibility
signal lets it down-weight noisy or rarely-applied strategies and prefer those with empirically strong support,
translating directly into higher end-to-end accuracy.

7     Discussion and Future Work
7.1     When to Use Tahoe
Tahoe is designed to bridge the gap between static benchmarks and dynamic production environments. It
delivers the highest ROI (Return on Investment) in settings where:
      • Environments with Heterogeneous Dialects. Unlike SFT models that are often overfitted to standard
        SQL [14], Tahoe’s syntax hints generalize across queries and databases within the same target dialect,
        while separate dialect-specific syntax registries can be maintained for heterogeneous dialect environments,
        effectively preventing recurrent compiler failures in strict dialects (e.g., Snowflake) without the need for
        parameter retraining.
      • Personalized or Domain-Specific Querying. When user preferences vary significantly or domain-specific
        knowledge is essential in crafting SQL queries, semantic hints capture these local conventions dynamically.
        This granular adaptation is often overlooked or too costly to implement via global fine-tuning.
      • Dynamic, Evolving Workloads. In scenarios requiring continuous adaptation, the Hint Bank evolves
        naturally as new examples arrive. This avoids the high operational cost of labeling new datasets and
        retraining models for every schema change.
In contrast, for static tasks with limited schema coverage where adaptation is unnecessary, traditional SFT
may remain a competitive solution.

7.2     System Limitations
We acknowledge several boundaries in our current design:


                                                         20
      • Deployment Phase Not Evaluated. Our experiments cover only the Development Phase (Phase I).
        Because the Deployment Phase (Phase II) relies on a human-in-the-loop preference signal that public
        benchmarks such as Spider 2.0–Snow do not provide, we do not run deployment-phase experiments in
        this paper and leave them as future work.
      • Trigger Sensitivity. The retrieval of semantic hints relies on the precision of natural-language triggers.
        Poorly formulated triggers may lead to lower recall or precision in hint selection, impacting the Logic
        Planning stage.
      • Strategy Sparsity. While the Strategy Layer prevents conflict loss, in the early stages of deployment
        (cold start), the system may lack sufficient statistical data to reliably rank competing strategies for rare
        edge cases.

7.3     Future Directions
We identify several promising directions to extend this framework:
      • Graph-Based Hint Representation. Currently, hints are stored as independent entries indexed by natural-
        language triggers and retrieved at inference time by an LLM-based scope-aware retriever (Section 5.4).
        We envision upgrading the Hint Bank to a Graph Structure, where nodes represent business entities (e.g.,
        tables, metrics) and edges represent strategy dependencies. This would enable the system to handle
        complex, multi-hop reasoning—for instance, realizing that a specific “Revenue” calculation strategy
        depends on a “Currency Conversion” rule defined in a separate hint.
      • Multi-Hint Reasoning. Although the current system uses an LLM-based Logic Planning step to combine
        retrieved strategies, future work can make multi-hint interaction more explicit and verifiable, for example
        through graph- or constraint-based reasoning over hint dependencies.
      • Benchmarking against Adaptation Paradigms. A natural future direction is to conduct systematic
        comparisons with alternative adaptation methods, including Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) [14], Direct
        Preference Optimization (DPO) [13], and Reinforcement Learning (RL) [11], to quantify trade-offs in
        computational cost, adaptability, and interpretability.
      • Deployment and Hint Bank Monitoring. Deploying Tahoe in real industry settings and monitoring
        the Hint Bank’s scale is an important next step. Although the Hint Management Module handles
        merging, deduplication, and conflict resolution, in production the bank can grow with continuous
        learning; operational monitoring of bank size, retrieval latency, and storage is needed to keep the system
        sustainable.
      • Knowledge Lifecycle Management. Real-world deployment requires robust management of the Hint
        Bank’s lifecycle, including mechanisms for pruning outdated hints (Eviction Policies), prioritizing new
        strategies, and managing storage constraints in long-running systems.

8     Conclusion
Large language models have made Text-to-SQL increasingly practical, but robust deployment in real database
environments remains challenging due to dialect-specific syntax failures, ambiguous business logic, and evolving
user preferences. Existing adaptation paradigms each expose a key weakness in this setting: supervised
fine-tuning is rigid and costly to refresh, test-time scaling incurs substantial online overhead, and raw retrieval
often introduces noisy context rather than actionable guidance.
In this paper, we presented Tahoe, which reframes Text-to-SQL adaptation as a data management problem
over a persistent Hint Bank. Instead of repeatedly re-solving the same failures at inference time, Tahoe
converts compiler and execution feedback into reusable Syntax Hints and scoped Semantic Hints. Its trigger–
strategy abstraction further enables the system to preserve and rank competing interpretations explicitly,
providing a structured mechanism for handling ambiguity without modifying model parameters.
Experiments on Spider 2.0–Snow-0212 show that this design substantially improves robustness in the
development-phase setting. On the 113 supervised development examples of Spider 2.0–Snow-0212, Tahoe


                                                         21
lifts pass rate from 61.95% to 79.42% and pass@4 from 72.57% to 87.61%, drives the Snowflake syntax pass
rate to 100%, and reduces average compiler-feedback critic rounds from 2.79 to 0.12 per sampled candidate.
Crucially, the same Hint Bank, plugged into weaker backbones (Doubao-2.0-lite, GPT-5) without retraining,
also produces double-digit pp gains. The held-out evaluation further shows strong syntax-level transfer but
more modest semantic gains, suggesting that semantic improvements depend on how well the development
examples cover the target workload. These results suggest that explicit, reusable hints can recover much of
the benefit of expensive adaptation while retaining low-latency inference and model agnosticism.
More broadly, Tahoe highlights a systems direction for self-improving database interfaces: keep online query
serving lightweight, and move adaptation into the continuous construction and maintenance of external
knowledge. While this paper evaluates only the development-phase workflow, the same architecture naturally
supports deployment-time batch refresh from accumulated feedback. We hope this perspective helps motivate
future work on deployment evaluation, multi-hint reasoning, and long-term knowledge lifecycle management
for Text-to-SQL systems.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the ByteDance ByteBrain team. The authors thank Tieying Zhang and Jianjun
Chen for their guidance and support throughout this project.

References
 [1] Spider 2.0–snow benchmark. https://spider2-sql.github.io/, 2026. Snowflake dialect adaptation of the Spider
     2.0 dataset, used for realistic Text-to-SQL evaluation.
 [2] Lakshya A. Agrawal et al. Gepa: Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement learning. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2507.19457, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.19457.
 [3] Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. Mem0: Building production-
     ready AI agents with scalable long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413, 2025.
 [4] Dawei Gao, Haibin Wang, Yaliang Li, Xiuyu Sun, Yichen Qian, Bolin Ding, and Jingren Zhou. Text-to-sql
     empowered by large language models: A benchmark evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.15363, 2023.
 [5] Pushpendu Ghosh, Aryan Jain, and Promod Yenigalla. Sqlgenie: A practical llm based system for reliable
     and efficient sql generation. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
     Linguistics (Volume 6: Industry Track), pages 1004–1012, 2025.
 [6] Prakhar Gurawa and Anjali Dharmik.          Balancing content size in rag-text2sql system.        arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2502.15723, 2025.
 [7] Chenxu Hu, Jie Fu, Chenzhuang Du, Simian Luo, Junbo Zhao, and Hang Zhao. Chatdb: Augmenting llms with
     databases as their symbolic memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03901, 2023.
 [8] Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Memgpt:
     Towards llms as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
 [9] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein.
     Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium
     on user interface software and technology, pages 1–22, 2023.
[10] Mohammadreza Pourreza and Davood Rafiei. Din-sql: Decomposed in-context learning of text-to-sql with
     self-correction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:36339–36348, 2023.
[11] Mohammadreza Pourreza, Shayan Talaei, Ruoxi Sun, Xingchen Wan, Hailong Li, Azalia Mirhoseini, Amin Saberi,
     Sercan Arik, et al. Reasoning-sql: Reinforcement learning with sql tailored partial rewards for reasoning-enhanced
     text-to-sql. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23157, 2025.
[12] Reid Pryzant et al. Automatic prompt optimization with gradient descent and beam search. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2305.03495, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.03495.




                                                          22
[13] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn.
     Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information
     processing systems, 36:53728–53741, 2023.
[14] Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bahdanau. Picard: Parsing incrementally for constrained
     auto-regressive decoding from language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.05093, 2021.
[15] Hong Sun, Xue Li, Yinchuan Xu, Youkow Homma, Qi Cao, Min Wu, Jian Jiao, and Denis Charles. Autohint:
     Automatic prompt optimization with hint generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07415, 2023.
[16] Bailin Wang, Richard Shin, Xiaodong Liu, Oleksandr Polozov, and Matthew Richardson. Rat-sql: Relation-aware
     schema encoding and linking for text-to-sql parsers. In Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the association
     for computational linguistics, pages 7567–7578, 2020.
[17] Pengfei Wang, Baolin Sun, Xuemei Dong, Yaxun Dai, Hongwei Yuan, Mengdie Chu, Yingqi Gao, Xiang Qi, Peng
     Zhang, and Ying Yan. Agentar-scale-sql: Advancing text-to-sql through orchestrated test-time scaling. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2509.24403, 2025.
[18] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen
     Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
[19] Tao Yu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Kai Yang, Rui Zhang, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, and Dragomir Radev. Syntaxsqlnet:
     Syntax tree networks for complex and cross-domain text-to-sql task. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05237, 2018.
[20] Kun Zhang, Xiexiong Lin, Yuanzhuo Wang, Xin Zhang, Fei Sun, Cen Jianhe, Hexiang Tan, Xuhui Jiang, and
     Huawei Shen. Refsql: A retrieval-augmentation framework for text-to-sql generation. In Findings of the Association
     for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 664–673, 2023.




                                                          23
A    Atomic diff Schema
During the Hint Learning Module’s multi-iteration process (Section 5.2), we utilize an LLM to generate atomic
diffs between the ground truth SQL and the predicted error traces. This structured schema forces the LLM
to isolate individual logic or syntax deviations, facilitating precise hint generation. The prompt enforces the
following JSON-like schema, with one object per atomic issue:
DiffID: "<Phrase-or ’GLOBAL’>::<Category>::<running number>"
Phrase: "<verbatim or close paraphrase from Question>"
Category: "<JOIN_TYPE | FILTER_SCOPE | AGG_TIMING |
WINDOW_FRAME | LIMIT_RANK | FORMULA |
COLUMN_CHOICE | UNIT_CAST | SEMANTIC |
GLOBAL_PLAN | OTHER>"
StepRef: "<Gold Step <n> | CTE name | GLOBAL>"
GoldStrategy: "<one concise sentence of Gold’s approach>"
GoldSQL: <concise snippet <=200 chars>
WrongStrategy: "<one concise sentence of Pred’s approach (mark as unpreferred)>"
WrongSQL: <concise snippet <=200 chars>
Impact: "<one sentence explaining how results or preference deviate>"


B   Per-Category Results on the Development Set
The 113 development examples of Spider 2.0–Snow-0212 fall into three sub-categories that reflect how each
query reaches the Snowflake engine: sf_other (queries against generic Snowflake-hosted databases, n=6),
sf_local (queries against locally provisioned Snowflake databases, n=36), and sf_bq (queries originally
authored on BigQuery and converted to the Snowflake dialect, n=71). The three subsets pose visibly different
challenges: sf_bq is dialect-heavy because converted queries inherit BigQuery idioms that must be rewritten
to Snowflake-compatible forms, while sf_other contains a small set of relatively standard analytical queries.
Table 5 reports vanilla GPT-5.5 vs. Tahoe (with the GPT-5.5-learned, attribution-finalized Hint Bank)
on each sub-category, using pass@4 and pass rate. The aggregate gains in Section 6.2 concentrate on the
harder sub-categories: Tahoe delivers +18.31 pp pass@4 and +19.72 pp pass rate on sf_bq, and +11.11 pp /
+15.28 pp on sf_local, while the small sf_other subset is already near-saturated under the vanilla baseline
(83.33% pass@4) and shows only marginal pass-rate movement. This pattern is consistent with our hypothesis
that the Hint Bank captures dialect- and schema-specific knowledge whose marginal value grows with subset
difficulty.

          Table 5 Per-category results on the 113 development examples (GPT-5.5): Vanilla vs. Tahoe.

                                                 pass@4 ↑            pass rate ↑
                           Category     n    Vanilla    Tahoe    Vanilla   Tahoe
                           sf_other      6   83.33%     83.33%   79.17%    83.33%
                           sf_local     36   72.22%     83.33%   61.81%     77.08%
                           sf_bq        71   71.83%     90.14%   60.56%     80.28%




                                                       24
