                                                Submitted to the Annals of Applied Statistics




                                                       THE STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN:
                                                       SAMPLE SIZE CONSIDERATIONS FOR TESTING NESTED
                                                         CAUSAL EFFECTS OF TIME-VARYING TREATMENTS

                                                        By Walter Dempsey1 , Peng Liao2 , Santosh Kumar3 , and Susan A.
                                                                                   Murphy1




arXiv:1711.03587v1 [stat.AP] 9 Nov 2017
                                                                                                 1 Harvard University
                                                                                                2 University of Michigan
                                                                                                3 University of Memphis

                                                                      Technological advancements in the field of mobile devices and
                                                                 wearable sensors have helped overcome obstacles in the delivery of
                                                                 care, making it possible to deliver behavioral treatments anytime and
                                                                 anywhere. Increasingly the delivery of these treatments is triggered
                                                                 by predictions of risk or engagement which may have been impacted
                                                                 by prior treatments. Furthermore the treatments are often designed
                                                                 to have an impact on individuals over a span of time during which
                                                                 subsequent treatments may be provided.
                                                                     Here we discuss our work on the design of a mobile health smok-
                                                                 ing cessation experimental study in which two challenges arose. First
                                                                 the randomizations to treatment should occur at times of stress and
                                                                 second the outcome of interest accrues over a period that may in-
                                                                 clude subsequent treatment. To address these challenges we develop
                                                                 the “stratified micro-randomized trial,” in which each individual is
                                                                 randomized among treatments at times determined by predictions
                                                                 constructed from outcomes to prior treatment and with randomiza-
                                                                 tion probabilities depending on these outcomes. We define both con-
                                                                 ditional and marginal proximal treatment effects. Depending on the
                                                                 scientific goal these effects may be defined over a period of time during
                                                                 which subsequent treatments may be provided. We develop a primary
                                                                 analysis method and associated sample size formulae for testing these
                                                                 effects.


                                                   1. Introduction. The rise of wearable technologies has generated in-
                                                creased scientific interest in the use and development of mobile interven-
                                                tions. Such mobile technology holds promise in providing accessible sup-
                                                port to individuals in need. Mobile interventions to maintain adherence
                                                to HIV medication and smoking cessation, for example, have shown suffi-
                                                cient effectiveness to be recommended for inclusion in health services [Free
                                                et al., 2013]. Increasingly scientists aim to trigger delivery of treatments
                                                   Keywords and phrases: sequential randomization, nested causal effects, stratified micro-
                                                randomized trials, mobile Health, weighted, centered methods

                                                                                                           1
                                          imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
2                             W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

based on predictions, such as of risk or engagement, which are outcomes
of prior treatments. In these settings scientists are increasingly interested
in assessing nested treatment effects. For example, a scientist may want to
understand if providing a treatment at high risk time [Hovsepian et al.,
2015] is effective. Often times of high risk occur infrequently. In these cases
randomization to treatment might be triggered by a risk prediction so as
to avoid providing treatment at the wrong time and potentially providing
too much treatment. Furthermore the scientist may want to detect these
treatment effects over the next hour during which subsequent treatments
may be delivered.
   In this paper, we propose the stratified micro-randomized trial design be-
cause it is critical to stratify randomization to ensure sufficient occasions
where the variable of interest (denoted Xt ), such as risk, takes a particular
value x and treatment is provided and sufficient occasions where Xt = x
and treatment is not provided. In these settings, the outcome of interest
may require a period of time over which to develop; during this time pe-
riod further treatment might be provided. To address this we provide a
careful definition of the desired treatment contrast and introduce the no-
tion of a reference distribution. We proceed by developing an appropriate
test statistic for the desired treatment contrast. The associated sample size
calculation is non-trivial due to unknown form of the non-centrality param-
eter. Moreover, the distribution of Xt over time, t, is unknown. Therefore
we develop an approach to formulating a simulation based sample size cal-
culator to accommodate the unknown longitudinal distribution of Xt . The
calculator requires the scientist to specify a generative model for the his-
tory Ht which achieves the specified alternative treatment effect. However
existing data sets that include the use of the required sensor suites and thus
can be used to guide the form of the generative model are often small and
do not include treatment. To address this we provide a protocol for the use
of such noisy, small datasets to inform the selection of the generative model,
leading to a data-driven, simulation-based sample size calculator. We also
illustrate how exploratory data analysis and over-fitting of the same data
can be used in constructing a feasible set of deviations to which the sample
size calculator should be robust.
   This work is motivated by our participation in a mobile health smoking
cessation study, in which an average of 3 stress-reduction treatments should
be delivered per day, 1/2 at times the participant is classified as stressed and
1/2 at times the participant is not classified as stressed. We use data from
an observational, no treatment, study of individuals [Sarker et al., 2017,
Saleheen et al., 2015] who are attempting to quit smoking to construct the


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
               STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                    3

generative model underlying the simulation based sample size calculator.
The data directly informs the generative model under no treatment. We
then build a generative model under treatment by combining the generative
model under no treatment with the targeted alternative treatment effect. We
next over-fit the noisy, small data to suggest potential deviations to which
we assess robustness of the sample size calculator.

   1.1. Related work. We build upon prior work in experimental design and
on data analysis methods for time-varying causal effects. We outline this
related work below, highlighting key differences to our current setting.

   1.1.1. Micro-randomized trials. Recently micro-randomized trial designs
[Liao et al., 2016, Dempsey et al., 2015] were developed for testing proxi-
mal and delayed effects of treatment [Klasnja et al., 2015]. While in these
trials treatment is sequentially randomized per participant, this approach
does not permit the randomization probabilities to depend on features of
the participant’s observation history. This restriction is quite problematic.
Indeed due to the rapid increase in sensor technology and the ability of
various machine learning methods to provide real-time predictions, it is
now feasible for scientists to trigger treatments based on these predictions
or other features of the participant’s observation history. A critical ques-
tion is whether triggering a treatment based on such features is effective.
Often these features may be impacted by prior treatment. Furthermore the
responses of greatest interest may be defined over a span of time during
which subsequent treatments may be delivered yet the approach developed
in [Liao et al., 2016] does not accomodate this. We designed the stratified
micro-randomized trial specifically for this more complex setting.

   1.1.2. N-of-1 trials. At first glance, the micro-randomized trial design
appears similar to the N-of-1 trial design frequently used in the behavioral
sciences. However the estimand is quite different. We will, as is typical in
statistical causal inference, consider average causal effects, possibly con-
ditional on covariates. In the behavioral field N-of-1 trials are used most
often to ascertain individual level causal effects [McDonald et al., 2017]. A
variety of nuanced assumptions about individual behavior using behav-
ioral science theory is brought to bear as scientists attempt to triangulate
on individual level effects; see the section on “Measuring behavior over
time” in McDonald et al. [2017] for a discussion. In the clinical field, N-
of-1 trials were developed for settings in which scientists wish to compare
the effect of one treatment versus another (treatment A versus treatment
B) on an outcome but it is very expensive to recruit many participants. In

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
4                              W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

both settings a common assumption underlying the analysis of N-of-1 tri-
als is that there are no carry-over effects. Additionally one often assumes
that the treatment effect is constant over time. An excellent overview of
N-of-1 designs and their use for evaluating technology based interventions
is Dallery et al. [2013]. See Kravitz et al. [2014] for a review of this design in
pharmacotherapy trials.

   1.2. Outline. This paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we discuss
the stratified micro-randomized trial and describe in greater detail the mo-
tivating smoking cessation study. In section 3 we define two types of treat-
ment effects: a conditional treatment effect, conditional on a stratification
variable, and a treatment effect that is marginal over the stratification vari-
able. Section 4 provides primary analysis methods and associated theory
for the proposed trial design. We then provide a simulation-based method
for determining the sample size for a stratified micro-randomized trial in
section 5. This simulation-based sample size calculator requires a generative
model for the trial data. We develop a generative model for the smoking ces-
sation example in section 6 and develop the simulation based sample size
calculator for this example. In this example the development of the genera-
tive model begins with the development of model under no treatment. This
latter model is constructed using summary statistics on data collected in an
observational, no treatment, smoking cessation study of cigarette smokers
[Saleheen et al., 2015]. Section 6.1.1 describes the dataset and how it is used
to inform the generative model. We also conduct a variety of robustness
checks and subsequently revise the generative model. Here too, the obser-
vational, no treatment, smoking cessation study is used to indicate where
robustness is required. Section 7 provides a discussion.

    2. Stratified Micro-Randomized Trial.

   2.1. Motivating example – Smoking cessation study. Here we provide a sim-
plified description of the smoking cessation study which we are involved
in through the Mobile Data to Knowledge Center (https://md2k.org/). This
is a 10 day mobile health intervention study focused on developing a mo-
bile health intervention aimed at aiding individuals who are attempting
to quit smoking. Participants wear both an AutoSense chest band [Ertin
et al., 2011] as well as bands on each wrist for 10 hours per day. Sensors
in the chestband and wristband measure various physiological responses
and body movements to robustly assess physiological stress. In particular
a pattern-mining algorithm uses the sensor data to construct a binary time-
varying stress classification (see Section 6 and Sarker et al. [2016] for further

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
               STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                           5

details) at each minute of sensor wearing throughout the entire day.
   Each participant’s smartphone contains a number of “mindfullness apps”
that can be accessed 24/7 to engage in guided stress-reduction exercises. In
this study the treatment is a smartphone notification to remind the partici-
pant to access the app and practice the stress-reduction exercises. Theoret-
ically, a treatment can be delivered at any minute during the 10 hour day.
However in practice, treatment will only be delivered when the participant
is available. That is, at some time points it is inappropriate for scientific,
ethical or burden reasons to provide treatment. In this example, one of the
reasons why a participant would not be available at decision time t is if the
participant received a treatment in the past hour (see Section 6 for further
details on availability specific to this trial).
   At each minute availability is ascertained and if the participant is avail-
able, then the participant is randomized to receive or not receive a treatment.
In this study the repeated randomizations are stratified to ensure that each
participant should receive an average of 1.5 treatments per day while classi-
fied as stressed and an average of 1.5 treatments per day while not classified
as stressed.
   We consider primary analyses and sample size formula when the primary
aim of this type of study is to address scientific questions such as:
Is there an effect of the treatment on the proximal response? And is there an effect
        of the treatment if the individual is currently experiencing stress?
The stratified micro-randomized trial is an experimental design intended
to provide data to address such questions.

   2.2. A Stratified Micro-Randomized Trial. A micro-randomized trial [Liao
et al., 2016, Dempsey et al., 2015] consists of a sequence of within-person
decision times t = 1, . . . , T, e.g. occasions, at which treatment may be ran-
domized. For example, in the smoking cessation study the decision times
are at minute intervals during a 10 hour day over a period of 10 days (i.e.,
T = 600 ∗ 10 decision times) for each participant. As discussed in the in-
troduction we are interested in treatment effects at particular values of a
variable Xt that are likely impacted by prior treatment (in the smoking ces-
sation study, Xt is an indicator of stress and treatment is intended to impact
the occurrence of stress); often in these settings some values of Xt occur
more rarely (e.g., participants experience many fewer minutes of stress
than non-stress minutes in a day) and thus to ensure sufficient treatment
exposure at these values we stratify the randomization. We call such trials
stratified micro-randomized trials. We assume the sample space for the covari-
ate X is finite and small. That is, Xt is a time-varying categorical (or ordinal)

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
6                                W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

variable with support X = {0, 1, . . . , k} where k is small. In the case of the
smoking cessation example, Xt = 1 if the participant is classified as stressed
at decision time t and Xt = 0, otherwise, thus k = 1.
   Ot (t ≥ 1) denotes observations collected after time t − 1 and up to and
including time t (including the time varying stratification variable, Xt );
O1 contains baseline covariates. Ot also contains the availability indicator:
It = 1 if available for treatment and It = 0 otherwise. Availability at time t is
determined before treatment randomization. In this paper, we consider bi-
nary treatment (e.g., on or off); At denotes the indicator for the randomized
treatment at time t. A randomization only occurs if It = 1. In the smok-
ing cessation example At = 1 if at minute t, the participant is notified to
practice stress-reduction exercises and At = 0 otherwise. In particular if the
participant is unavailable (i.e., It = 0) there can be no notification to practice
stress-reduction exercises (i.e., At = 0). The ordering of the data at a decision
time t is Ot , At . Let Ht = ({Os , As }t−1 s=1
                                                , Ot ) denote the observation history up
to and including time t, as well as the treatment history at all decision times
up to, but not including, time t.
   In general the randomization probability for At will depend not only on
the stratification variable, Xt but also other variables in Ht . The pr(At = 1 | Ht )
is a known function of Ht , denoted by pt (1 | Ht ). We define pt (1 | Ht ) = 0
when the participant is currently unavailable (i.e., It = 0 ⊂ Ht ). Appendix A
provides an example, suitable in the smoking cessation example, of a for-
mula for pt (a | ht ), t = 1, . . . , T for any possible value of history given by ht .
From here on, we assume the investigator has access to a formula for these
randomization probabilities. Let Pp denote the distribution of the data if
collected using randomization probabilities determined by this formula.
   The proximal response, denoted by Yt,∆ , is a known function of
the participant’s data within a subsequent window of length ∆ (i.e.,
{Ot+1 , At+1 , . . . , Ot+∆−1 , At+∆−1 , Ot+∆ }). In the smoking cessation study, for
example, the length of window might be ∆ = 60 minutes with proximal
response
                                                  X∆
                                     Yt,∆ = ∆−1        1Xt+s =1 .
                                            s=1

In this smoking cessation example, the response is a deterministic function
of only the stratification covariate, Xt ; this need not be the case. For example
in a physical activity study in which the treatments are activity messages
Xt may be a binary variable indicating currently sedentary or not yet the
response might be the number of steps over subsequent x minutes.



imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                   STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                     7

   3. Proximal effect of treatment. The primary question of interest is
whether the treatment has a proximal effect; that is, whether there is an effect
of treatment at decision time t on the proximal response Yt,∆ . In particular
we aim to test if the proximal effect is zero. Note we are only interested in
treatment effects conditional on availability (It = 1). We consider two types
of proximal effects: an effect that is defined conditionally on the value of
the stratification variable, Xt and It = 1 or an effect that is conditional only
on It = 1, so marginal with respect to the distribution of Xt .

   3.1. Proximal effect of treatment, Potential outcomes & Reference distribution.
We use potential outcomes [Robins, 1986, Rubin, 1978] to define both the
conditional and marginal proximal effect. At time 2, the potential obser-
vations are {O2 (a1 )}a1 ∈{0,1} . The potential observations and availability at
decision time t are {Ot (āt−1 )}āt−1 ∈{0,1}t−1 . Recall that the proximal response is
a known function of the participant’s data within a subsequent window
of length ∆. Thus the potential outcomes for the response at time t are
{Yt,∆ (āt+∆−1 )}āt+∆−1 ∈{0,1}t+∆−1 ; each individual has 2t+∆−1 potential responses at
time t.

   Definition 3.1 (Proximal treatment effects). At the individual level, the
effect of providing treatment versus not providing treatment at time t is a
difference in potential outcomes for the proximal response and is given by
(1)      Yt,∆ (āt−1 , 1, at+1 , . . . , at+∆−1 ) − Yt,∆ (āt−1 , 0, at+1 , . . . , at+∆−1 ).
There are 2t+∆−2 of these treatment differences for each individual, each
corresponding to a value for (āt−1 , at+1 , . . . , at+∆−1 ). The “fundamental prob-
lem of causal inference” [Imbens and Rubin, 2015, Pearl, 2009] is that we
can not observe any one of these individual differences. Thus we provide
a definition of the treatment effect that is an average across individuals.
Furthermore to define the effect of treatment we must specify a reference
distribution, that is the distribution of the treatments prior to time t, āt−1
and if ∆ > 1 then we must also define the distribution of the treatments
after time t, (at+1 , . . . , at+∆−1 ). If the reference distribution is not a point mass
then, in the definition of the treatment effect, here too, the treatment effect
will be an average; the average is over the above differences (1) with respect
to the reference distribution. So in summary the treatment effect at time t
will be an average of the differences in (1) both over the distribution across
individuals in potential outcomes as well as over the reference distribution
for the treatments.
   The question is, “Which reference distribution should be used for the
treatments?” The choice of which distribution to use for (at+1 , . . . , at+∆−1 )

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
8                                          W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

might differ by the type of inference desired. For example in the smoking
cessation study, it makes sense to consider setting the treatments at+1 , . . . , at+∆−1
to 0. In this case we can interpret the treatment effect as the effect of pro-
viding a notification at time t to practice stress-reduction exercises and no
more notifications within the next hour versus no notification at time t nor
over the next hour on the fraction of time stressed in the next hour (i.e., the
proximal response).
   In this paper, we set treatment at the subsequent ∆ − 1 times equal to
0 as described above. In order to select the reference distribution for āt−1
we follow common practice in observational mobile health studies; here
longitudinal methods such as GEEs and random effects models [Liang and
Zeger, 1986] might be used to model how a time-varying variable, such as
physical activity, varies with current mood. In this case the mean model
in these analyses is marginal over the past distribution of mood. A similar
strategy in the randomized setting is to use the past treatment randomiza-
tion probabilities as the reference distribution.
   With the reference distribution set to the randomization probabilities for
past treatment and set to no treatment for the subsequent ∆ − 1 times, the
average causal effect at time t can be viewed as an “excursion.” That is,
participants get to time t under treatment according to the randomization
probabilities, then at time t (if available) the effect is the contrast between
two opposing excursions into the future. In one excursion, we treat at time
t and then do not treat for ∆ − 1 further times; in the opposing excursion,
we do not treat at time t nor do we treat for ∆ − 1 subsequent times.
   Using the above reference distribution, the marginal, proximal treatment
effect at time t, β(t), is:
     hP Q                                                                                                       i
               t−1
   E āt−1     j=1 p j (a j |H j ( ā j−1 ))   (Y t,∆ ( ā t−1 , 1, 0̄)  −   Y  t,∆ (ā t−1 , 0, 0̄))I t ( āt−1 )
                        hP Q                                                          i
                                          t−1
                    E āt−1                     p
                                          j=1 j j (a   |H    (ā
                                                            j j−1    ))   I  ( ā
                                                                            t t−1     )

where the expectation, E is over the distribution of the potential outcomes
and 0̄ is a row vector of length ∆ − 1. Define the conditional, proximal effect,
β(t; x), as follows:
  hP Q                                                                                                          i
              t−1
E āt−1       j=1 p j (a j |H j (ā j−1 )) (Yt,∆ (āt−1 , 1, 0̄) − Yt,∆ (āt−1 , 0, 0̄))It (āt−1 )1Xt (āt−1 )=x
                       hP Q                                                                      i                .
                                        t−1
                   E āt−1              j=1 p j (a j |H j (ā j−1 ))  I t ( āt−1 )1 Xt (āt−1 )=x


    The proximal effects can be defined for other reference distributions over
(āt−1 , at+1 , . . . , at+∆−1 ). Careful consideration is required in selecting the refer-
ence distribution. For example, a natural alternative to setting the treatments

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                 STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                9

at+1 , . . . , at+∆−1 to 0 in the above definition would be to use a definition which
averaged over the randomization distribution, Pp . Consider the smoking
cessation example. Here if at time t treatment is delivered then according
to the randomization protocol the participant cannot be provided further
treatment in the subsequent hour. On the other hand, if treatment is not
provided at time t then the participant may be provided treatment in the
subsequent hour. Thus defining the proximal treatment effect with respect
to the randomization distribution Pp means that the treatment contrast is
between providing treatment at time t versus the combination of delaying
treatment to later time points in the next hour or not providing treatment
in the next hour.
   A further consideration in selecting a reference distribution is that if
the reference distribution is far from the randomization distribution then
treatment effects may be very difficult to estimate. That is, the sample size
necessary to achieve the requisite power to detect treatment effects will be
practically infeasible (i.e, astronomical). Consider again the smoking ces-
sation study example. Using data from other studies on smokers who are
trying to quit we know that there are only a few times per day at which
the smoker is classified as stressed. In the subset of the observational, no
treatment, study used to inform our generative models, the mean (standard
deviation) of the number of episodes classified as stressed per day per per-
son was 2.8 (3.2). The mean (standard deviation) of the number of episodes
not classified as stressed per day per person was 17.1 (12.6). These statistics
support the conclusion that most of the day the smoker is not stressed.
Recall the randomization distribution must satisfy the restriction that on
average 1.5 treatments are provided while a smoker is classified as stressed
and on average 1.5 treatments are provided while a smoker is classified
as non-stressed. This is over a 10 hour day. This means that at any given
minute, the participant is likely classified as not stressed and the probability
of treatment at this minute is very low. As a result the product of randomiza-
tion probabilities t+∆−1
                          Q
                             j=t+1 p j (0|H j ) is close to 1 and thus close to a reference
distribution that provides no treatment at times t + 1, . . . , t + ∆ − 1. This
means that there will be much data from the study that is consistent with
the reference distribution. If, however the randomization probabilities had
to satisfy a restriction specifying a much larger number of treatments, then
there would be very little data consistent with the reference distribution.
   For the reminder of this paper, the proximal effects are defined using the
randomization distribution for past treatments (āt−1 ) and (at+1 , . . . , at+∆−1 )
are set to 0 (no treatment).



imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
10                                    W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

   3.2. Proximal effect of treatment & Observable Data. To express the causal
treatment effects, β(t) and β(t; x) in terms of the observable data,
e.g. {O1 , A1 , . . . , Ot , At , . . . , OT , AT , . . . , AT+∆−1 , OT+∆ }, we use the following
three assumptions.

  Assumption 3.2. We assume consistency, positivity, and sequential ig-
norability [Robins, 1986]:
     • Consistency: For each t ≤ T + ∆, Ot (Āt−1 ) = Ot . That is, the observed
       values are equal the corresponding potential outcomes.
     • Positivity: if the joint density {Ht = h, At = a} is greater than zero,
       then pr(At = at | Ht = ht ) > 0.
     • Sequential ignorability: for each t ≤ T, the potential outcomes,
       {O2 (a1 ), . . . , OT+∆ (āT+∆−1 )}āT+∆−1 ∈{0,1}T+∆−1 , are independent of At condi-
       tional on the history Ht .

   Sequential ignorability and, assuming all of the randomization proba-
bilities are bounded away from 0 and 1, positivity, are guaranteed for a
stratified micro-randomized trial by design. Consistency is a necessary as-
sumption for linking the potential outcomes as defined here to the data.
When an individual’s outcomes may be influenced by the treatments pro-
vided to other individuals, consistency may not hold. In such instances, a
group-based conceptualization of potential outcomes is used [Hong and
Raudenbush, 2006, Vanderweele et al., 2013]. In particular if the mobile
intervention includes treatments that aim to produce social ties between
participants, then consistency as stated above will not hold. For simplicity
we do not consider such mobile interventions here.

   Lemma 3.3. Under assumption 3.2, the marginal treatment effect satisfies
                                                                        
                t+∆−1
                       Y 1A j =0                                         
    β(t) = E E                        Yt,∆ At = 1, Ht  It = 1 −
                                                                         
                          p j (A j |H j )                                
                      j=t+1
                                                                                            
                                           t+∆−1      1
                                       Y            A j =0                               
(2)                                                                Yt,∆ At = 0, Ht  It = 1
                                                                                             
                                 E E 
                                                p j (A j |H j )                              
                                         j=t+1

and the conditional treatment effect satisfies
                                                                             
                      t+∆−1     1
                  Y           A j =0                                       
  β(t; x) = E E                       Yt,∆ At = 1, Ht  Xt = x, It = 1 −
                                                            
                                                                                
                          p j (A j |H j )                                     
                       j=t+1



imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                 STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                         11
                                                                                      
                           t+∆−1
                                 Y 1A j =0                                             
(3)                                                  Yt,∆ At = 0, Ht  Xt = x, It = 1
                                                                                       
                      E E 
                                   p j (A j |H j )                                     
                              j=t+1

for all x ∈ {0, . . . , k} where E denotes the expectation with respect to distribution
of the data generated via a stratified micro-randomized trial with randomization
distribution, Pp .

                                                   1A j =0
   Note that the above products, e.g. t+∆−1
                                          j=t+1 p j (A j |H j ) , are set to 1 if ∆ = 1.
                                       Q

Proof of Lemma 3.3 can be found in Appendix B. In the following we focus
on designing a stratified micro-randomized trial for the primary purpose
of testing whether the treatment effect at any time point differs from 0.

    4. Test statistic. Our main objective is the development of a sample size
formula that will ensure sufficient power to detect alternatives to the null
hypothesis of no proximal treatment effect. For the conditional proximal
effect the null hypothesis is H0 : β(t; x) = 0, t = 1 . . . , T and x ∈ {0, . . . , k}. For
the marginal proximal effect the null hypothesis is H0 : β(t) = 0, t = 1 . . . , T.
The proposed sample size formulas are simulation based and will follow
from consideration of the distribution of test statistics under alternatives to
the above null hypotheses. The sample size will be denoted by N. Our test
statistic will be based on a generalization of the test statistics developed
by Boruvka et al. [2017] to accommodate the fact that the response Yt,∆
covers a time interval during which subsequent treatment may be delivered
(in Boruvka et al. [2017], ∆ = 1 throughout) and the conceptual insight that
these estimators can be interpreted as L2 projections. These test statistics
are quadratic forms based on estimators of the coefficients involved in L2
projections.
    In the following we describe L2 projections, and provide the test statistics.
First in the conditional setting the test statistic is based on an empirical
projection of {β(t; x)}t=1...,T;x∈{0,...,k} on the space spanned by a qc by 1 vector
of features involving t and x, denoted by ft (x). We denote the projection by
ft (x)0 βc . The βc weights in this projection are given by
                           T                                                                 
                          X
       β?
                                                                                         2 
        c = arg min E            It p̃t (1|Xt )(1 − p̃t (1|Xt )) β(t; Xt ) − ft (Xt ) βc 
                                                                                     0
                 βc
                       
                            t=1

where {p̃t (1|x)}t=1,...,T;x∈{0,...,k} are pre-specified probabilities used to define the
weighting across time and stratification distribution in the projection. Note
that if desired, one can set p̃t (1|x) = 1/k for all t, x. See Section 5.1 for further


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
12                               W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

comments on the choice of the pre-specified probabilities and on the choice
of ft (x).
   Second, in the marginal setting, the test statistic is based on estimators
of the coefficients involved in an L2 projection of {β(t)}t=1...,T on the space
spanned by a qm by 1 vector of features involving t, denoted by ft . We denote
the projection by ft0 βm . The βm weights in this projection are given by
                              T                                          
                             X                                      2 
              β?
                                                        
               m = arg min E    It p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) β(t) − ft0 βm 
                              
                        βm
                              
                                  t=1

for pre-specified probabilities, {p̃t (1)}t=1,...,T . Again these probabilities are
used to specify the weighting across time and stratification distribution in
the projection.
   Here we discuss the estimators of the coefficients in the L2 projections.
The estimators will form the basis for the test statistics. Note that neither
treatment effect, β(t; x) in (3) nor β(t) in (2), are conditional expectations
of an observable variable (rather the effects are defined by differences in
repeated conditional expectations). Thus instead of minimizing a standard
least squares criterion, we minimize a generalization of the criterion in
Boruvka et al. [2017] (see (4), (5) below).
   In some settings there will be sufficient a priori information (e.g. using
data on individuals from a similar population) that will permit the simu-
lation based sample size formula to depend on “control variables.” These
variables are used to help reduce the variance of the estimators with the
goal that the resulting test statistic is more powerful in detecting particular
alternatives to the null hypothesis. See Section 5.1 for further discussion
concerning the choice of the control variables. For example in the smoking
cessation study a natural control variable would be the fraction of time
stressed in the hour prior to time t as this pre-time t variable may be ex-
pected to be highly correlated with the fraction of time stressed in the hour
subsequent to time t, Yt,60 .
   Given a q0 by 1 vector of “control variables” gt (Ht ), define gt (Ht )0 α?
                                                                             c as an
L2 projection; in particular
                                T                                         
                               X                                     2 
             α?
                                                   
              c = arg min
                       α
                          E    It wct (Ht+∆−1 ) Yt,∆ − gt (Ht )0 αc 
                                 t=1

                        p̃t (At |Xt ) ∆−1
                                      s=1 1[At+s =0]
                                     Q
where wct (Ht+∆−1 ) =     Q∆−1                       . Also define gt (Ht )0 α?
                                                                              m as an L2 pro-
                              s=0 t+s (At+s | Ht+s )
                                  p




imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                   STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                                 13

jection; in particular
                                      T                                           
                                     X                                        2 
             α?
                                                              
              m = arg min                   It wmt (Ht+∆−1 ) Yt,∆ − gt (Ht ) αm 
                                                                               0
                          E 
                       α
                                      t=1

                      p̃ (A ) ∆−1 1[A =0]
                              Q
where wmt (Ht+∆−1 ) = Qt ∆−1t s=1 t+s . Note one can choose gt (Ht ) equal to
                          s=0 pt+s (At+s | Ht+s )
the scalar, 1. Again see Section 5.1 for further discussion. See appendix C
for a discussion of the trade-off between the approximation error of the L2
projection of {E[wct (Ht+∆−1 )Yt,∆ | Ht , It = 1]}t=1,...,T onto the control vari-
ables gt (Ht )α?
               c , sample size N, and statistical power 1 − β0 .
   Recall the proposed test statistic is based on an estimator of β?                          ?
                                                                                     c or βm .
Here we consider an estimator of β?    c which is the minimizer of the following
weighted, centered least-squares criteria, minimized over (αc , βc ):
           T                                                                              
          X
               It wct (Ht+∆−1 ) Yt,∆ − gt (Ht )0 αc − (At − p̃t (1|Xt )) ft (Xt )0 βc 2 
                                                                                          
(4) Pn 
            t=1

where Pn [φ(Ht+∆−1 )] is defined as the average of a function, φ(Ht+∆−1 ),
over the sample. The centering refers to the centering of the treatment
indicator At in the above weighted least squares criteria. This criterion is
similar to Boruvka et al. [2017]; however Boruvka et al. [2017]  restrict to
                                                                                         ∆−1
                                                                                               1[At+s =0]
                                                             Q
∆ = 1 and thus the weight wct does not contain the ratio, Q∆−1s=1                                               .
                                                                                      s=1 pt+s (At+s | Ht+s )
Also Boruvka et al. [2017] assume a model for the treatment effect β(t; Xt )
(as opposed to estimating the projection of this effect as is the case here).
Under finite moment and invertibility assumptions, the minimizers (α̂c , β̂c ),
                                                        ? ?
            √ asymptotically normal estimators of (αc , βc ). The limiting
are consistent,
variance of N(β̂c − β?                 −1    −1
                      c ) is given by Qc Wc Qc where

                            T
                           X
                  Wc = E         It wct (Ht+∆−1 ) ct (At − p̃t (1 | Xt )) ft (Xt )
                           t=1
                               T
                               X                                                        
                           ×         It wct (Ht+∆−1 ) ct (At − p̃t (1 | Xt )) ft (Xt )0 ,
                               t=1
             ct = Yt,∆ −gt (Ht )0 α?                                 0 ?
                                    c − (At − p̃t (1|Xt )) ft (Xt ) βc , and
                   XT                                                       
             Qc =      E It p̃t (1|Xt )(1 − p̃t (1|Xt ))) ft (Xt ) ft (Xt ) .
                                                                           0

                    t=1

See Appendix B.2 for technical details.

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
14                                       W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

 The estimators of the coefficients in the projection of the marginal treat-
ment effect, βm minimize the following least-squares criteria over (αm , βm ):

                 T                                                               
                X                                                          2 
(5)       Pn    It wmt (Ht+∆−1 ) Yt,∆ − gt (Ht ) αm − (At − p̃t (1)) ft βm 
                                                    0                      0

                t=1

where the probability p̃t (a) defines the projection (see above and Section 5.1).
Similarly under finite moment and invertibility assumptions, the minimiz-
ers (α̂m , β̂m ), are consistent, asymptotically normal estimators of (α?      ?
                                                                          m , βm ).
See Appendix B.2 for technical details. For expositional simplicity we fo-
cus on the test for the conditional treatment effect in the remainder of this
paper. See Appendix D for a parallel discussion in the case of the marginal
treatment effect.
   The proposed sample size formula in the conditional setting is based on
the test statistic

(6)                                TcN = Nβ̂0c Q̂c Ŵc−1 Q̂c β̂c

where N is the sample size and Ŵc is given by

                        T
                        X
                  Pn           It wct (Ht+∆−1 ) ˆct (At − p̃t (1|Xt )) ft (Xt )
                         t=1
                             T
                             X                                                          
                         ×         It wct (Ht+∆−1 ) ˆct (At − p̃t (1|Xt )) ft (Xt )0
                             t=1

with ˆct = Yt,∆ − gt (Ht )0 α̂c − (At − p̃t (1|Xt )) ft (Xt )0 β̂c , and Q̂c is given by
                T
                X        h                                                      i
                       Pn It wct (Ht+∆−1 )(At − p̃t (1|Xt ))2 ft (Xt ) ft (Xt )0 .
                 t=1

Here we have implicitly assumed that Ŵc is invertible. The following lemma
provides the distribution of TcN :

  Lemma 4.1 (Asymptotic Distribution of TcN ).                        Under finite moment and
invertibility assumptions,
                                   0
                        N β̂c − β?                          ?
                                                            
                                 c    Q̂ Ŵ
                                        c c
                                            −1
                                               Q̂c   βˆc − βc −→d χqc .
                                                                   2




imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                        15

   From a technical perspective the above test statistic, TcN , is very similar
to the quadratic form test statistics based on weighted regression used in
Generalized Estimating Equations method [Liang and Zeger, 1986, Diggle
et al., 2002]. In this field much work has been done on how to best adjust
these test statistics and their distribution when the sample size N might be
small [Liao et al., 2016, Mancl and DeRouen, 2001]. The adjustments are
based on the intuition that the quadratic form is akin to the multivariate
T-test statistic used to test whether a vector of means is equal to 0 and thus
Hotellings T-squared distribution is used to approximate the distribution
when N may be small. Here we follow the lead of this well developed area
and use a non-central Hotelling’s T-squared distribution to approximate
the distribution of TcN . Recall that if a random variable X has non-central
Hotelling’s T-squared distribution with degrees of freedom (d1 , d2 ) and non-
centrality parameter λ then d1 (d1 d+d
                                     2
                                       2 −1)
                                             X has non-central F-distribution with
the same degrees of freedom and non-centrality parameter [Hotelling, 1931].
In our setting d1 = qc and d2 = N − (q0 + qc ) and λ = Nγc with
                                   0
(7)                          γc = β? c    Qc Wc −1 Qc β?
                                                       c.

Recall that q0 is the dimension of αc and qc is the dimension of βc . See
Appendix B for a discussion of how for large N, we recover the Chi-Squared
distribution given in Lemma 4.1.
   Thus the rejection region for the test H0 : β(t; x) = 0, t = 1 . . . , T and
x ∈ {0, . . . , k} is:
                              qc (N − (q0 + 1)) −1
                       (                                                 )
(8)                     TcN >                  F                (1 − α0 )
                                N − (q0 + qc ) qc ,N−(q +qc );0
                                                       0



with α0 a specified significance level. For details regarding further small
sample size adjustments, used when analyzing the data, see Appendix E.

   5. Sample size formulae. To plan the stratified micro-randomized study,
we need to determine the sample size needed, N, to detect a specific alter-
native with a given power (1 − β0 ) at a given significance level (α0 ). The
sample size is the smallest value N such that

                                N − (q0 + 1) −1
                                                                         !
(9)    1 − Fqc ,N−(q0 +qc );Nγc               F                 (1 − α0 ) ≥ 1 − β0 .
                                N − (q0 + qc ) qc ,N−(q +qc );0
                                                       0



Fd1 ,d2 ;λ and F−1
                d1 ,d2 ;λ
                          denote the cumulative and inverse distribution func-
tions respectively for the non-central F-distribution with degrees of free-
dom (d1 , d2 ) and non-centrality parameter λ. Calculation of the sample size

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
16                            W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

N is non-trivial due to the unknown form of the noncentrality parameter,
Nγc (where γc is defined in (7)). This is in contrast to micro-randomized
trials where, under certain working assumptions, Liao et al. [2016] were
able to find an analytic form for the noncentrality parameter Nγc .
   We outline a simulation based sample size calculation, starting with gen-
eral overview and comments in Section 5.1 and employ this calculator to
design the smoking cessation study in Section 6.

    5.1. Simulation based sample size calculation. As discussed above, calcu-
lation of the sample size N is non-trivial due to the unknown form of the
non-centrality parameter. Here, we propose a three-step procedure for sam-
ple size calculations.
    In the first step, equation (7) and information elicited from the scientist
is used to calculate, via Monte-Carlo integration, γc in the non-centrality
parameter. The resulting value, γ̂c , is plugged in to equation (9) to solve for
an initial sample size N̂0 . In the second step we use a binary search algorithm
to search over a neighborhood of N̂0 ; in our simulations we found the binary
search quickly resulted in a solution. For each sample size N required by
the binary search algorithm, K samples each of N simulated participants
are run. Within each simulation, the rejection region for the test is given
by equation (8) at the specified significance level. The average number of
rejected null hypotheses across the K simulations is the estimated power for
the sample size N. The sample size is the minimal N with estimated power
above the pre-specified threshold 1 − β0 .
    In the last, third, step we conduct a variety of simulations to assess the
robustness of the sample size calculator to any assumptions and to make
adjustments to ensure robustness. See our use of these simulations to test
robustness in the case of the smoking cessation study in Section 6.
    Our sample size formula requires the following information for t =
1, . . . , T; x ∈ {0, . . . , k}:
     1. desired type 1 and type 2 error rates,
     2. targeted alternative β(t; x),
     3. selected probabilities {p̃t (1 | x)},
     4. selected “control variables” gt (Ht ),
     5. the randomization formula used to determine pt (1|h) given a history
        h and
     6. a generative model for {Ht }t=1,...,T .
   We provide general comments concerning the choice of the above items
and then build the sample size calculator for the smoking cessation study
of Section 6. First we elicit information from the scientist to construct a

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                 STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                            17

specific alternative form for β(t; x). A simple approach is to consider linear
alternatives, {β(t; x) = ft (x)0 β?
                                  c }t=1,...,T;x∈{0,...,k} so that the L2 projection and
the alternative coincide. Stratification variables are often categorical (X is
categorical); as a result we model the alternative separately for each value
of X = x; x ∈ {0, . . . , k}. Furthermore if we suspect that the effect will be
generally decreasing (with study time) due to habituation, then we might
consider a vector feature, ft that represents a linear in time, t trend. Or
we might believe that the effect of the treatments might be low at the
beginning of the study and then increase as participants learn how to use
the treatment and then decrease due to habituation; here we might consider
a vector feature, ft that results in a quadratic trend.
   The less complex the projection (smaller qc ) of the alternative β(t; x), the
smaller the required sample size, N, becomes. On the other hand, the use
of a simple projection for the alternative may not reflect the true alterna-
tive β(t; x) very well (see appendix C for a discussion of this tradeoff). We
suggest sizing a study for primary hypothesis tests using the least complex
alternative possible. For example, while there may be within day variation
in treatment effect, the study might still be sized to detect treatment effects
averaged across such variation – i.e., a constant alternative within a day
can result in a hypothesis test with sufficient power against a wide range of
alternatives. For example in the smoking cessation study the feature, ft (x)
might be (1, x, d(t), d(t)x) with d(t) equal to the number of days following the
“quit smoking” date. The linear trend in days would be used to detect an
approximately decreasing treatment effect, β(t; x), with increasing t.
   An objection to the above approach might be as follows. Suppose that
the scientific team believes that there will be an effect only at a very few
decision points within a day and thus a test statistic based on an L2 pro-
jection that averages over all decision points within the day would result
in a test with low power. However if investigators suspect this might be
the case then more care should be taken in selecting the decision points.
Consider the example of Heartsteps [Klasnja et al., 2015], a mobile health
intervention focused on promoting physical activity and reducing seden-
tary behavior among sedentary office workers. HeartSteps uses an activity
tracker to monitor steps taken on a per minute basis. Originally decision
points were set to match the frequency of data collection (i.e., each minute).
Upon reviewing activity data, it was discovered that the highest within
person variability in step count occurred at five timepoints throughout the
day with much less within person variability at other times.a This informa-
  a
   These times were pre-morning commute, mid-day, mid-afternoon, evening commute
and after dinner. Data collected was on individuals with “regular” daytime jobs.


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
18                                       W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

tion combined with the types of treatments being considered indicates that
the treatment might be most effective at these 5 timepoints and potentially
less effective at other times. Therefore, decision times were selected to align
with the five discovered timepoints.
   To select the probabilities {p̃t (1 | x)}t=1,...,T;x∈{0,...,k} , recall that these proba-
bilities define the weighting across time and across the stratification dis-
tribution of the alternative when operationalized as an L2 projection. To
see this suppose we decide to target a constant-across-time alternative and
select ft (Xt ) = (1Xt =1 , 1Xt =2 , . . . , 1Xt =k )0 , then β?     ?      ?
                                                               c = (βc,1 , βc,2 , . . . , βc,k ) where

                               T                                                −1
                              X
                    β?
                                                                                 
                     c,x =     
                                
                                     E[It 1Xt =x ] p̃t (1 | x)(1 − p̃ t (1 | x)) 
                                                                                   
                                  t=1
                            T                                                           
                           X                                                           
                            
                                    E[It 1Xt =x ]p̃t (1 | x)(1 − p̃t (1 | x))β(t; x)
                              t=1

for x ∈ {0, . . . , k}. If we set the reference probabilities to be constant in t, x
then
                              T                −1  T                        
                             X                 X
                      ?
                                                                               
                    βc,x =   E[It 1Xt =x ] 
                                                      E[It 1Xt =x ]β(t; x) .
                               t=1                        t=1

In this case βc,x is an average treatment effect across time weighted by the
fraction of time the participant is available and in stratification level x. In
our work we usually set p̃t (1 | x) to be constant in (t, x) so as to more easily
discuss the targeted alternative with collaborators.
   Next a decision should be made about which control variables gt (Ht )
should be included in the construction of the test statistic. A natural control
variable is the pre-decision time version of the proximal response as this
variable is likely highly correlated with the proximal response and thus can
be used to reduce variance in the estimation of the coefficients for the L2
projection. For example in the smoking cessation study a natural control
variable is the fraction of time stressed in the hour prior to time t. One
might want to include in the q0 by 1 vector, gt (Ht ), many variables so as to
maximally reduce variance and thus increase the size of the noncentrality
parameter in (7); indeed for fixed q0 , the larger the noncentrality parameter,
the smaller the sample size N. However from equation (9) we see that
fixing all other quantities, the sample size N increases with increasing q0 . So
intuitively there is a tradeoff between increasing the size of the noncentrality
parameter by including more variables in gt (Ht ) with the resulting reduction

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                          19

in degrees of freedom in the denominator of the F test caused by increasing
q0 , the number of variables in gt (Ht ). See appendix C for further discussion.
    In the smoking cessation example below, we calculate the sample size
with the vector of control variables gt (Ht ) set equal to ft (Xt ); this maintains
a hierarchical regression yet keeps q0 as small as possible. Incidentally this
simplifies the development of the generative model as additional time-
varying variables are not included.
    Generally the randomization formula has been determined by consid-
erations of treatment burden, availability and whether it is critical for the
scientific question that the randomization depend on a time-varying vari-
able such as a prediction of risk. Treatment burden considerations might
impose a constraint such as, on average around n treatments should occur
over a specified time period (e.g. an average of n treatments per day); also
the randomization formula might be developed so as to limit the variance
in the number of treatments in the specified time period. In the smoking
cessation study, the randomization probability, pt (1|Ht ) at decision point t
depends on at most {Xs , Is }s=1,...,t (as opposed to the entire history, Ht ).
    The sample size formula requires the specification of a generative model
for the history Ht which achieves the specified alternative treatment effect.
However existing data sets that include the use of the required sensor suites
and thus can be used to guide the form of the generative model are often
small and do not include treatment. In the smoking cessation study, for
example, we require a generative model for the multivariate distribution of
{Xt , It , At }Tt=1 of which only the distribution of At given (Ht , It = 1) is known
(e.g. pt (1|Ht )). We have access to a small, observational, no-treatment data
set that included the required sensor suites and thus can be used to guide
the form of the generative model. Because the data set is small, in Section 6
we construct a low dimensional Markovian generative model. Here and in
general, the prior data does not include treatments. Thus we use the prior
data to develop a generative model under no treatment.
    The relatively simple generative model allows us to use only a few sum-
mary statistics from this small noisy data set. This of course, may lead to
bias – this bias would be problematic if the bias results in sample sizes for
which the power to detect the desired effect is below the specified power.
Thus we also use the small data set to guide our assessment of robustness
of the sample size calculator. In particular, more complex generative mod-
els can be proposed by exploratory data analysis. Of course such complex
alternatives may be due to noise and not reflect the behavior of trial partic-
ipants. In Section 6.4.3, we present results of an exploratory data analysis
in which we over-fit the noisy, small data to suggest a particular complex


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
20                             W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

deviation from the simple Markovian generative model.
   We follow the three steps outlined at the beginning of this subsec-
tion to provide a sample size N. Our calculator also provides standard-
ized effect sizes. That is, given the alternative effect β(t; x) and a genera-
tive model we calculate the average conditional variance given by σ̄2x =
(1/T) Tt=1 E[Var Yt,∆ | It = 1, At , Ht | It = 1, Xt = x]. Table 14 in Appendix F
      P                                
provides standardized treatment effect sizes, defined as, d(t; x) = β(t; x)/σ̄x .

   6. Smoking Cessation Study. In the following, we use the above three
step procedure to form a sample size calculator for the smoking cessation
study. Recall the last step involves a variety of simulations to assess ro-
bustness to the assumption underlying the generative model; this step is
provided in section 6.4.
   As noted previously, the smoking cessation study is a 10 day study; the
first day is the “quit day”, the day the participant quits smoking. Recall
that participants wear the AutoSense sensor suite [Ertin et al., 2011] which
provides a variety of physiological data streams that are used by the stress
classification algorithm. A high level view of the stress classification algo-
rithm is as follows. First, every minute a support vector machine (SVM)
algorithm is applied to a number of ECG and respiration features con-
structed from the prior one minute stream of sensor data. The output of
the SVM, e.g. the distance of the features from the separating hyperplane,
is then transformed via a sigmoid function to obtain a stress likelihood in
(0, 1); see Hovsepian et al. [2015] for details. This output (in (0, 1)) across the
minute intervals is further smoothed to obtain a smoother “stress likelihood
time series.” Next, a Moving Average Convergence Divergence approach
is used to identify minutes at which the trend in the stress likelihood is
going up and when it is going down; see Sarker et al. [2016] for details. The
beginning of an episode is marked by the start of a positive-trend interval;
the peak of an episode is the end of a positive-trend interval followed by the
start of a negative-trend interval. If the area under the curve from the begin-
ning of the episode to the peak of the episode exceeds a threshold then the
episode is declared to be a stress episode. The threshold is based on prior
data from lab experiments and was evaluated on independent test data sets
(from both lab and field) in terms of the F1 score (a combination of sensi-
tivity and specificity [Wikipedia, 2017]) for use in detecting physiological
stress.
   A participant is available, It = 1, for a treatment at minute t if the par-
ticipant has not received a treatment in the prior hour, if this minute corre-
sponds to a peak of an episode and if the minute is during the 10 hours since


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                  STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                               21

attiring Autosense. The stratification variable at every available minute (de-
cision point) t is whether the criterion for stress is met (Xt = 1) or whether
the criterion for stress was not met (Xt = 0). There are 600 decision times per
day (i.e., 10 hours/day × 60 minutes/hour) at which, assuming the partici-
pant is available, the participant may receive a treatment notification. We
plan the trial with 11 hour days in which during the final hour participants
cannot receive treatment. The final hour of data collection ensures we can
calculate the proximal response for the final decision time each day. Each
participant should receive a daily average (over the 10 hours) of 1.5 treat-
ment notifications (notifications to practice the stress-reduction exercise on
the app) when Xt = 1 and a daily average of 1.5 treatment notifications
when Xt = 0.
   Next, we build the simulation-based calculator assuming the primary
hypothesis is H0 : β(t; x) = 0; t = 1 . . . , T; x ∈ {0, 1} and the test statistic is
as given in (6). Small sample corrections are used in constructing the test
statistic as discussed in Section 4; see Appendix E for additional details.

   6.1. Simulation-based calculator. We start by choosing inputs for the sam-
ple size formula as outlined in Section 5.1. We set the desired type 1 and
type 2 error rates to be 5% and 20% respectively. We next specify the tar-
geted alternative β(t; x) = ft (x)0 β?      ?
                                     c for βc ∈ R . Suppose the scientific team
                                                 qc

suspects that if there is an effect of the mindfulness reminders, then this
effect might be negligible at the beginning of the study, increase as partic-
ipants begin to practice the mindfulness exercises and then the effect may
decrease due to habituation. Thus, we select ft (Xt )0 = ft0 · 1Xt =0 , ft0 · 1Xt =1
             j k j k2 
where ft0 = 1, t−1
                 600 , 600
                       t−1
                             . This leads to a non-parametric treatment effect
model in the stratification variable Xt , and a piece-wise constant treatment
effect model in time given Xt = x that is quadratic as a function of “day
in study.” In this case, the dimension of the L2 projection is qc = 3 · 2 = 6,
β?       ?    ?                                                             0 ?
 c = (βc,0 , βc,1 ) ∈ R and the targeted alternative is β(t; x) = ft βc,x for x = 0, 1.
                         6

Next to elicit enough information from the scientist to specify β?                c , we ask
scientists to specify for each level of X, (1) an initial conditional effect, (2)
the day of maximal effect (t?           x ) and (3) the average conditional treatment
                       PT
effect β̄c,x = T    −1
                         t=1 β(t; x). This set of conditions uniquely identifies the
subvector β?   c,x ; therefore,     the conditions over each level of X combine to
uniquely identify the vector β?                  ?      ?
                                           c = (βc,0 , βc,1 ) as desired. For this example,
we will target the same alternative for both levels of the stratification vari-
able Xt , thus β?  c,0
                       = β?c,1
                               . To set this common alternative, we use the following
values: the day of maximal effect is day 5 and the initial conditional effect


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
22                               W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

is 0. We consider three possible common values of β̄c,0 = β̄c,1 denoted β̄ in
Table 2.
   Here we set the control variables to gt (Ht ) = ft (Xt ). Furthermore suppose
the formula for randomization probability depends only on past values
of the time-varying variable Xt and availability It . We use the formula
for pt (a | ht ) provided in Appendix A. One of the inputs to the randomization
formula at an available decision point t is the expected number of episodes
during the remaining part of the day that will be classified as stressed
(X = 1) and the expected number of episodes during the remaining day that
will not be classified as stressed (X = 0). The generative model developed
below is used to provide this input. See appendix A for further details and
the specification of other inputs to this randomization formula.

   6.1.1. Generative Model. We now use a subset of the data collected in an
observational, no treatment, smoking cessation study of 61 cigarette smok-
ers [Saleheen et al., 2015] to inform the generative model of longitudinal
outcomes {Xt , It }Tt=1 . Study enrollment was restricted to smokers who re-
ported smoking 10 or more cigarettes per day for the prior 2 years and a
high motivation to quit. Enrolled participants select a smoking quit date.
Two weeks prior to the specified quit date, participants wore the AutoSense
sensor suite [Ertin et al., 2011] for 24 hours in their natural environment.
Participants again wore the sensor suite for 72 hours in their natural environ-
ment starting on the specified quit date. The same classification algorithm
that is used in the smoking cessation example can be used with this data
to produce the stress likelihood and associated episodes as described at
the beginning of Section 6. Of the 61 participants, 50 had sufficiently high-
quality electrocardiogram data to construct the episodes and infer the stress
classification for the 72 hours post-quit. This subset is reported in Sarker
et al. [2017]. From this data we calculate the sample moments:
     1. For each episode type (i.e., x ∈ {0, 1}), the probability that the next
        episode will be a stress episode – i.e., a 2 by 1 vector W̄
     2. For each episode type (i.e., x ∈ {0, 1}), the average episode length – i.e.,
        a 2 by 1 vector Z̄
These are: W̄ = (6.7%, 51.9%) and Z̄ = (10.9, 12.0); that is, the fraction of
episodes not classified as stressed that are followed by an episode classified
as stressed is 6.7%, the fraction of episodes classified as stressed that are
followed by an episode classified as stressed is 51.9%, the average length of
episode not classified as stressed is 10.9 minutes and the average length of
an episode classified as stressed is 12.0 minutes.


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                  STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                    23

   Using these sample moments we construct a no-treatment transition ma-
trix for the joint process Vt = (Xt , Ut ), t = 1, . . . , 600 where Xt is the time-
varying stress classification and Ut is the time-varying variable indicating
phases of the current episode – “pre-peak”, “peak”, and “post-peak” given
by Ut = 0, 1, and 2 respectively. Ut will be used to generate an availability
indicator, It . Each episode ends in state Vt = (x, 2) for x ∈ {0, 1} and transi-
tions to the beginning of the next episode, Vt+1 = (x0 , 0) for x0 ∈ {0, 1}. We
restrict the transition matrix such that for x ∈ {0, 1}:
   • (x, 0) can only transition to states (x, 0) or (x, 1) (i.e., stay in state “pre-
     peak” or transition to state “peak”) from one minute to the next
     minute.
   • (x, 1) transitions immediately to (x, 2) with probability one (i.e., pr(Vt+1 =
     (x, 2) | Vt = (x, 1)) = 1). In other words the process inhabits the “peak”
     state for only one minute.
   • (x, 2) can only transition to states (x, 2), (0, 0), or (1, 0) (i.e., stay in state
     “post-peak” or end the episode and begin a new one).
We label each episode depending on the value x. The added complexity of
the joint process Vt (in lieu of a generative model solely for Xt ) is used to
accomodate the fact that the scientific team decided to deliver treatment, if
at all, only at “peaks” of an episode (i.e., Ut , 1 then It = 0). Note that at
the peak of the episode, the episode is classified as stressed or not classified
as stressed. Define Z̃(x,u) to be the length of the phase u in an episode of
type x after the chain enters state (x, u). Then Z̃(x,1) = 0 for each x because as
soon as the chain enters the peak (u = 1) of an episode, the chain departs.
Otherwise set Z̃(x,u) = (Z̄x − 3)/2 for u = 0 and u = 2b (recall that Z̄x is the
elicited average length, in minutes, of an episode classified as x, under no
treatment).
   We set the no-treatment transition probability matrix to
                   (0)                                         (0)
                 P(x,u),(x,u) = Z̃x,u /(Z̃x,u + 1) and P(x,1),(x,2) = 1.0

for x ∈ {0, 1} and u ∈ {0, 2}, and then set
     (0)                                                 (0)
    P(x,2),(0,0) = (1 − W̄x )(1 − P(x,2),(x,2) ) and P(x,2),(1,0) = W̄x (1 − P(x,2),(x,2) )

for x ∈ {0, 1} (recall that W̄x is the elicited probability that the next episode
will be a stress episode). All other entries of P(0) are set to zero. Thus P(0)
   b
     We subtract three as we are guaranteed one pre-peak, one peak and one post-peak
minute in each episode. Dividing by two splits the remaining average time evenly between
pre-peak and post-peak phases of an episode.

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
24                                     W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

is a deterministic function of the moments W̄ and Z̄. See Figure 1 for the
transition matrix P(0) .
                                               Table 1
              P(0) : Transition Matrix for the Markov chain, Vt , under No Treatment
                                            Non-stress                                  Stress
                               Pre-peak      Peak Post-peak                  Pre-peak   Peak Post-peak
                Pre-peak         0.80         0.20     0.00                    0.00     0.00   0.00
 Non-stress       Peak           0.00         0.00     1.00                    0.00     0.00   0.00
                Post-peak        0.19         0.00     0.80                    0.01     0.00   0.00
                Pre-peak         0.00         0.00     0.00                    0.82     0.18   0.00
     Stress       Peak           0.00         0.00     0.00                    0.00     0.00   1.00
                Post-peak        0.09         0.00     0.00                    0.09     0.00   0.82


   The transition matrix P(0) specified in Table 1 has stationary distribu-
tion (π(0,0) = 39.4%, π(0,1) = 8.0%, π(0,2) = 39.4%, π(1,0) = 6.1%, π(1,1) =
1.1%, π(1,2) = 6.1%).

    6.2. Generative model under treatment. Next we form the generative model
under treatment. We make the simplifying assumption that following treat-
ment (i.e., At = 1) stress, Vt+j , evolves as a discrete-time Markov chain but
                                                        (1)
with respect to a different transition matrix Pt for each of the subsequent
j = 1, . . . , 60 minutes. After the hour, assuming a subsequent treatment no-
tification is not provided, the time-varying stratification variable returns to
evolution as a Markov chain with transition matrix P(0) . Thus,
                                            ( h (0) i
                                               P                  if At−s = 0, s = 1, . . . , 60
pr(Vt = (x, u) | Vt−1 = (x0 , u0 ), Ht−1 ) = h (1) i(x ,u ),(x,u)
                                                      0 0
                                                                                                 .
                                               Pt                         otherwise
                                                      0 0    (x ,u ),(x,u)

Because the alternative β(t; x) is constant within each day, we will construct
                        (1)
a transition matrix, Pt , that will only depend on t through the day of
                                         (1)              (1)
decision t. Thus we use the notation Pd(t) instead of Pt where d(t) is the day
of decision time t.
   Recall that in the smoking cessation study, the treatment effect is the effect
of providing a notification at time t to practice stress-reduction exercises and
no more notifications within the next hour versus no notification at time t
and no notifications over the next hour on the percent of time stressed in
the next hour. Thus the reference policy sets the treatments at+1 , . . . , at+∆−1
to 0 and the expected proximal response under the reference policy is
                  t+∆−1
                     Y            1A j =0                                      
               EE                                Yt,∆ At = a, Ht It = 1, Xt = x
                               p j (A j |H j )
                       j=t+1

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                 STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                           25

can be computed analytically for any combination of x and a (∆ = 60).
See Appendix F.1 for derivations of the below analytic forms. When a =
1, under the proposed generative model the above expectation is equal
                     h (1) s i
to ∆−1 ∆                         . When a = 0, the expectation is equal to
      P P
        s=1 u∈{0,1,2} Pd(t)       (x,1),(1,u)
the fraction of time stressed within the next hour under the reference policy
                                               h s i
of no actions for that hour ∆−1 ∆                 0
                                P P
                                  s=1 u∈{0,1,2} P          .
                                                           (x,1),(1,u)
                                                                         (1)
  Given the alternative β(t; x) for a particular day, we set Pd(t) equal to
                                                                                  2
                   ∆
             
          X      X X                      h    s i                          
               ∆       [Qs ]((x,1),(1,u)) − P(0)                     − β(t; x)
              −1
  arg min
                                                                                   
      Q∈P                                             ((x,1),(1,u))               
           x∈{0,1}      s=1 u∈{0,1,2}

where P denotes the set of transition matrices which satisfy the constraints
discussed above. The set P can be parameterized in order to use general-
                                                                   (1)
purpose, box-constrained optimization methods to calculate Pd(t) efficiently.
For all calculations, we initialize with inputs equivalent to the transition
matrix P(0) . Using this procedure, the maximum squared distance across all
alternatives β(t; x) considered in this paper is 2.71 × 10−11 (i.e., low approx-
imation error).

   6.3. Generating the simulated data. The prior section yields the no-treatment
                                                          (1)
and treatment transition matrices (i.e., P(0) and {Pd }10      d=1
                                                                   )) given the specified
alternative {β(t; x)}. We briefly show how to use this information along with
the randomization probability formula to generate synthetic data arising
from a stratified micro-randomized trial. First, we generate data for each
day independently. On a given day at time t, we first generate Vt using
the transition equation in section 6.2. We then assess availability, It , which
is a deterministic function of the current value of Vt and the past sixty
minute history of actions {At−s }60      . That is, It = 1[ 60s=1 At−s = 0] × 1[Ut = 1].
                                                           P
                                   s=1
Given It = 1, we take the history Ht and generate the action at time t, At ,
using the given randomization probability formula pt (1 | Ht ) found in ap-
pendix A. In order to compute the proximal outcome Yt,∆ for every minute
over the ten hour day (i.e., t = 1, . . . , 600), we simulate an additional eleventh
hour during which participants cannot receive treatment (i.e., participants
are unavailable). The above procedure generates synthetic data for one
participant in a stratified micro-randomized trial.

   6.3.1. The test statistic. The above provides the generative model for use
in the simulation based sample size calculator. Next consider the choice of
the test statistic for use in calculating the sample size. In the test statistic, (6),

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
26                               W. DEMPSEY ET AL.
                                                                                                  
we set the time t reference probability as p̃t (1 | x) = x=0,1 π(x,1) 1.5/[(600 − 1.5 · 60)π(x,1) ] =
                                                          P

2 (1.5/[(600 − 1.5 · 60)]) = 5.88×10−3 (recall that the numerator of the weight,
wct , in (4) is p̃t (At | x) ∆−1
                              s=1 1[At+s = 0]). The probability, p̃t (1|x) is equal to the
                            Q
daily average number of treatments while in state x divided by the daily
average number of times the participant is available and in state x, marginal-
ized over the state x. In the denominator, the term 1.5·60 is subtracted off the
total number of decision points due to the availability constraints follow-
ing treatment; that is, the participant is unavailable for 60 decision points
following a treatment notification and we require on average 1.5 daily treat-
ments while the participant is classified in state x, so the remaining number
of decision points on average after taking into account this deterministic
constraint is approximately 600 − 1.5 · 60.
   The test statistic, (6), with the above choice of reference probabilities, and
the above generative model are used to generate the sample sizes in Table 2.
The column labeled, Sample Size, in this table provides the estimated sample
size to detect a specified alternative for the conditional proximal effect given
power of 80% and significance level 5.0% for the smoking cessation study.
Recall that our input for the day of maximal effect is day 5 and the input
for the initial conditional effect is 0 for both levels of the time-varying
variable Xt . The average treatment effects {β̄x = T−1 Tt=1 β(t; x)}x=0,1 are
                                                                   P
assumed equal across levels X and set to β̄; in the tables below three values
of β̄ are considered.
                                        Table 2
                      Estimated sample size, N, and achieved power.
                                       Sample size     Power
                          β̄ = 0.030       50           80.6
                          β̄ = 0.025       67           80.7
                          β̄ = 0.020      127           80.6



   6.4. Evaluation of Simulation Calculator for the Smoking Cessation Study.
First to assess the quality of the sample size calculator under an ideal set-
ting we perform 1000 simulations. Each simulation is based on the transi-
                             (1)
tion matrices P(0) and {Pd(t) }10d(t)=1
                                        , participant being unavailable for the hour
following treatment and at non-peak times, and the randomization prob-
ability pt (1 | Ht ). See the last column in Table 2. Each simulation consists
of generating data for N individuals and performing the hypothesis test
using equation (8) with the small-sample size adjustment described in Ap-
pendix E. Appendix D discusses the sample size calculations with respect
to marginal proximal effect for the smoking cessation study.

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                   27

   Recall the relatively simple generative model allowed us to use only a
very few statistics from a small data set, namely the data set described in
Section 6.1.1. This may lead to bias which is problematic if the bias results
in sample sizes for which the power to detect the desired effect is below the
specified power. Therefore, here we construct a feasible set of alternative
generative models to which the sample size calculator should be robust.
   First we evaluate the sensitivity of the calculator to the assumptions on
the form of the transition matrix P(0) . in the next section we assess robustness
to the form of the transition matrix and, how as a result of the assessment,
we make the calculator more robust to the assumptions.
   Second we evaluate the sensitivity of the calculator to deviations from a
Markovian generative model. Here we once again make use of the data set
described in Section 6.1.1.

   6.4.1. Misspecification of transition matrix P(0) . We start by testing robust-
ness of the sample size calculator to misspecification of the transition ma-
trix P(0) for the Markov chain, Vt , under no treatment; the treatment effect is
still correctly specified. We suppose the misspecification stems from noise
related to the use of sample moments from a small data set. Let B(,0 ) denote
an (, 0 )-ball around the inputs (W̄, Z̄); that is,

            B(,0 ) = { (W, Z) | kW − W̄k∞ ≤  and kZ − Z̄k∞ ≤ 0 }.

For each (W, Z) ∈ B(,0 ) , we wish to compute the achieved power under
the alternative generative model where Vt under no treatment evolves as a
Markov chain with transition matrix P constructed from inputs W and Z.
In practice, this is computationally prohibitive as the cardinality of B(,0 ) is
large. Simulation suggests power to be a smooth, non-increasing function
of both  and 0 , so instead we focus on computing power for the following
subset of B(,0 ) :

  Ω(,0 ) = {(W, Z) | W ∈ W̄ ± {(, −), (, )} and Z ∈ Z̄ ± (0 , −0 ), (0 , 0 ) .
                                                              

For each pair (W, Z) ∈ Ω(,0 ) we compute the associated transition matrix P;
                                                              (1)
then we compute the sequence of transition matrices Pd(t) which maintain
the correct alternative treatment effect. We define the power for B(,0 ) to
be the minimum power across (W, Z) ∈ Ω(,0 ) . Table 3 presents achieved
power under the previously calculated sample sizes for Ω(0.02,4) and Ω(0.01,2)
respectively. For both (, 0 ) = (0.01, 2) and (, 0 ) = (0.02, 4), the achieved
power is significantly below the pre-specified 80% level for all three choices
of the average treatment effect β̄.

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
28                               W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

                                           Table 3
            Misspecification of transition matrix P(0) : minimum achieved power
                                 over set of matrices in Ω,0
                                                (, 0 ) =
                                          (0.02, 4) (0.01, 2)
                             β̄ = 0.030     57.5          61.5
                             β̄ = 0.025     43.9          52.2
                             β̄ = 0.020     40.4          65.6


   6.4.2. Deviations from a time-homogenous transition matrix under no treat-
ment. Next we test robustness of the sample size calculator to a dif-
ferent type of misspecification of the transition matrix P(0) , that of time-
inhomogeneity; as before the treatment effect is still correctly specified. In
particular suppose that the assumed transition matrix, P(0) , is correct for
weekdays but not for weekends; in particular, suppose in reality that the
                                                             (0)
transition matrix under no treatment on the weekend is Pweekend , P(0) . The
weekend is defined as d(t) = 6 and 7 (i.e., all participants enter the study on
                           (0)
a Monday). We specify Pweekend via inputs (W̄weekend , Z̄weekend ) which we
set to two possible values

           ((0.04, 0.45), (10.9, 12.0)) or ((0.10, 0.60), (10.9, 12.0)) .
           |           {z            }     |           {z            }
                weekend inputs (1)                     weekend inputs (2)

Using the inputs we construct two alternate versions of what the true tran-
                (0)
sition matrix Pweekend might be. In the former, the individual is less likely to
enter a stress episode over the weekend; in the latter, the individual is more
likely to enter a stress episode over the weekend. In both cases, the average
episode lengths are assumed equal to W̄.
   To test the calculator, we generate data using the no-treatment transition
            (0)
matrices Pweekend (for the weekend) and P(0) (for the weekday). This data is
simulated so that the treatment effect used by the calculator is still correct
                                                            (1)
(e.g. we select the transition matrices under treatment, Pd(t) , to ensure this).
However the expectation E[wct (Ht+∆−1 )Yt,∆ | Ht , It = 1] will not be quadratic
in day-of-study.
   Table 4 presents achieved power under these alternative generative mod-
els. We see that the achieved power is below the pre-specified 80% threshold
in each case except for β̄ = 0.020 under weekend input 1. If the scientist
thought such deviations feasible, then the above analysis suggests for the
smoking cessation example that the sample size be set to ensure a least 80%
power over a set of feasible choices for time-inhomogeneous choices for the no-
treatment transition matrix.

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                   STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                       29

                                          Table 4
        Estimated power under generative model with time-inhomogeneous Markov chain.
                                             Estimated power
                                     Weekend Input 1 Weekend Input 2
                      β̄ = 0.030                79.2            69.8
                      β̄ = 0.025                72.5            66.0
                      β̄ = 0.020                81.5            76.4


   6.4.3. Deviations from a Markovian generative model. Here we use the data
set described in Section 6.1.1 to construct feasible deviations to the simple
Markovian generate model. In particular, we present an exploratory data
analysis where we over-fit the noisy, small data to build a more complex
semi-Markovian generative model. Due to the small size of this data set,
such complex alternatives may be due to noise and not reflect the behavior
of trial participants. However these complex alternatives can be used to
assess robustness of our sample size calculator. Therefore, after presenting
data analysis suggesting the semi-Markovian deviation, we then assess
robustness of the sample size calculator to this particular deviation.
   We start by considering the episodic transition rule. The Markovian
model assumes that the episode transitions only depend on the prior
episode classification. We test this by fitting a logistic regression with
episode classification as the response variable with lagged values of episode
classification as well as additional summaries of past history, including prior
episode durations and time of day. Analysis suggests that neither time of
day nor prior episode duration were statistically significant. We used for-
ward selection to determine the number of lagged values of episode clas-
sification. Using this procedure, we include two lagged values of episode
classification in our over-fit model. Table 5 presents the estimates of the lo-
gistic regression along with robust standard errors and confidence intervals.
The likelihood ratio test failed to reject the null when comparing this model
to the larger model in which all interactions among the lagged variables
were included (i.e., a nonparameteric Markovian model).
                                               Table 5
  Parameter estimates for the logistic regression. Response is indicator of current episode being a
                                           stress episode.
               Parameter           Estimate   Std. Error     95% LCL      95% LCL
               Intercept              −2.83         0.10        −3.03        −2.63
               1L Stress Ep.           2.75         0.20         2.37         3.14
               2L Stress Ep.           0.71         0.22         0.27         1.14

  The over-fit, two-lagged Markovian model leads to slightly distinct be-


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
30                                     W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

havior of the transition rules. For example, given the prior episode was a
stress episode, the probability of the next episode being a stress episode
ranges from 48.0% (prior episode was non-stress) to 65.2% (prior episode
was stress). Given the prior expisode was a non-stress episode, the probabil-
ity of the next episode being a stress episode ranges from 5.6% (prior episode
was non-stress) to 10.7% (prior two episodes was stress). Table 5 suggests
                                                                (1)         (1)
a different Markovian model in which the state is (Xt , Ut , Lt ) where Lt
denotes the classification of the prior episode.




               (a) Pre-peak duration                       (b) Post-peak duration

Fig 1: Histograms of duration for pre/post-peak durations. Empirical bayes
pdfs for exponential (red) and weibull (black) densities are overlayed.

   We next examine the pre and post peak durations. Under the Markovian
model, the duration of each period is exponentially distributed. Figure 1
shows histograms of the duration of pre and post peak durations in the ana-
lyzed subset of data along with empirical Bayes estimates of the probability
density functions under both exponential and Weibull distribution specifi-
cations. We recognize the durations are discrete and the above distributions
are continuous. These are fit for simplicity. When generating the episode
duration we generate a random variable from the continuous distribution
and take the integer part of that random variable. It is evident from the
figures that the Weibull distribution is more appropriate. This is supported
by data analysis presented below.
   Table 6 presents the parameter estimates for this over-fit model to the
duration data assuming a Weibull distributionc . Like the episodic transition
     c
         Models are fit to duration minus one as pre and post peak durations are guaranteed to

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                  STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                31

rules, the post and pre peak durations now depend on the current episode
classification as well as the prior episode classifications. The exploratory
data analysis suggests a semi-Markovian model in which the pre/post peak
                                                                         (1) (2)
durations are Weibull distributed, and the state is given by (Xt , Ut , Lt , Lt )
         (i)
where Lt denotes the classification of the ith prior episode.

                                           Table 6
                   Parameter estimates for each Weibull survival regression.
                              Pre-peak                                 Post-peak
  Parameter       Estimate    Std. Error    p-value        Estimate    Std. Error   p-value
  Intercept           1.78         0.016      0.000            1.59          0.02     0.000
  0L Stress Ep.      −0.20         0.037      0.000            0.45          0.07     0.000
  1L Stress Ep.          -             -          -           −0.21         0.058     0.004
  2L Stress Ep.          -             -          -           −0.16          0.07     0.020
  Log(scale)         −0.24         0.015      0.000           −0.31          0.05     0.000

   Next we test robustness of the sample size calculator to the semi-Markovian
deviations described above. To test the calculator, we generate data using
the no-treatment semi-Markov model specified in Appendix G. The data is
simulated so that the treatment effect used by the calculator is correct. See
Appendix G for a discussion of how this was achieved.
   Table 7 presents achieved power under these alternative generative mod-
els. We see that the achieved power is well above the pre-specified 80%
threshold in each case. Therefore the sample size calculator is robust to such
complex deviations from the Markovian generative model. For the given
the alternative effect β(t; x) and semi-Markov generative model we calculate
the standardized effects. These are provided in Table 15 in Appendix F.
                                         Table 7
                       Estimated power under semi-Markov generative.
                                            Estimated power
                               β̄ = 0.030               93.6
                               β̄ = 0.025               88.0
                               β̄ = 0.020               93.6



   6.5. Adjustments to the simulation-based calculator. In section 6.4 we eval-
uated the simulation calculator built in section 6.1. Here we make adjust-
ments to the simulation calculator to ensure robustness. First, we note that
the simulation calculator is robust to the potential semi-Markovian devia-
tion discussed in Section 6.4.3. Next we make the decision that we are not
be greater than one. Thus we are modeling the duration in the state above the minimum
value of one.


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
32                                 W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

concerned with lack of robustness to deviations from a time-homogenous
transition matrix as discussed in section 6.4.2. Therefore we focus on mak-
ing the simulation calculator robust to misspecification of Markov transition
matrix as discussed in section 6.4.1.
   Analysis in section 6.4.1 suggests for the smoking cessation example that
the sample size should be set to ensure at least 80% power over a set of feasible
choices for the transition matrix P(0) . We fix (, 0 ) = (0.01, 2) to be our tolerance
to misspecification of the inputs. For each set of inputs (W, Z) ∈ Ω0.01,2 , we
compute a sample size using the simulation calculator built in Section 6.1.
The maximum of this set of computed sample sizes is chosen to ensure
tolerance to misspecification of the transition matrix. Table 8 presents the
sample size under this procedure as well as the achieved minimum power
over the set Ω,0 .
                                          Table 8
          Estimated sample size, N, and computed power under  = 2 and 0 = 0.01.
                                   Sample size    Minimum Power
                      β̄ = 0.030       69              81.9
                      β̄ = 0.025      107              80.4
                      β̄ = 0.020      208              80.5

   We have now used the three-step procedure to form a sample size calcu-
lator for the smoking cessation study example. For illustration suppose we
wish to detect an average conditional treatment effect β̄ equal to 0.025. Based
on the above discussion a sample size, N, of 107 would be recommended to
ensure power above the pre-specified 80% threshold across a set of feasible
deviations from the assumed generative model.

   7. Discussion. In this paper we introduced the “stratified micro-randomized
trial” and provided a definition and discussion of proximal treatment effects
along with the dependence of this definition on a reference distribution. We
proposed a simulation-based approach for determining sample size and
used this approach to determine the sample size for a simplified version
of the MD2K smoking cessation study. We expect that similar trial designs
would be applicable in areas such as marketing and advertising in which
each client is tracked and provided incentives, e.g. treatments, repeatedly
over time, and it is of interest to determine in which contexts particular
treatments are most effective.
   While the focus here is sample size considerations, stratified micro-
randomized studies yield data for a variety of interesting secondary data
analyses. For example, understanding predictors of future availability is of
general interest as keeping participants engaged in the mobile health in-

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                  STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                   33

tervention is often of high concern. Moreover, there is interest in using the
data in constructing “dynamic treatment regimes” (e.g., just-in-time adap-
tive interventions [Spruijt-Metz and Nilsen, 2014]). The stratified micro-
randomized trial improves such analyses by reducing causal confounding.

References.
A. Boruvka, D. Almirall, K. Witkiewitz, and S.A. Murphy. Assessing time-varying causal
    effect moderation in mobile health. To appear in the Journal of the American Statistical
    Association, 2017.
J. Dallery, N. R. Cassidy, and R. B. Raiff. Single-case experimental designs to evaluate
    novel technology-based health interventions. J Med Internet Res, 15(2):e22, 2013. URL
    http://www.jmir.org/2013/2/e22/.
W. Dempsey, P. Liao, P. Klasnja I. Nahun-Shani, and S.A. Murphy. Randomised trials for the
    fitbit generation. Significance, 12(6):20–23, 2015.
P.J. Diggle, P. Heagerty, K.Y. Liang, and S.L. Zeger. Analysis of Longitudinal Data. Oxford
    Science Publications. Clarendon press, 2002.
E. Ertin, N. Stohs, S. Kumar, A. Raij, M. al’Absi, and S. Shah. Autosense: Unobtrusively
    wearable sensor suite for inferring the onset, causality, and consequences of stress in
    the field. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems,
    pages 274–287, New York, NY, USA, 2011.
C. Free, G. Phillips, L. Galli, L. Watson, L. Felix, P. Edwards, V. Patel, and A. Haines. The
    effectiveness of mobile-health technology-based health behaviour change or disease man-
    agement interventions for health care consumers: A systematic review. PLOS Medicine,
    10(1):1–45, 2013.
G. Hong and S. W. Raudenbush. Evaluating kindergarten retention policy. Journal of the
    American Statistical Association, 101(475):901–910, 2006.
H. Hotelling. The generalization of student’s ratio. Annals of Mathematical Sciences, 2(3):
    360–378, 1931.
K. Hovsepian, M. al’Absi, E. Ertin, T. Kamarck, M. Nakajima, and S. Kumar. cstress: Towards
    a gold standard for continuous stress assessment in the mobile environment. In Proceed-
    ings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing,
    UbiComp ’15, pages 493–504, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
G.W. Imbens and D.B. Rubin. Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and Biomedical Sciences: An
    Introduction. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, USA, 2015.
P. Klasnja, E.B. Hekler, S. Shiffman, A. Boruvka, D. Almirall, A. Tewari, and S.A. Murphy.
    Micro-randomized trials: An experimental design for developing just-in-time adaptive
    interventions. Health Psychology, 34:1220–1228, 2015.
R.L. Kravitz, N. Duan, eds, and the DEcIDE Methods Center N-of 1 Guidance Panel. Design
    and implementation of n-of-1 trials: A users guide. AHRQ Publication, 13(14), January
    2014. URL http://www.effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/N-1-Trials.cfm.
KY Liang and SL Zeger. Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear models.
    Biometrika, 73(1):13–22, 1986.
P. Liao, P. Klasjna, A. Tewari, and S.A. Murphy. Micro-randomized trials in mhealth. Statistics
    in Medicine, 35(12):1944–71, 2016.
LA. Mancl and TA. DeRouen. A covariance estimator for GEE with improved small-sample
    properties. Biometrics, 57(1):126–134, 2001.
S. McDonald, F. Quinn, R. Vieira, N. O’Brien, M. White, D.W. Johnston, and F.F. Sniehotta.
    The state of the art and future opportunities for using longitudinal n-of-1 methods in


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
34                                  W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

    health behaviour research: a systematic literature overview. Health Psychology Rev., 0(0):
    1–17, 2017.
J. Pearl. Causal inference in statistics: An overview. Statistics Surveys, 3:96–146, 2009.
J. Robins. A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with a sustained ex-
    posure period-application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect. Mathematical
    Modelling, 7(9):1393–1512, 1986.
DB. Rubin. Bayesian inference for causal effects: The role of randomization. The Annals of
    Statistics, 6(1):34–58, 1978.
N. Saleheen, A.A. Ali, S.M. Hossain, H. Sarker, S. Chatterjee, B. Marlin, E. Ertin, M. al’Absi,
    and S. Kumar. puffmarker: A multi-sensor approach for pinpointing the timing of first
    lapse in smoking cessation. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on
    Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, UbiComp ’15, pages 999–1010, New York, NY, USA,
    2015. ACM. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2750858.2806897.
H. Sarker, M. Tyburski, M.M. Rahman, K. Hovsepian, M. Sharmin, D.H. Epstein, K.L. Pre-
    ston, C.D. Furr-Holden, A. Milam, I. Nahum-Shani, M. al’Absi, and S. Kumar. Finding
    significant stress episodes in a discontinuous time series of rapidly varying mobile sensor
    data. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
    CHI ’16, pages 4489–4501, Santa Clara, California, USA, 2016. ACM.
H. Sarker, K. Hovsepian, S. Chatterjee, I. Nahum-Shani, S.A. Murphy, B. Spring, E. Ertin,
    M. al’Absi, M. Nakajima, and S. Kumar. From markers to interventions: The case of
    just-in-time stress intervention. In J.M. Regh, S.A. Murphy, and S. Kumar, editors, Mobile
    Health Sensors, Analytic Methods, and Applications. Springer International Publishing, 2017.
D. Spruijt-Metz and W. Nilsen. Dynamic models of behavior for just-in-time adaptive
    interventions. Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 13(46):28–35, 2014.
T. J. Vanderweele, G. Hong, S.M. Jones, and J.L. Brown. Mediation and spillover effects in
    group-randomized trials: A case study of the 4rs educational intervention. Journal of the
    American Statistical Association, 108(502):469–482, 2013.
Wikipedia. F1 score — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, 2017. URL https://en.
    wikipedia.org/wiki/F1_score. [Online; accessed 23-May-2017].


             APPENDIX A: RANDOMIZATION PROBABILITIES
   Here we provide a brief discussion of how the randomization probabil-
ities pt (a | Ht ) might be calculated. Suppose we require the participant to
receive on average a certain number of interventions per day at the various
levels of the time varying covariates, Nx for x ∈ {0, . . . , k} := [k]. In the smok-
ing cessation example, we have the time-varying covariate taking values
in X = {0 = Non-stressed, 1 = Stressed}. We aim for participants to receive
on average one and a half interventions per day when classified as stressed
and one and a half interventions per day when not classified as stressed.
Formally, our randomization algorithm is designed to satisfy the following:

                                     T                    
                                    X                    
(10)                           E    At It 1[Xti = x] = Nx
                                   i=1



imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                    STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                          35

for each x ∈ [k]. The inputs of the randomization algorithm are {Nx }, a
tuning parameter λ ∈ [0, 1], and a prediction, denoted by gt (x, r; h), at time t
of the number of times in state x and available during the remaining time r
given data h. The probability to assign treatment at time t given Ht is given
by

                        NXt − t−1
                              s=1 λs As + (1 − λs )ps (1 | Hs ) 1[Xs = Xt ]
                             P                                
(11)     pt (1 | Ht ) =
                                    1 + gt (Xt , T − t; Ht )
where λs = λt−s . In addition, we restrict the randomization probability
within the interval [, 1 − ].
  To derive (11) we start by re-writing equation (10) as
                      T                        T                         
                     X                      X                         
                 E    At 1{Xt =x}  = E 
                                                  pt (1 | Ht )1{Xt =x} 
                            t=1                        t=1

or for λt ∈ (0, 1),
                T                         T                                            
               X                       X                                          
          E    At 1{Xt =x}  = E     λt At + (1 − λt )pt (1 | Ht ) 1{Xt =x} 
                 t=1                       t=1

The conditional expectation of the latter given the current history Hs is
      T                                                    
     X                                                  
 E       λt At + (1 − λt )pt (1 | Ht ) 1{Xt =x} | Hs 
        t=1
  s−1
                                                                        T                               
  X                                                                     X                              
=         λt At + (1 − λt )pt (1 | Ht ) 1{Xt =x} + ps (1 | Hs ) + E 
                                       
                                                                            pt (1 | Ht )1{Xt =x} | Hs 
   t=1                                                                   t=s+1

    We aim to find ps (1 | Hs ) such that Nx ≈ E[ Tt=1 λt At + (1 − λt )pt (1 | Ht ) 1{Xt =x} |Hs ]
                                                        P                                    
for each x ∈ [k]. However, at the end of s decision time, we do not have ac-
cess to future randomization probabilities, i.e. pt (1 | Ht ) under Xt = x for
t ≥ s + 1, which appears in the last term above. As such, we approximate
pt (1 | Ht ) by ps (1 | Hs ) whenever Xt = x, e.g. using the same randomization
probabilities for future time points, and obtain ps (1 | Hs ) by solving:
        s−1
                                                                           T                               
        X                                                                  X                              
Nx =          λt At + (1 − λt )pt (1 | Ht ) 1{Xt =x} + ps (1 | Hs ) + E 
                                                                             ps (1 | Hs )1{Xt =x} | Hs 
         t=1                                                                  t=s+1

That is,
                                       Ps−1 
                                        t=1 λt At + (1 − λt )pt (1 | Ht ) 1{Xt =x}
                                                                         
                                Nx −
               ps (1 | Hs ) =                   hP                    i
                                          1 + E Tt=s+1 1{Xt =x} | Hs

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
36                                      W. DEMPSEY ET AL.
                                                               hP                i
The remaining problem is to approximate gt (1, T−s; Hs ) = E Tt=s+1 1{Xt =1} | Hs ,
which is, at time s, the expected total number of future, available time points
classified as x given the current history. This approximation is essentially
a prediction problem. There are a variety of approaches one can take de-
pending on the data available. These prediction approaches may use dis-
tributional assumptions, such as Markovian assumptions, on Xt if there is
only a small amount of data to form these predictions or can employ more
black box predictions if there is a great deal of data. In the actual smoking
cessation study, there was only a small amount of pre-existing data so a
Markovian model was used to form the predictions. For the smoking ces-
sation study example, we set N = (1.65, 2.15), λ = 0.3,  = 0.001 and the
remainder function is set according to following rule:
     • If (T − t) − Nx · 60 < 60 then set gt (x, T − t; Ht ) = (T − t)πx ,
     • else if (T − t) − Nx · 60 < 120 then set gt (x, T − t; Ht ) = (T − t − 60)πx ,
     • else set gt (x, T − t; Ht ) = (T − t − 120)πx ,
where π is the stationary distribution of the markov transition matrix P(0) .
The reason for this complex rule is we must incorporate the fact that a
participant is unavailable for the hour following delivery of an intervention.

                     APPENDIX B: TECHNICAL ARGUMENTS
     B.1. Treatment effects under potential outcomes framework.

   Proof of Lemma 3.3. We establish Lemma 3.3 for the marginal treatment
effect. The argument for the conditional treatment effect follows from a
similar argument.
   For a ∈ {0, 1}, we consider the
                                                                                    
                 Y t−1                                                           
                           p j (a j |H j (ā j−1 )) Yt,∆ (āt−1 , a, 0̄)It (āt−1 )
                                                                                  
            E 
                                                                                     
                       j=1
                                                                                                      
                 t−1
                       Y                                                                               
          = E        p j (a j |H j (ā j−1 )) It (āt−1 )E Yt,∆ (āt−1 , a, 0̄) | Ht (āt−1 ) 
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                       
                      j=1


Since the history Ht includes availability at time t. By consistency, Ht (Āt−1 ) =
Ht and It (āt−1 ) = It so the above is equal to
                                                                                    
                          Yt−1                                                   
                                   p j (a j |H j ) It E Yt,∆ (āt−1 , a, 0̄) | Ht 
                                                                                   
(12)
                                                                                     
                      E 
                                                                                     
                               j=1


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                         STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                                              37

Sequential ignorability implies that

                                         E Yt,∆ (āt−1 , a, 0̄) | Ht
                                                                    

                                       = E Yt,∆ (āt−1 , a, 0̄) | Ht , At = a
                                                                            

Sequential ignorability also implies that E[Yt,∆ (āt−1 , a, 0̄) | Ht+k ]E[1At+k =0 | Ht+k ]
is equal to E[Yt,∆ (āt−1 , a, 0̄)1At+k =0 | Ht+k ]. We apply this to show

                  E Yt,∆ (āt−1 , at , 0̄) | Ht , At = a
                                                        

                = E E Yt,∆ (āt−1 , at , 0̄) | Ht+1 | Ht , At = a
                                                                   
                   "                                                                     #
                                                       E[1At+1 =0 | Ht+1 ]
                = E E Yt,∆ (āt−1 , at , 0̄) | Ht+1                         | Ht , At = a
                      
                                                           pt+1 (0 | Ht+1 )
                   " "                                                 #              #
                                                   1At+1 =0
                = E E Yt,∆ (āt−1 , at , 0̄)                     | Ht+1 | Ht , At = a
                                              pt+1 (0 | Ht+1 )

Iteratively applying this argument, we end up with the following expecta-
tion
   1                "         "                                                    #      #
        At+1 =0                                           1At+∆−1 =0                                     
E                   E · · · E Yt,∆ (āt−1 , at , 0̄)                        | Ht+∆−1 | Ht+1 | Ht , At = a
   pt+1 (0 | Ht+1 )                                  pt+∆−1 (0 | Ht+∆−1 )
                                                                               
                              t+∆−1 1
                             Y        A j =0                                  
                      = E                       Yt,∆ (āt−1 ) | Ht , At = a
                                                                                
                                  p j (0 | H j )                                
                                       j=t+1

Plugging this result into equation (12), we have
                                                                                              
           Yt−1                         t+∆−1
                                                 Y 1A j =0                                         
                    p j (a j |H j ) It E                       Yt,∆ (āt−1 ) | Ht , At = a  .
                                                                                               
       E 
                                                  p j (0 | H j )                               
                      j=1                           j=t+1

Summing over all potential outcomes āt−1 and normalizing yields
                    Q                         
                           t−1
                                                                                                                           
     X                       p
                           j=1 j j (a   |H j It
                                             )                  t+∆−1  Y 1A j =0                                            
                                                                                                Yt,∆ (āt−1 ) | Ht , At = a 
                                                                                                                          
  E                       Q                         E 
                   P           t−1                                            p j (0 | H j )
           āt−1 E[ āt−1      j=1 p j (a j |H j ) It ]
                                                                                                                            
                                                                        j=t+1
                    Q                         
                           t−1
                                                                                                                                     
                               p   (a   |H   )   I                     t+∆−1     1
       X                 j=1   j    j    j       t                    Y           A j =0                                            
= E                                                                                                             ,    =            =
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                Y    ( ā   ) | H    A    a      | I   1
                                                                                                                                    
                                                            E                                  t,∆ t−1         t    t         t
                                                                              p          H
                                                                                                                                        
                E[
                   P          Qt−1
                                     p   (a   |H     )  I t ]
                                                                   
                                                                                j (0   |    j )                                            
           āt−1     āt−1     j=1 j j             j                    j=t+1
                                                                               
         t+∆−1
                 Y 1A j =0                                                      
= E E                           Yt,∆ | Ht , At = a | It = 1 .
                                                                             
                   p j (0 | H j )                                               
              j=t+1



imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
38                                      W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

In the final equation, the outer expectation is with respect to the history Ht
conditional on It = 1. That is, over both past actions As and past observa-
tions Os for s < t.
   The above shows
                      hQ                                                                               i
                            t−1
                  E         j=1  p j (a  j |H j ( ā j−1 ))   Y    t,∆ ( āt−1  ,  a,   0̄)I t (ā t−1 )
                                hQ                                                       i
                                       t−1
                             E          j=1  p   j (a j |H j ( ā j−1  ))   I t ( āt−1   )
                                                                                                   
                           t+∆−1
                      Y 1A j =0                                                                 
                =E E                                Yt,∆ | Ht , At = a | It = 1
                                                                                                 
                                   p j (0 | H j )                                                   
                               j=t+1

which completes the proof.                                                                             

   B.2. Asymptotic consistency and normality. We provide a detailed
proof of asymptotic normality and consistency in the conditional setting for
the weighted-centered least squares estimator. The proof in the marginal
setting follows in a similar manner with only minor modification. For ease
of notation, we write Ep to denote expectations where the distribution over
actions is with respect to the randomization probability Pp , and Eη to de-
note expectations where the distribution over actions is with respect to the
chosen reference distribution – that is, providing a prompt at time t with
probability p̃t (1 | Xt ) followed by no prompt over the next hour.

  Lemma B.1 (Change from randomization probability to reference distri-
bution). For any function φ(Ht+k ) of the history up to time t + k, for k ≥ 0,
                 h                         i       h            i
              Ep wct (Ht+∆−1 )φ(Ht+k ) | Ht = Eη φ(Ht+k ) | Ht

where
                                        p̃t (At |Xt ) ∆−1 1[At+s = 0]
                                                     Q
                         wct (Ht+∆−1 ) = Q∆−1 s=1                     .
                                              s=0 pt+s (At+s | Ht+s )




imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                   STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                   39

  Proof of Lemma B.1. Suppose ∆ = 2. Then
         h                               i
 Ep wct (Ht+∆−1 )φ(Ht+k ) | Ht
                                 1[At+1 = 0]
         "                  "                                          #    #
            p̃t (At |Xt )
=Ep                       E                     φ(Ht+k ) | Ht+1 , At+1 | Ht
            pt (At | Ht ) pt+1 (At+1 | Ht+1 )
                                                                                                        
       p̃t (At |Xt ) X           1(a =   0)                            h                       i
=E                                             π(At+1 = a | Ht+1 )E φ(Ht+k ) | Ht+1 , At+1 = a | Ht 
                                                                                                         
         pt (At | Ht ) a π(At+1 = a | Ht+1 )
                                                                           
      p̃t (At |Xt ) X                     h                          i
=E                        1[a = 0] · E φ(Ht+k ) | Ht+1 , At+1 = a | Ht 
                                                                            
         pt (At | Ht ) a
       "                                                             #
          p̃t (At |Xt )                 h                     i
=E                      1[At+1 = 0]E φ(Ht+k ) | Ht+1 , At+1 | Ht
         pt (At | Ht )
  X p̃t (At = a|Xt )                            h                 h                  i      i
=                             pt (At = a | Ht )E 1[At+1 = 0]E φ(Ht+k ) | Ht+1 , At+1 | Ht
  a
           pt (At = a | Ht )
  X                            h                           i
=          p̃t (At = a|Xt )E 1[At+1 = 0]φ(Ht+k ) | Ht
       a

Applying this argument iteratively leads
                            ∆
                                                                  
 X                     Y                                           h              i
   p̃t (At = a|Xt )E    1[At+j = 0] φ(Ht+k ) | Ht , At = a = Eη φ(Ht+k ) | Ht
                                                                   
                                                                   
   a                       j=1

as desired.                                                                                    

   Lemma B.1 yields many important corollaries. First,

                         Ep [wct (Ht+∆−1 ) | Ht ] = Eη [1 | Ht ] = 1,

which implies Ep [wct (Ht+∆−1 ) | Xt ] = 1. Also, define

                  Ep [wct (Ht+∆−1 )Yt,∆ | Ht ] = Eη [Yt,∆ | Ht ] = α(t; Ht )

   Lemma B.2.         For any k ≥ 0 and function φ(Ht+k ), we have
                                      
Ep [wct (Ht+∆−1 ) At − p̃t (1 | Xt ) φ(Ht+k ) | Xt ]
                                        h                                                            i
    = p̃t (1 | Xt )(1 − p̃t (1 | Xt ))E Eη [φ(Ht+k ) | Ht , At = 1] − Eη [φ(Ht+k ) | Ht , At = 0] | Xt

In particular, we have Ep [wct (Ht+∆−1 )Yt,∆ (At − p̃t (1 | Xt )) | Xt = x] = p̃t (1 | Xt )(1−
p̃t (1 | Xt ))β(t; Xt ). Note that if φ(Ht+k ) is a constant function of Ht and At then the
above expression is equal to zero.

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
40                                         W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

     Proof.
 Ep [wct (Ht+∆−1 ) At − p̃t (1 | Xt ) φ(Ht+k ) | Xt ]
                                              
                                                  Q∆−1
                                                              1[At+s = 0]
                                                                                                           
        p̃t (At |Xt )                                   s=1
=Ep                                                                         φ(Ht+k ) | Ht , At  | Xt 
                                                                                                        
                         At − p̃t (1 | Xt ) Ep  Q∆−1
           pt (At |Ht )
                                                      s=1 pt+s (At+s | Ht+s )
                                                                      Q∆−1                                                         
                                                                                          =
                                                                                                                            
         X p̃t (At | Xt )                                                      1[A t+s     0]                                      
=Ep                           pt (At | Ht ) a − p̃t (1 | Xt ) Ep  Q∆−1s=1                     φ(Ht+k ) | Ht , At = a | Xt 
                                                                    
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                     
                  pt (At | Ht )                                              p    (A     | H     )                                   
          a∈{0,1}                                                         s=1 t+s     t+s     t+s
                                        h    h                          i      h                              i i
=p̃t (1 | Xt ) 1 − p̃t (1 | Xt ) E Eη φ(Ht+k ) | Ht , At = 1 − Eη φ(Ht+k ) | Ht , At = 0 | Xt
                                    

If φ(Ht+k ) = wt+1,∆ Yt,∆ , then by Lemma B.1 the above equals
                                    h                                                             i
    p̃t (1 | Xt ) 1 − p̃t (1 | Xt ) E Eη Yt,∆ | Ht , At = 1 − Eη Yt,∆ | Ht , At = 0 | Xt
                                                                                         

                                       Q∆−1 1[A = 0]                                          
                                                  s=1      t+s
 = p̃t (1 | Xt ) 1 − p̃t (1 | Xt ) E Ep  Q∆−1                         φ(Ht+k ) | Ht , At = 1
                                                                                              

                                                s=1 pt+s (At+s | Ht+s )
                                        Q∆−1
                                               s=1 1[At+s = 0]
                                                                                                   
                                                                     φ(Ht+k ) | Ht , At = 0 | Xt
                                                                                           
                                  −Ep  Q∆−1
                                        
                                             s=1 pt+s (At+s | Ht+s )
 = p̃t (1 | Xt ) 1 − p̃t (1 | Xt ) β(t; Xt )
                                   

as desired.                                                                                                   

   Lemma B.2 implies the function p̃t must be conditionally independent
of Ht given Xt in order to guarantee a consistent estimator of the projection
of β?
    c.

   Lemma B.3. The solutions (α̂, β̂) that minimize equation (4) are consistent
estimators for:
                 T                       −1  T                           
                X                                 X
         ?
                                                                          
        α = E                  0
                       gt (Ht )gt (Ht )  E    gt (Ht )α(t; Ht )
                         t=1                                  t=1
                    T                                    −1  T                                      
                   X                                              X
          β? = E 
                                                                                                     
                          σ̃2t (Xt ) ft (Xt ) ft (Xt )0  E    σ̃2t (Xt ) ft (Xt )β(t; Xt )
                         t=1                                           t=1

where σ̃2t (Xt ) = p̃t (1 | Xt )(1 − p̃t (1 | Xt )).

   Proof. The solutions (α̂, β̂) that minimize equation (4) are consistent es-
timators for the solutions that minimize the following
             T                                                                        
            X                                                                    2 
                wct (Ht+∆ ) Yt,∆ − gt (Ht )0 α? − (At − p̃t (1 | Xt )) ft (Xt )0 β? 
                           
       E 
               t=1

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                         STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                       41

Differentiating the above equation with respect to α? yields a set of p esti-
mating equations.
             T                                                                                  
            X
                wct (Ht+∆−1 ) Yt,∆ − gt (Ht )0 α? − (At − p̃t (1 | Xt )) ft (Xt )0 β? gt (Ht )
                                                                                               
0q0 = Ep 
               t=1
        T
        X
              E Ep wct (Ht+∆−1 ) Yt,∆ − gt (Ht )0 α? − (At − p̃t (1 | Xt )) ft (Xt )0 β? | Ht gt (Ht )
               h h                                                                         i         i
    =
        t=1

By Lemma B.2, Ep wct (Ht+∆ )(At − p̃t (1 | Xt )) ft (Xt )0 β? | Ht = 0. Therefore, we
                                                                 
have,
                         T
                         X
                               E Ep wct (Ht+∆−1 ) Yt,∆ − gt (Ht )0 α? | Ht gt (Ht )
                                h h                                     i         i
              0q0 =
                         t=1
                         XT
                               E gt (Ht )α(t; Ht ) − gt (Ht )gt (Ht )0 α?
                                h                                         i
                     =
                         t=1

and we have the desired equivalence. The second equality is due to Lemma B.1.
Now differentiating with respect to β? yields
             T                                                                                                       
            X
                wct (Ht+∆−1 ) Yt,∆ − gt (Ht )0 α? − (At − p̃t (1 | Xt )) ft (Xt )0 β? (At − p̃t (1 | Xt )) ft (Xt )
                                                                                                                    
0qc = Ep 
               t=1

By Lemma B.2, we have Ep wct (Ht+∆−1 )(At − p̃t (1 | Xt ))Yt,∆ | Ht = p̃t (1 | Xt )(1−
                                                                               
p̃t (1 | Xt ))βη (t; Xt ), and Ep wt (Ht+∆−1 )(At − p̃t (1 | Xt ))gt (Ht ) | Ht = 0. The final
                                                                              
term satisfies
           h                                    i
       Ep wt (Ht+∆−1 )(At − p̃t (1 | Xt ))2 | Ht = p̃t (1 | Xt )(1 − p̃t (1 | Xt )) = σ̃2t (Xt )

by Lemma B.1. Then we have
                         T
                         X
                                E σ̃2t (Xt ) ft (Xt )βη (t; Xt ) − σ̃2t (Xt ) ft (Xt ) ft (Xt )0 β?
                                 h                                                                  i
                0q =
                          t=1

as desired.                                                                                             

  Proof of Asymptotic Normality in Lemma 4.1. We now consider the is-
sue of asymptotic normality. First, let

                         ct = Yt,∆ − gt (Ht )0 α? − (At − p̃t (Xt )) ft (Xt )0 β? ,

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
42                                            W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

θ̂ = (α̂, β̂), and θ? = (α? , β? ). Since Xt ⊂ Ht we define ht (Ht )0 = (gt (Ht )0 , (At −
p̃t (1 | Xt )) ft (Xt )0 ). Then

√               √   T
                      X                                −1     T
                                                                 X                           
            ?
    N(θ̂ − θ ) = N PN   wct (Ht+∆−1 )ht (Ht )ht (Ht )0
                                                              PN   Yt,∆ wct (Ht+∆−1 )ht (Ht )
                                    t=1                                          t=1
                    T
                     X                                
                                                    0 ?
                − PN   wct (Ht+∆−1 )ht (Ht )ht (Ht ) θ
                            t=1
                 √   T
                      X                                 −1
                = N E    wct (Ht+∆−1 )ht (Ht )ht (Ht )0
                                  t=1
                        T
                          X                                 
                     PN         wct (Ht+∆−1 )ct ht (Ht )         + op (1)
                          t=1

By definitions of α? and β? and the previous consistency argument
                                        T                             
                                       X                             
                                  E    wct (Ht+∆−1 )ct ht (Ht ) = 0
                                        t=1

Then under moments conditions, we have asymptotic normality with vari-
ance Σθ given by
                       T                                     −1
                      X                                     
            Σθ = E      wct (Ht+∆−1 )ht (Xt )ht (Xt )0 
                        t=1
                    T                               T
                                                                                       
                   X                               X                                 
              E      wct (Ht+∆−1 )ct ht (Xt ) ×     wct (Ht+∆−1 )ct ht (Xt )0 
                      t=1                                   t=1
                     T                                  −1
                    X                                  
                                                     0
                E   wct (Ht+∆−1 )ht (Xt )ht (Xt ) 
                      t=1

Due to centering and the previous lemma, the expectation of the matrix
wct (Ht+∆−1 )ht (Xt )ht (Xt )0 is block diagonal and therefore, we can extract the
sub-covariance matrix Σβ “cleanly” from the above formula. Using this, we




imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                    STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                 43

have
         T                                                       −1
        X                                                       
Σβ =    E[(At − p̃t (Xt ))2 wt (Ht+∆ ) ft (Xt ) ft (Xt )0 ]
         t=1
       T
      X                                           T
                                                   X                                           
                                                                                             0
    ·E   wt (Ht+∆ )ct (At − p̃t (Xt )) ft (Xt ) ×   wt (Ht+∆ )ct (At − p̃t (Xt )) ft (Xt )
          t=1                                               t=1
          T                                                      −1
         X                                                      
    ·    E[(At − p̃t (Xt ))2 wt (Ht+∆ ) ft (Xt ) ft (Xt )0 
        t=1

as desired.                                                                                   

   Proof of asymptotic distribution of TcN . By the above proof, we have
                         √
                           N(β̂c − β?
                                    c ) → N(0, Σ)
                                       0


where Σ = Q−1 WQ−1 , as defined in Lemma 4.1. Since a quadratic form of
the normal distribution has a chi-square distribution, we have

                                N(β̂c − β?             ?
                                         c ) Σ (β̂c − βc ) → χqc .
                                            0 −1              2


TcN replaces Σ with a consistent estimator Σ̂. By independence of the co-
variance estimator and the equation above, we have
                                ? 0 −1         ?
                     c N(β̂c − βc ) Σ̂ (β̂c − βc ) ∼ F(qc , N − q − qc ).
                                                    a
                    q−1                                          0


For large N, we have the F-distribution with degrees of freedom qc and
N − q0 − q is well approximated by a multiple of the χ2 -distribution with
degree of freedom qc ; that is, if XN ∼ F(qc , N − q0 − qc ) then Y = limN→∞ qc XN
has a chi-square distribution with degrees of freedom qc .
   For large N, asymptotic normality implies β̂c has an approximate normal
distribution with mean β?   c and variance Σ/N. This implies that β̂c Σ β̂c
                                                                              −1

has an approximate non-central chi-square distribution with degrees of
freedom qc and non-centrality parameter β?         −1 ?
                                                c Σ βc . That is,

                                N · β̂c Σ−1 β̂c ∼a χ2qc (Nβ?  −1 ?
                                                           c Σ βc )

where ∼a means approximately in distribution for large N. As Σ̂−1 is a
consistent estimator of Σ, this implies that

                    TcN = Nβ̂c Σ̂−1 β̂c ∼a qc F(qc , N − q0 − q; β?  −1 ?
                                                                  c Σ βc ).

That is, q1c TcN has an approximate non-central F-distribution.                               

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
44                                    W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

APPENDIX C: TRADEOFF BETWEEN APPROXIMATION ERROR AND
                DEGREES OF FREEDOM FOR SAMPLE SIZE
                          CALCULATIONS
   This section provides a discussion of two tradeoffs involved in attempting
to reduce the required sample size for a given power. The first tradeoff
involves the complexity of the projection of the treatment effect and the
second tradeoff involves the complexity of the projection involving the
control variables. For expositional simplicity, we discuss the tradeoffs in the
case of sample size calculations for marginal treatment effects. We make the
simplifying assumptions that the proximal response is a known function
of the participant’s data within a window of length ∆ = 1 and that the
participant is always available for treatment (i.e., It = 1 for all t = 1, . . . , T).
   In the marginal setting, the sample size is the smallest integer N that
satisfies:
                                  N − (q0 + 1) −1
                                                                           !
(13)     1 − Fqm ,N−(q0 +qm );Nγm               F                 (1 − α0 ) ≥ 1 − β0 .
                                  N − (q0 + qm ) qm ,N−(q +qm );0
                                                         0




where γm is the non-centrality parameter equal to (β?             ?
                                                    m ) Qm Wm Qm βm with
                                                       0    −1


               T
              X                                          T
                                                          X                                     
     Wm = E           wmt (Ht ) mt (At − p̃t (1)) ft ×         wmt (Ht ) mt (At − p̃t (1)) ft0 ,
                t=1                                       t=1
                             T
                             X                                                        p̃t (At )
                      Qm =         p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) ft ft0 , and wmt (Ht ) =                 ,
                                                                                   pt (At | Ht )
                             t=1

and mt = Yt,∆ − gt (Ht )0 α?                    0 ?
                            m − (At − p̃t (1)) ft βm . Fd1 ,d2 ;λ and Fd1 ,d2 ;λ denote
                                                                       −1

the cumulative and inverse distribution functions respectively for the non-
central F-distribution with degrees of freedom (d1 , d2 ) and non-centrality
parameter λ.
  Define the error term, t , by

                 t = Yt,∆ − E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] − (At − p̃t (1))β(t).

The error term has conditional mean zero; that is, E[t | Ht , At ] = 0. See
Appendix C.1 for the derivation. Importantly we can write mt in terms of
the error term t :

    mt = t + E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] − gt (Ht )0 α?                           0 ?
                                                                                
                                                   m + (At − p̃t (1)) β(t) − ft βm

        = t + eα (t; Ht ) + (At − p̃t (1))eβ (t).


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                     STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                              45

The term eα (t; Ht ) is the approximation error related to the complexity of the
L2 projection involving the control variables. The term eβ (t) is the approxi-
mation error related to the complexity of the L2 projection of the treatment
effect.
   The goal of the remainder of this section is to provide an intuitive under-
standing of the tradeoff among the errors due to L2 projections (i.e., eα (t; Ht )
and eβ (t)), sample size, and power. We start by forming an approximate
sample size formula based on equation (13). In particular when N and qm
are large the sample size can be approximated by
                                            q                           
         γm 2 · z1−β0 + 2qm z1−α0 + 2z1−β0 z1−β + qm /2 + 2qm z1−α0 .
           −1      2
                            p                                   p
(14)                                             2
                                                            0


where zc = Φ−1 (c) is the inverse-normal distribution evaluated at c ∈ (0, 1).
See Lemma C.1 in Appendix C.1 for technical details.
  Given the approximate sample size formula, we next discuss the tradeoff
involving the complexity of the projection of the treatment effect. We start
by making three additional assumptions:
    • The control variables are correctly specified; that is, E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] =
      gt (Ht )0 α?
                 m (i.e., eα (t; Ht ) ≡ 0).
    • The error term t satisfies the second moment condition E[2t | Ht , At ] =
      σ2 .
    • p̃t (1) = E[pt (1 | Ht )].
Under these conditions, the non-centrality parameter γm can be approxi-
mated by

                               β?                                        β?
                                  ! 0 X                                
                    σ 2                  T
                                                                                !
                                  m                                           m
            
                                                                       0
(15)                          
               Θ̄σ2 + Ψ̄ē2  σ 
                                            p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) ft ft 
                                                                              σ
                                      
                           β               t=1
                  PT
where ē2β = T1           2
                     t=1 eβ (t), and

             T
                   p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1))3 (1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1)3
                 "                                             #                       !
           1X
      Ψ̄ =     E                        +                        − (1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1)
           T             pt (1 | Ht )      1 − pt (1 | Ht )
               t=1

and
                                T   "                                #
                              1X           p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1))
                         Θ̄ =     E
                              T       pt (1 | Ht )(1 − pt (1 | Ht ))
                                  t=1

It turns out that since p̃t (1) = E[pt (1 | Ht )], then Ψ̄ ≥ 0 and Ψ̄ = 0 if pt (1 | Ht ) =
p̃t (1) = 12 . See Lemma C.2 in Appendix C.1 for technical details.

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
46                                       W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

   We now combine equations (15) and (14). For large values of qm the
sample size is approximately

                      (z1−β0 + z1−α0 ) 2qm                            ēβ 2 
                                       p                                ! 
                                                            Θ̄ + Ψ̄         .
                                                           
(16)    Nu
             (β? /σ) T p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) ft f 0 (β? /σ)             σ 
                    P                                      
                   m         t=1                                 t     m

                                                          −1 T f 0 (β? /σ), we have
                                                             P
For a fixed average projected treatment effect          T      t=1 t m
seen, in simulation, little variation in (β?                       − p̃t (1)) ft ft0 (β?
                                                    P                              
                                                      T
                                             m /σ)0       p̃
                                                      t=1 t  (1)(1                        m /σ)
as a function of qm . So suppose we fix this average projected treatment
effect at some value. Then the tradeoff between the error in approximat-
ing the treatment effect and the dimension of the number, qm , of strati-
fication
      variables          used in this approximation is represented by the term
√               ēβ 2 
  qm Θ̄ + Ψ̄ σ . This is quite interesting as even when the size of approx-
                                                                          √           ēβ 2
imation error, ēβ can be made sufficiently close to 0 so that qm Ψ̄ σ is
                       √
small, the term qm Θ̄ remains. This argues for our recommendation that
one use the least complex (e.g. smallest qm ) projection for the treatment
effect that is reasonable in forming the test statistic that determines the sam-
ple size. Also if the randomization probabilities were set to 1/2 then Ψ = 0,
again supporting our recommendation of selecting the least complex pro-
jection that is feasible.
   We now turn to the tradeoff involving the complexity of the projection
with respect to the control variables. We replace the assumptions in the
prior discussion with the following two assumptions:
     • The marginal treatment effect is correctly specified; that is, β(t) = ft0 β
     • The error term t satisifes the following second moment condition:
       E[2t | Ht , At ] = σ2 .
Under these conditions, the non-centrality parameter γm is approximated
by
                          # ? !0  T
                                                                   β?
                                                                  
                   σ2       βm X
             "                                                          !
                                                               0      m
                                     p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) ft ft 
               Θ̄σ2 + Ξ̄α    σ                                       σ
                                 
                                                t=1

where Ξ̄α = T1 Tt=1 Ξα (t), and
              P

                                   "                                                 #
                                                           p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1))
                    Ξα (t) = E         e2α (t; Ht )                                    .
                                                      pt (1 | Ht )(1 − pt (1 | Ht ))

Θ̄ is as previously defined. See Lemma C.3 in Appendix C.1 for technical
details.

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                 STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                              47

     The above approximation of the non-centrality parameter γm implies
that the approximate sample size formula given by equation (14) has a
multiplicative constant equal to (Θ̄+ Ξ̄σ2α ). By including appropriately chosen
control variables, one can hope for a steep reduction in eα (t; Ht )2 and thus
in Ξ̄α . For fixed sample size N, significance level α0 , and dimension qm , this
leads to an increase in power. The error reduction’s impact on power is less
dependent on design (choice of randomization probabilities and choice of
p̃t ) unlike the impact of error ē2β from the prior discussion. The dimension q0
does not appear in equation (14) as we have assumed N − q0 − qm  0 but q0
does appear in the small sample analog (13). Fixing all other quantities, the
sample size N increases with increasing q0 in (13). This discussion shows
the benefit of choosing a small number of control variables that are strongly
correlated with the proximal response. In the smoking cessation study, for
example, a natural control variable is the fraction of time stressed in the
hour prior to time t. This low dimensional (q0 = 1) control variable may
substantially lower Ξ̄α leading to an increase in power for fixed sample
size.

   C.1. Technical details. The following derivation shows that the error
term t has conditional mean zero (i.e., E[t | Ht , At ] = 0). We do this by
showing that we can write E[Yt,∆ | Ht , At ] as a function of E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ |
Ht ], β(t), and p̃t (1):

      E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] = p̃t (1)E[Yt,∆ | Ht , At = 1] + (1 − p̃t (1))E[Yt,∆ | Ht , At = 0]
   ⇒ E[Yt,∆ | Ht , At = 0] = E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] − p̃t (1)β(t)
E[Yt,∆ | Ht , At = 1] − β(t) = E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] − p̃t (1)β(t)
   ⇒ E[Yt,∆ | Ht , At = 1] = E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] + (1 − p̃t (1))β(t)
        ⇒ E[Yt,∆ | Ht , At ] = E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] + (At − p̃t (1))β(t).

  We now deduce the approximate sample size formula (14).

  Lemma C.1. Given a specified significance level α0 , power 1 − β0 , and
dimensions q0 and qm , then when qm and sample size N are sufficiently large
equation (13) implies that N can be approximated by
                                                q                            
      γ−1              +               +                +     /2 +        1−α0 .
                  2
                         p                                         p
            2 · z          2q   z        2z       z 2     q         2q   z
       m          1−β0        m   1−α0      1−β0    1−β
                                                      0
                                                            m          m


where zc = Φ−1 (c) is the inverse-normal distribution evaluated at c ∈ (0, 1).



imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
48                                     W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

  Sketch Proof. The following is a sketch proof based on asymptotic nor-
mal approximations for non-central chi-squared distributions. A complete
proof requires careful consideration of uniform convergence results.
  We know that

                       N(β̂m − β?                       ?
                                m ) Q̂m Ŵm Q̂m (β̂m − βm ) → χqm .
                                   T      −1                   2


Thus in large samples the distribution of the test statistic TmN = β̂Tm Q̂m Ŵm
                                                                              −1 Q̂ β̂
                                                                                   m m
has an approximate χqm (Nγm ) distribution where γm = (βm ) Q̂m Ŵm Q̂m β?
                       2                                       ? T        −1
                                                                                  m.
Thus sample size N is the smallest integer that satisfies
                                                   
                  1 − Fχ2q (Nγm ) F−1
                                   χ2 (0)
                                          (1 − α 0 ≥ 1 − β0 .
                                                  )
                                   m                 qm


Fχ2 (λ) and F−12      denote the cumulative and inverse distribution functions
     d       χd (λ)
respectively for the non-central χ2 -distribution with degree of freedom d
and non-centrality parameter λ.
   Now for large qm we know that if U ∼ χ2qm (0) then

                                                 U − qm
                                                  p
                                                    2qm

has an approximate standard normal distribution. Thus
                                                     
                                            u − qm 
                        Fχ2q (0) (u) ≈ Φ  p        
                            m
                                                2qm
                                                       

where Φ is the cdf for the standard normal distribution. Thus

                               (1 − α0 ) ≈ z1−α 2qm + qm
                                               p
                      F−1
                        χ2 (0)   qm


where z1−α0 = Φ−1 (1 − α0 ).                           Pqm
 Next we know that a χ2qm (Nγm ) is the distribution of j=1 (X j + λ j )2
                                                               m                            q
where X j are iid standard normal random variables and {λ j } j=1 satisfy
Pqm 2
    λ = Nγm . But
 j=1 j

                      qm
                      X                        qm
                                               X               qm
                                                               X                qm
                                                                                X
                            (X j + λ j ) =
                                       2
                                                     X2j + 2         λ jX j +         λ2j
                      j=1                      j=1             j=1              j=1
                                               qm
                                               X               qm
                                                               X
                                           =         X2j + 2         λ j X j + Nγm
                                               j=1             j=1


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                             49

and we know that              Pqm 2           Pqm
                                                     λ
                                                             
                              j=1 X j − qm     j=1   j X j 
                                             ,
                                                            
                                                Pqm 2 
                                                      λ
                                p
                                   2qm            j=1 j

converge in distribution as qm → ∞ to independent standard normal ran-
dom variables. Thus
                                          q                   
                                          X m                
                    Fχ2q (Nγm ) (v) = pr  (X j + λ j )2 ≤ v
                                                              
                        m                                      
                                              j=1


For v = z1−α0       2qm + qm , we have
                p

                         Pqm 2                 Pqm
                                            2Nγm j=1 λ j X j
                                          s                                    
                         j=1 X j − qm                        Nγm             
  Fχ2q (Nγm ) (v) = pr                +                    + p     ≤ z1−α0  .
                                                                              
                                             qm
      m
                             p                   p
                              2qm                 Nγm           2qm            

For qm large but N fixed the right hand side is approximately equal to
                                   s                              
                                    2Nγ  m               Nγ m 
                                                                   
                    pr Z1 +               Z2 ≤ z1−α0 − p
                                                                  
                                                                    
                                       qm                  2qm 
                                   q                     Nγ 
                           Z + 2Nγm Z
                            1              2
                                                  z1−α0 − √ m 
                                        qm                 2qm 
                  =pr  q                   ≤ q              
                                                                 
                                       2Nγm              2Nγm 
                                  1 + qm             1 + qm 
                                                               
                                  p            
                       z1−α0 2qm − Nγm 
                  =Φ  p
                                               
                               2 · (qm + 2Nγm )
                                                 

where (Z1 , Z2 ) are independent standard normal random variables. So we
want the smallest integer N such that
                                      p            
                              z1−α0 2qm − Nγm 
(17)                  1 − Φ  p
                                                    ≥ 1 − β0 .
                                   2 · (qm + 2Nγm )
                                                     

This yields the equation
                                        p
                z1−α0 2qm − Nγm = −z1−β0 2 · (qm + 2Nγm )
                     p


since zβ0 = −z1−β0 . Let y =          qm /2 + Nγm ; then we can rewrite the above
                                  p

equation as                                          qm 
                          y2 − 2z1−β0 y − z1−α0 2qm +      .
                                               p
                                                       2
imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
50                               W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

The quadratic formula yields
                                   r                    qm 
                     y = z1−β0 ±     z21−β + z1−α0 2qm +
                                                  p
                                          0               2
Solving for N yields

           1
                                         q                        
     N=        2z1−β0 + z1−α0 2qm ± 2z1−β0 z1−β + z1−α0 2qm + qm /2 .
                 2
                             p                         p
                                            2
          γm                                   0



It rests to find the correct sign for the final term. We know that sample size
is the smallest integer N to satisfy equation (17). Using our formula for N
we have
                                             s
                                                     1                   
     z1−α0 2qm − Nγm = −2z1−β0 ± 2z1−β0 1 + 2            z1−α0 2qm + qm /2 .
           p                   2        2
                                                              p
                                                   z1−β
                                                           0


To satisfy equation (17) for power greater than 50% we need the left-hand
side of the above equation to be negative. If the second term on the right-
hand side of the above equation is positive then the whole right hand side
is positive as the term within the square-root is greater than one. Therefore,
the second term must be negative; so sample size N is given by

            1
                                           q                          
     N=         2z21−β0 + z1−α0 2qm + 2z1−β0 z21−β + z1−α0 2qm + qm /2 .
                               p                           p
           γm                                     0


                                                                                       

   Lemma C.1 specifies a large sample analytic relationship among N,
qm , α0 , β0 , and γm . Next, Lemma C.2 establishes a relationship between
the non-centrality parameter γm and the approximation error due to L2
projection of the treatment effect (i.e., {eβ (t)}t=1,...,T ).

    Lemma C.2. Recall eβ (t) := β(t) − ft0 β? m , eα (t; Ht ) := E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] −
gt (Ht )0 α?
           m , and the error term t is given by

                 t = Yt,∆ − E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] − (At − p̃t (1))β(t)

and satisfies E[t | Ht , At ] = 0. We make the following assumptions:
     • The control variables are correctly specified; that is, E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] =
       gt (Ht )0 α?
                  m (i.e., eα (t; Ht ) ≡ 0).
     • The error term t satisfies the second moment condition E[2t | Ht , At ] =
       σ2 .

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                     STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                51

   • p̃t (1) = E[pt (1 | Ht )].
Under these conditions, the non-centrality parameter γm can be approxi-
mated by

                              β?                                       β?
                                 ! 0 X                               
                    σ2                  T
                                                                             !
                               m                                      m
            
                                                                     0
                                         p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) ft ft 
                                                                        
                Θ̄σ + Ψ̄ē2β  σ  t=1                                     σ
               2                    

                  PT
where ē2β = T1           2
                     t=1 eβ (t), and

             T
                   p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1))3 (1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1)3
                 "                                             #                       !
           1X
      Ψ̄ =     E                        +                        − (1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1)
           T             pt (1 | Ht )      1 − pt (1 | Ht )
               t=1

and
                                   T   "                                #
                                 1X           p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1))
                            Θ̄ =     E
                                 T       pt (1 | Ht )(1 − pt (1 | Ht ))
                                      t=1

Note that if p̃t (1) = E[pt (1 | Ht )], then Ψ̄ ≥ 0 and Ψ̄ = 0 if and only if
pt (1 | Ht ) = p̃t (1) = 21 (see proof below).

   Proof. Under the above assumptions, the model error mt decomposes
into two components:

                              mt = t + (At − p̃t (1))(β(t) − ft0 β?
                                                                    m)
                                   = t + (At − p̃t (1))eβ (t).

Plugging the decomposition into the formula for Wm , we have
                        T
                        X                                        
            Wm = E             wmt (Ht ) t + (At − p̃t (1))eβ (t) (At − p̃t (1)) ft
                         t=1
                          XT                                        
                        ×         wmt (Ht ) t + (At − p̃t (1))eβ (t) (At − p̃t (1)) ft0 .
                            t=1

We can decompose the above formula into various terms, which we now
walk through step by step. The first term involves only the error t . By the
assumption that E[t | Ht , At ] = 0 and ∆ = 1 the cross terms are zero, we
have
        X                                                                   
           E wmt (Ht ) t (At − p̃t (1)) ft × wms (Hs ) s (As − p̃s (1)) fs .
                                        2                                2 0

            s,t

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
52                                           W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

equals zero; then we have the term
     T
    X                                                    T
                                                           X      h                                           i
E          w2mt (Ht ) 2t (At − p̃t (1))2 ft ft0       =         E w2mt (Ht ) (At − p̃t (1))2 E[2t |Ht , At ] ft ft0
     t=1                                                   t=1
                                                                T
                                                                X       h                          i
                                                       = σ2            E w2mt (Ht ) (At − p̃t (1))2 ft ft0
                                                                t=1
                                                                 T
                                                                    p̃t (1)2 (1 − p̃t (1))2 p̃t (1)2 (1 − p̃t (1))2
                                                                X         "                                         #
                                                       =σ   2
                                                                E                            +                        ft ft0
                                                                           pt (1 | Ht )           1 − pt (1 | Ht )
                                                            t=1
                                                             T
                                                                         (p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)))2
                                                            X     "                                #
                                                       =σ 2
                                                                E                                    ft ft0 .
                                                                    pt (1 | Ht )(1 − pt (1 | Ht ))
                                                                 t=1

   Due to the same reasoning above, the cross-terms involving both t and
error eβ (t) are zero.
   The next term involves only the approximation error (At − p̃t (1))eβ (t):

                     T
                     X                                                        
     Wm,β = E               w2mt (Ht ) eβ (t)2 (At − p̃t (1))4 ft ft0
                      t=1
                    X                                                                                            
              +E            wmt (Ht ) eβ (t)(At − p̃t (1))        2
                                                                       ft × wms (Hs ) eβ (s)(As − p̃s (1))2 fs0
                      s,t

We first investigate the second term (i.e. the cross-product term). Taking
expectations, we have
            X
                eβ (t)(1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1) ft × eβ (s)(1 − p̃s (1))p̃s (1) ft0
                     s,t
                      
                    T 
                                                                                            
                    X                                    X                                  
                  =    eβ (t)(1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1) ft ×   e           p̃        p̃      f 0
                      
                                                            β (s)(1 −    s (1))   s (1)  s
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                     t=1                                          s,t

By definition of the L2 projections, we know that
                                T
                                X
                                      (1 − p̃s (1))p̃s (1)(β(s) − fs0 β) fs = 0p
                                s=1

This implies for each t = 1, . . . , T, we have
       X
          (1 − p̃s (1))p̃s (1)(β(s) − fs0 β) fs = −(1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1)(β(t) − ft0 β) ft .
            s,t

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                   STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                     53

Plugging this in the cross-term becomes
                                  T
                                  X                                2
                              −           eβ (t)(1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1) ft ft0 .
                                    t=1
The first term can be simplified by
                                                   p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1))3 (1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1)3
                                                 "                                             #
 h                          i
E wmt (Ht ) (At − p̃t (1)) = p̃t (1)(1−p̃t (1))E
   2                      4
                                                                        +                        .
                                                         pt (1 | Ht )      1 − pt (1 | Ht )
The above implies that Wm,β is equal to
                               T
                               X
                                 (1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1)Ψt eβ (t)2 ft ft0
                                t=1
where
                        p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1))3 (1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1)3
                      "                                             #
            Ψt = E                           +                        − (1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1)
                              pt (1 | Ht )      1 − pt (1 | Ht )
                                                                         
We assume p̃t (a) is chosen such that it equals E pt (a | Hth) for a ∈              i {0, 1}. Under
                                                                            p̃t (a)
this assumption, Jensen’s inequality implies that E pt (a | Ht ) ≥ 1 for a ∈
{0, 1} with equality holding only if pt (a | Ht ) is constant almost surely (i.e.,
pt (a | Ht ) = p̃t (a) a.s.). Therefore,
                      Ψt ≥ (1 − p̃t (1))3 + p̃t (1)3 − (1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1) ≥ 0
for p̃t (1) ∈ [0, 1] with equality holding only if p̃t (1) = 1/2. Therefore Ψt = 0
if and only if pt (1 | Ht ) = p̃t (1) = 21 almost surely.
    Combining all of the above we have
                             T
                             X                          h                  i
                      Wm =          p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) Θt σ2 + Ψt eβ (t)2 ft ft0
                              t=1
                  p̃t (1)(1−p̃t (1))
                  h                        i
where Θt = E pt (1 | H t )(1−p1 (1 | Ht ))
                                            . We approximate this by

              h              T
                           i X                              h             i
          Wm ≈ Θ̄σ + Ψ̄ēβ ·
                  2      2
                               p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) ft ft0 = Θ̄σ2 + Ψ̄ē2β Qm
                                          t=1

where ū is the average of T−1 Tt=1 ut . This implies the non-centrality pa-
                                     P
rameter is approximated by
                                β?                                       β?
                                   ! 0 X                               
                      σ2                  T
                                                                               !
                                 m                                      m
              
                                                                       0
                                           p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) ft ft 
                                                                          
                  Θ̄σ + Ψ̄ē2β  σ  t=1                                     σ
                 2                    

as desired.                                                                                     

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
54                                   W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

  The following lemma provides a complementary result to Lemma C.2. In
particular, it provides a relation between the non-centrality parameter and
choice of control variables.

    Lemma C.3. Recall eβ (t) := β(t) − ft0 β? m , eα (t; Ht ) := E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] −
gt (Ht )0 α?
           m , and the error term t is given by

                 t = Yt,∆ − E[wmt (Ht )Yt,∆ | Ht ] − (At − p̃t (1))β(t)

and satisfies E[t | Ht , At ] = 0. We make the following assumptions:
     • The marginal treatment effect is correctly specified; that is, β(t) = ft0 β
     • The error term t satisifes the following second moment condition:
       E[2t | Ht , At ] = σ2 .
Under these conditions, the non-centrality parameter γm is approximated
by
                                                                         β?
                           # ? !0  T                                   
                    σ2         βm X
              "                                                                !
                                                                     0       m
                                           p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) ft ft 
                Θ̄σ2 + Ξ̄α      σ                                          σ
                                    
                                       t=1

where Ξ̄α = T1 Tt=1 E[Ξ̄α (t)], and
              P

                             "                                             #
                                               p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1))
                 Ξ̄α (t) = E eα (t; Ht )
                                2
                                                                             .
                                         pt (1 | Ht )(1 − pt (1 | Ht ))

Θ̄ is as defined in Lemma C.2.

   Proof. Under the above assumptions, the model error mt decomposes
into the error t and two approximation error terms:

           mt = t + (α(t; Ht ) − gt (Ht )0 αm ) + (At − p̃t (1))(β(t) − f 0t βm )
               = t + (α(t; Ht ) − gt (Ht )0 αm )

The third term is zero by the assumption of properly specified treatment
effect. Plugging the decomposition into the formula for Wm , we have
                          T
                         X                             
              Wm = E           wmt (Ht ) t + eα (t; Ht ) (At − p̃t (1)) ft
                           t=1
                            XT                                                 
                         ×         wmt (Ht ) t + eα (t; Ht ) (At − p̃t (1)) ft .
                                                                               0

                             t=1

We can decompose the above formula into various terms, which we now
walk through step by step. The first terms involve only the error t . These

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                    STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                               55

were taken care of in the prior proof; following the logic in that proof, the
cross-terms involving both t and error eα (t) are zero.
   The next terms involve only the approximation error eα (t; Ht ):

         T
         X                                                
Wm,α = E    w2mt (Ht ) e2α (t; Ht )(At − p̃t (1))2 ft ft0
              t=1
            X                                                                                              
       +E           wmt (Ht ) eα (t; Ht )(At − p̃t (1)) ft × wms (Hs ) eα (s; Hs )(As − p̃s (1)) fs0
              s,t

The cross-product term is zero due to centering (i.e., E[wms (Hs )(As −p̃s (1))|Ht ] =
0). The first term can be simplified by

                                                                          p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) 2 
                                                                                                  
     h                                     i
    E eα (t; Ht )wmt (Ht ) (At − p̃t (1)) = E e2α (t; Ht )
       2          2                      2                                                           .
                                                
                                                                     pt (1 | Ht )(1 − pt (1 | Ht )) 

Define                           "                                           #
                                                        p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1))
                       Ξα (t) = E e2α (t; Ht )
                                                   pt (1 | Ht )(1 − pt (1 | Ht ))
Then Wm,α is equal to
                                 T
                                 X
                                        (1 − p̃t (1))p̃t (1)Ξα (t) ft ft0
                                  t=1

  Combining all of the above we have
                               T
                               X                         h              i
                      Wm =           p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) Θt σ2 + Ξα (t) ft ft0
                               t=1

We approximate this by

               h          i TX                              h          i
           Wm = Θ̄σ2 + Ξ̄α ·   p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1)) ft ft0 = Θ̄σ2 + Ξ̄α Qm
                                        t=1
                                          PT
where ū is the average of T−1                t=1 ut . This gives the desired result.                      

APPENDIX D: SAMPLE SIZE CALCULATION FOR MARGINAL CASE
  To test H0 : β(t) = 0, t = 1 . . . , T we use the test statistic

                                  TmN = Nβ̂0m Q̂m Ŵm
                                                    −1
                                                       Q̂m β̂m

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
56                                       W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

where N is the sample size and Ŵm is given by
       T                                           T
                                                                                                 
      X                                           X                                            
Pn    It wmt (Ht+∆−1 ) ˆmt (At − p̃t (1)) ft ×   It wmt (Ht+∆−1 ) ˆmt (At − p̃t (1)) ft 
                                                                                             0

       t=1                                             t=1

with ˆmt = Yt,∆ − gt (Ht )0 α̂m − (At − p̃t (1)) ft0 β̂m , and Q̂m is given by

                           T
                           X       h                                      i
                                 Pn It wmt (Ht+∆−1 )(At − p̃t (1))2 ft ft0 .
                           t=1

Here we have implicitly assumed that Ŵm is invertible. The following
lemma provides the distribution of TmN :

  Lemma D.1 (Asymptotic Distribution of TmN ). Under invertibility as-
sumptions,
                        0
             N β̂m − β?                            ?
                                                   
                      m    Q̂m Ŵm
                                  −1
                                     Q̂m   β̂ m − βm −→d χqm .
                                                          2


When N is large, consistency of mean and variance estimators as well as
asymptotic normality imply the distribution of q−1m TmN is well-approximated
by a noncentral F-distribution distribution, Fqm ,N−q0 −qm ;Nγm , where

(18)                               γm = β?           ?
                                         m Qm Wm Qm βm ,
                                               −1

              T
              X                                                T
                                                               X                                            
Wm = E              It wmt (Ht+∆−1 ) mt (At − p̃t (1)) ft ×         It wct (Ht+∆−1 ) ct (At − p̃t (1)) ft0 ,
              t=1                                              t=1
         mt = Yt,∆ − gt (Ht )0 α?                      0 ?
                                 c − (At − p̃t (1)) ft βm , and
                      XT                                    
               Qm =        E It p̃t (1)(1 − p̃t (1))) ft ft .
                                                           0

                             t=1

   We set the rejection region for the test H0 : β(t; x) = 0, t = 1 . . . , T:

                         qm (N − (q0 + 1)) −1
               (                                                    )
(19)             TmN >                    F               (1 − α0 )
                          N − (q0 + qm ) qc ,N−(q +qc );0
                                                  0



with α0 a specified significance level. For details regarding further small
sample size adjustments, used when analyzing the data, see Appendix E.
   The sample size is the smallest value N such that

                                 N − (q0 + 1) −1
                                                                          !
(20)    1 − Fqm ,N−(q0 +qm );Nγm               F                 (1 − α0 ) ≥ 1 − β0 .
                                 N − (q0 + qm ) qm ,N−(q +qm );0
                                                        0




imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                       57

Calculation of the sample size N is non-trival due to the unknown form
of the noncentrality parameter, Nγm in (18). We now review the three-step
procedure for sample size calculations.
   In the first step, equation (18) along with information elicited from the
scientist is used to calculate, via Monte-Carlo integration, γm in the non-
centrality parameter. The resulting non-centrality parameter, γ̂m , is plugged
in to Equation (20) to solve for an initial sample size estimate N̂0 . In the sec-
ond step we use a binary search algorithm to search over a neighborhood
of N̂0 . For each sample size N required by the binary search algorithm, K
samples each of N simulated participants are run. Within each simulation,
the rejection region for the test is given by equation (19) at the specified
significance level. The average number of rejected null hypotheses across
the K simulations is the estimated power for the sample size N. The sample
size is the minimal N with estimated power above the pre-specified thresh-
old 1 − β0 . In the last, third, step we conduct a variety of simulations to
assess the robustness of the sample size calculator to any assumptions and
to make adjustments to ensure robustness.

   D.1. Application to motivating example. Table 9 presents the esti-
mated sample size from our proposed method to detect a specified alterna-
tive for the conditional proximal effect given power of 80% and significance
level 5.0% for the smoking cessation study. We assume the day of maximal
effect is day 5 and the initial effect is 0 for both levels of the time-varying
variable Xt . The average treatment effect β̄ is set to three plausible values. We
                                       Table 9
                     Estimated sample size, N, and achieved power.
                                      Sample size     Power
                         β̄ = 0.030       50           80.0
                         β̄ = 0.025       77           80.0
                         β̄ = 0.020      121           80.4

perform 1000 simulations. Each simulation is based on the Markov chain P,
                                                    (1)
the sequence of markov chain under action Pt , and the randomization
probability pt (1 | Ht ). These components completely specify the generative
model. Each simulation consists of generating data for N individuals and
performing the hypothesis test using equation (8) with the small-sample
size adjustment described in Appendix E.
   The third step in forming the simulation-based sample size calculator
is to assess robustness to the assumptions. We are particularly concerned
with the sensitivity of the calculator to the assumptions on the form of
the transition matrix P(0) . The following is an illustration of how we might

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
58                                W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

assess robustness to the form of the transition matrix and, how as a result
of the assessment, we make the calculator more robust to the assumptions.

   D.1.1. Misspecification of transition matrix P(0) . As in Section 6.4.1, we test
robustness of the sample size calculator to misspecification of the transition
matrix P(0) for the Markov chain, Vt , under no treatment; the treatment
effect is still correctly specified. We suppose the misspecification stems from
noise related to the information elicited from scientists. Let B(,0 ) denote
an (, 0 )-ball around the inputs (W̄, Z̄) and Ω(,0 ) be the subset of B(,0 )
as defined in Section 6.4.1. Table 10 presents estimated power under the
previously calculated sample sizes for Ω(0.02,4) and Ω(0.01,2) respectively.
For both (, 0 ) = (0.01, 2) and (, 0 ) = (0.02, 4), the estimated power is
significantly below the pre-specified 80% level for all three choices of the
average treatment effect β̄.
                                            Table 10
            Misspecification of transition matrix P(0) : minimum estimated power
                                  over set of matrices in Ω,0
                                                (, 0 ) =
                                          (0.02, 4) (0.01, 2)
                             β̄ = 0.030     43.1          66.3
                             β̄ = 0.025     37.6          63.8
                             β̄ = 0.020     27.3          57.6



   D.1.2. Deviations from a time-inhomogenous transition matrix under no treat-
ment. As in Section 6.4.2, next we test robustness of the sample size cal-
culator to a different type of misspecification of the transition matrix P(0) ,
that of time-inhomogeneity; as before the treatment effect is still correctly
                         (0)
specified. We specify Pweekend via inputs (W̄weekend , Z̄weekend ) given in Sec-
tion 6.4.2. Using the inputs we construct two alternate versions of what the
                          (0)
true transition matrix Pweekend might be.
   To test the calculator, we generate data using the no-treatment transition
            (0)
matrices Pweekend (for the weekend) and P(0) (for the weekday). This data is
simulated so that the treatment effect used by the calculator is still correct
                                                            (1)
(e.g. we select the transition matrices under treatment, Pd(t) , to ensure this).
   Table 11 presents power calculations under these alternative generative
models. We see that the power is below the pre-specified 80% threshold for
both inputs across the three possible values of the average treatment effect β̄.
If the scientist thought such deviations feasible, then the above analysis
suggests for the smoking cessation example that the sample size be set to


imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                 STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                             59

ensure a least 80% power over a set of feasible choices for time-inhomogeneous
choices for the no-treatment transition matrix.
                                         Table 11
       Estimated power under generative model with time-inhomogeneous Markov chain.
                                           Estimated power
                                   Weekend Input 1 Weekend Input 2
                    β̄ = 0.030                82.9            75.4
                    β̄ = 0.025                78.6            77.0
                    β̄ = 0.020                76.4            76.9



  D.2. Deviations from a Markovian generative model. Here we test
robustness of the sample size calculator to the over-fit semi-Markovian
deviations presented in the main text. To test the calculator, we generate
data using the no-treatment semi-Markov model specified in Appendix G.
The data is simulated so that the treatment effect used by the calculator is
correct. See Appendix G for a discussion of how this was achieved.
  Table 12 presents achieved power under these alternative generative
models. We see that the achieved power is well above the pre-specified 80%
threshold in each case. Therefore the sample size calculator is robust to such
complex deviations from the Markovian generative model.
                                        Table 12
                      Estimated power under semi-Markov generative.
                                              Estimated power
                                 β̄ = 0.030               92.5
                                 β̄ = 0.025               91.2
                                 β̄ = 0.020               88.3



   D.3. Adjustments to the simulation-based calculator. We have now
evaluated the simulation calculator. Here we make adjustments to the sim-
ulation calculator to ensure robustness. First, we note that the simulation
calculator is robust to the potential semi-Markovian deviation. We make
the decision that we are not concerned with lack of robustness to deviations
from a time-inhomogenous transition matrix. Instead we focus on making
the simulation calculator robust to misspecification of transition matrix.
   The above analysis suggests for the smoking cessation example that the
sample size should be set to ensure at least 80% power over a set of feasible
choices for the transition matrix P(0) . We fix (, 0 ) = (0.01, 2) to be our tolerance
to misspecification of the inputs. For each set of inputs (W, Z) ∈ Ω0.01,2 ,
the sample size calculator will compute a sample size, and the maximum

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
60                                 W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

of this set of computed sample sizes will be chosen to ensure tolerance
to misspecification of the transition matrix. Table 13 presents the sample
size under this procedure as well as the avhieved minimum power over the
set Ω,0 .
                                         Table 13
         Estimated sample size, N, and computed power under  = 2 and 0 = 0.01.
                                    Sample size      Minimum Power
                     β̄ = 0.030         66                80.2
                     β̄ = 0.025        113                80.5
                     β̄ = 0.020        195                80.6

   We have illustrated the three-step procedure to forming a sample size
calculator for the smoking cessation study example. Suppose the scientist
specifies an average treatment effect β̄ equal to 0.025. Based on the above
discussion a sample size, N, of 113 would be recommended to ensure power
above the pre-specified 80% threshold across a set of feasible deviations
from the assumed generative model.

       APPENDIX E: SMALL SAMPLE SIZE ADJUSTMENT FOR
                       COVARIANCE ESTIMATION
   The robust sandwich covariance estimator Mancl and DeRouen [2001]
for the entire variance matrix is given by Q−1 ΛQ−1 . The first term, Q, is
given by
                               N               
                              X               
                               
                                 DTi Wi Di 
                                        i=1
where Di is the model matrix for individual i associated with equation (4),
and Wi is a diagonal matrix of weights either constructed from wct (Ht+∆−1 )
or wmt (Ht+∆−1 ) for the conditional and marginal test statistics respectively.
The middle term Λ is given by
                     N
                     X
                            D0i Wi (Ii − Hi )−1 ei e0i (Ii − Hi )−1 Wi Di
                      i=1

where Ii is an identity matrix of correct dimension, ei is the individual-
specific residual vector and
                                    N             −1
                                   X             
                        Hi = Di    Di Wi Di  D0i Wi
                                        0

                                         i=1

From Q−1 ΛQ−1 we extract Σ̂β .

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                 STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                           61

  APPENDIX F: ADDITIONAL DETAILS FOR SMOKING CESSATION
                  EXAMPLE SAMPLE SIZE CALCULATION
   Table 14 presents the standardized effect sizes for the two levels of the
stratifying variable Xt under the Markov generative model introduced in
Section 6.1.1.
                                         Table 14
                 Standardized effects under the Markovian generative model
                                   Xt = “Non-stress”    Xt =“Stress”
                      β̄ = 0.030         0.059              0.034
                      β̄ = 0.025         0.052              0.030
                      β̄ = 0.020         0.038              0.020


   Table 14 presents the standardized effect sizes for the two levels of the
stratifying variable Xt under the semi-Markov generative model introduced
in Section 6.4.3.
                                           Table 15
               Standardized effects under the semi-Markovian generative model
                                   Xt = “Non-stress”    Xt =“Stress”
                      β̄ = 0.030         0.074              0.036
                      β̄ = 0.025         0.063              0.028
                      β̄ = 0.020         0.049              0.024



  F.1. Analytic form of the treatment effect for the smoking cessation
example. For the smoking cessation study, action at decision time t implies
that the individual is unavailable for treatment for the subsequent hour;
therefore pt+s (At+s = 0 | Ht+s ) = 1 for s = 1, . . . , ∆ − 1 given At = 1. In this
                           1A j =0
case, we have t+∆−1
                  j=t+1 p j (A j |H j ) = 1. Recall the proximal response Yt,∆ is equal
                Q




imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
62                                              W. DEMPSEY ET AL.
         PT
to ∆−1     u=1 1Xt+u =1 . Therefore we have

            t+∆−1
               Y              1A j =0                                                  
         EE                                  Yt,∆ At = 1, Ht              It = 1, Xt = x
                           p j (A j |H j )
                   j=t+1
               ∆
               X                                              
     =∆   −1
                 E pr (Xt+s = 1 | At = 1, Ht ) | It = 1, Xt = x
               s=1
               X∆      X                                                                
     =∆   −1
                                 E pr (Xt+s = 1, Ut+s = u | At = 1, Vt ) | It = 1, Xt = x
               s=1 u∈{0,1,2}
               ∆
               X X
     =∆   −1
                                 pr (Xt+s = 1, Vt+s = u | At = 1, Xt = x, Ut = 1)
               s=1 u∈{0,1,2}

where the second equality is due to the Markov property assumption. Un-
der the specified generative model, the time-varying stratification variable
is a Markov process with transition rule P1d(t) for the hour following action.
Therefore,
                     ∆
                     X X
               ∆−1
                                        pr (Xt+s = 1, Ut+s = u | At = 1, Xt = x, Ut = 1)
                     s=1 u∈{0,1,2}
                     ∆
                     X X h       s i
          =∆    −1
                           P1d(t)                                 .
                                                    (x,1),(1,u)
                     s=1 u∈{0,1,2}

If instead At = 0, then for s > 1
                    ∆−1
                   Y         1A j =0                                     
               E                             1Xt+s =1 At = 0, Ht
                           p j (A j |H j )
                    j=1
                                                           ∆−1
                                                                                     
                    s−1
                   Y         1A j =0                  Y         1A j =0                       
           =E                              1Xt+s =1 E                        Ht+s  At = 0, Ht
                                                                                     
                           p j (A j |H j )                    p j (A j |H j )         
                    j=1                                  j=s
                    s−1
                     Y        1A j =0                           
           =E                                1Xt+s =1 At = 0, Ht .
                           p j (A j |H j )
                    j=1




imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                            STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                   63

Where the third inequality is a consequence of Lemma B.1. Taking s = 2, we
see that
          1At+1 =0                            
  E                      1Xt+2 =1 At = 0, Ht
      pt+1 (At+1 |Ht+1 )
          1At+1 =0                                              
=E                       E 1Xt+2 =1 | Ht+1 , At+1 At = 0, Ht
                                                  
      pt+1 (At+1 |Ht+1 )
     X                                    1At+1 =0                                                 
=E            pt+1 (At+1 = a | Ht+1 )                    pr (Xt+2 = 1 | Ht+1 , At+1 = a) At = 0, Ht
                                      pt+1 (At+1 |Ht+1 )
      a∈{0,1}
                                                      
=E pr (Xt+2 = 1 | Ht+1 , At+1 = 0) At = 0, Ht
     X                                                                          
=E              pr (Xt+2 = 1, Ut+2 = u | Xt+1 , Ut+1 , At+1 = 0) At = 0, Ht
         u∈{0,1,2}
    X           X           X
=                                     pr (Xt+2 = 1, Ut+2 = u | Xt+1 = x0 , Ut+1 = u0 , At+1 = 0)
    x0 ∈[k] u0 ∈{0,1,2} u∈{0,1,2}

    × pr (Xt+1 = x0 , Ut+1 = u0 | Ht , At+1 = 0)


        X           X             X
    =                                   pr (Xt+2 = 1, Ut+2 = u | Xt+1 = x0 , Ut+1 = u0 , At+1 = 0)
        x0 ∈[k] u0 ∈{0,1,2} u∈{0,1,2}

        × pr (Xt+1 = x0 , Ut+1 = u0 | Xt , Ut = 1, At+1 = 0)
          X              2 
    =                 P0
                               (Xt ,1),(1,u)
        u∈{0,1,2}

Expanding on this for s ≥ 2 the following equality holds
                  ∆−1
                   Y              1A j =0                          X h s i
                E                             1Xt+s =1 At = 0, Ht =     P0
                            p j (A j |H j )                                           (Xt ,1),(1,u)
                      s=1                                         u∈{0,1,2}

For s = 1 the result holds trivially. The analysis implies that
    ∆−1
  Y                1A j =0                                                     ∆−1 X h  i
                                                                                   X          s
EE                                 Yt,∆ At = 0, Ht Xt = x, It = 1 = ∆         −1
                                                                                           P0                       .
                p j (A j |H j )                                                                       (x,1),(1,u)
          s=1                                                                      s=1 u∈{0,1,2}

    APPENDIX G: TECHNICAL DETAILS ON THE SEMI-MARKOVIAN
                           GENERATIVE MODEL
  For a semi-Markov process, we let Yn denote the nth state the process
enters and Sn denote the time of that transition. Each time-homogeneous,

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
64                                   W. DEMPSEY ET AL.

semi-Markov process is characterized by the kernel function:

                     Qi j (x) ≡ P[Yn+1 = j, Sn+1 − Sn ≤ x | Yn = i].

This is the conditional probability of next being in state j and the transition
occurring before time x given the prior state is state i.The probability that
any transition takes place within the next x time units is givenPby summing
up the leaving probabilities for each possible state j, Qi (x) = j,i Qi j (x), not
taking into account transitions from i to i.
   We have a closed form expression for Qi j (x) for each x given the param-
eters from the above model. If a transition is allowed from i to j then

                                             x + 0.5 κi
                                         "          #!
                    Qi j (x; θ) = 1 − exp −              Ωi j
                                               λi

where λi and κi are the Weibull distribution parameters given state i, Ωi j
is the probability of transitioning from state i to state j, and θ denotes the
entire set of parameters underlying the semi-Markov model. Note that from
any state j one can transition to only 1 or 2 other states and therefore the
kernel function is quite low-dimensional.
   For a time-homogeneous, semi-Markov process we need to know the
probability of ending up in state j at a time x conditional on starting in
state i at time 0.

         pi j (x; θ) = δi j [1 − Qi (x; θ)]
                       XX     x
                     +           pk j (x − v; θ) [F(v; λi , κi ) − F(v − 1; λi , κi )] Ωik
                       k,i v=1

This requires knowledge of pk j (x0 ; θ) for all x0 < x which is not known a
priori. However, we have initial conditions pi j (0; θ) = δi j . Then for the first
point in the discretization we have
                                       X
        pi j (1) = δi j [1 − Qi (1)] +   pk j (0) · [F(1; λi , κi ) − F(0; λi , κi )] Ωik
                                        k,i
                                             
                = δi j [1 − Qi (1)] + 1 − δi j [F(1; λi , κi ) − F(0; λi , κi )] Ωi j .

We omitted dependence of pi j and Qi on θ for the sake of space. This
completely determines pi j (1) for all i and j. We can iterate on knowing these
parameters to solve for pi j (x) for each x = 1, . . . , ∆. For x = 2, for example,



imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
                 STRATIFIED MICRO-RANDOMIZED TRIAL DESIGN                                    65

we have:
                                        X
       pi j (2) = δi j [1 − Qi (2)] +     pk j (0) · [F(2; λi , κi ) − F(1; λi , κi )] Ωik
                                        k,i
                                                                
              + pk j (1) · [F(1; λi , κi ) − F(0; λi , κi )] Ωik .

Therefore, for a given model specification we can compute the expected
fraction of time classified as “stressed” in the next hour. Let A denote the
set of states that correspond to currently being classified as stressed, then
                                                   ∆ X
                                                   X
                             µ(i; θ) = ∆      −1
                                                             pi j (x; θ).
                                                   x=1 j∈A

where again θ denotes the set of parameters of the transition and dura-
tion models and i denotes the current state. Let θ0 denote the parameters
for the baseline generating model. Then we define the proximal outcome
conditional on being currently non-stressed as
                                    i∈Ac πi (θ0 )µ(i; θ )
                                                       0
                                  P
                        µ0 (θ ) =
                             0
                                        i∈Ac πi (θ0 )
                                      P

and the proximal outcome conditional on being currently stressed as
                                  i∈A πi (θ0 )µ(i; θ )
                                                    0
                                P
                      µ1 (θ ) =
                           0
                                                       .
                                      i∈A πi (θ0 )
                                    P

Note that the proximal outcomes above are defined summing over the
stationary distribution with respect to θ0 (i.e., πi (θ0 )). We do this because it is
a decent approximation to the true setting. Interventions occur infrequently
and so we expect the stationary distribution over the baseline parameters
to be close to the true distribution of the states given Xt = x
   To construct the semi-Markov generating model under treatment we
wish to find
                       arg min  max (µx;θ0 − µx;θ0 ) − β̃x
                             0  θ    x∈{0,1}

where β̃x is specified alternative treatment effect for Xt = x. Thus the prob-
lem now turns into an optimization problem. Fortunately generic black-box
optimization routines in R were found to be sufficient.

     APPENDIX H: CODE TO GENERATE SIMULATION RESULTS
  The R code used to generate the smoking cessation example results in this
paper can be obtained from https://github.com/wdempsey/stratified_
mrt.

imsart-aoas ver. 2014/10/16 file: sMRT-arxiv-submission.tex date: November 13, 2017
