                                           An Intrinsic Integrity-Driven Rating Model for a Sustainable Reputation
                                                                           System

                                                                                  H. Wena , T. Huangb , D. Xiaoc,∗
                                                             a Department of Economics, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom
                                                      b Faculty of Business and Law, University of Roehampton, London, SW15 5SL, United Kingdom
                                                              c School of Mathematical Sciences, Tongji University, Shanghai, China, 200092




arXiv:2310.09143v1 [cs.CE] 13 Oct 2023
                                         Abstract
                                             In the era of digital markets, the challenge for consumers is discerning quality amidst information asym-
                                         metry. While traditional markets use brand mechanisms to address this issue, transferring such systems to
                                         internet-based P2P markets—where misleading practices like fake ratings are rampant—remains challeng-
                                         ing. Current internet platforms strive to counter this through verification algorithms, but these efforts find
                                         themselves in a continuous tug-of-war with counterfeit actions.
                                             Exploiting the transparency, immutability, and traceability of blockchain technology, this paper introduces
                                         a robust reputation voting system grounded in it. Unlike existing blockchain-based reputation systems, our
                                         model harnesses an intrinsically economically incentivized approach to bolster agent integrity. We optimize
                                         this model to mirror real-world user behavior, preserving the reputation system’s foundational sustainability.
                                         Through Monte-Carlo simulations, using both uniform and power-law distributions enabled by an innovative
                                         inverse transform method, we traverse a broad parameter landscape, replicating real-world complexity. The
                                         findings underscore the promise of a sustainable, transparent, and formidable reputation mechanism. Given
                                         its structure, our framework can potentially function as a universal, sustainable oracle for offchain-onchain
                                         bridging, aiding entities in perpetually cultivating their reputation. Future integration with technologies like
                                         Ring Signature and Zero Knowledge Proof could amplify the system’s privacy facets, rendering it particularly
                                         influential in the ever-evolving digital domain.
                                         Keywords: blockchain, reputation system, sustainable oracle, agent, credit point, integrity-driven rating,
                                         incentive mechanisms, Monte-Carlo simulation


                                         1. Introduction
                                             Information asymmetry [1] introduces challenges for consumers trying to select products or services that
                                         best fit their needs. In traditional retail markets, consumers gravitate towards brands they trust based
                                         on personal experiences, the experiences of others, or advertisements [2]. Each brand embodies a certain
                                         value that can be monetized in open markets. Offering products or services that fall short of their targeted
                                         consumers’ expectations can diminish this brand value. These brand mechanisms [3] serve to benefit both
                                         consumers and producers in retail and even broader traditional market sectors [4].
                                             With the increased convenience and diversity they provide, online products and services are becoming the
                                         preferred choice for many consumers. A notable trend in this domain is the rise of third-party P2P offerings
                                         on internet platforms [5]. This rapidly growing sector includes a wide array of services. Modern internet
                                         platforms such as Amazon, eBay, Taobao, Anyvan, ClickMechanic, and Mybuilder have transformed the way
                                         third-party service providers engage with consumers. Essentially, these platforms enable vendors to showcase
                                         their products or services, allowing customers to easily browse, compare, and purchase.
                                             Central to these operations is the role of customer reviews. A high number of positive reviews can
                                         significantly boost the attractiveness of a vendor, influencing other potential customers’ purchasing decisions.
                                         Conversely, negative reviews can deter future sales. This significant influence has, however, paved the way

                                           ∗ Corresponding author

                                            Email address: xiaodunhui@tongji.edu.cn (D. Xiao)



                                                                                                   1
for manipulative tactics. The prevalence of deceptive practices, such as fake ratings and click farming, is
notably higher online compared to traditional markets [6, 7, 8]. For instance, some vendors might engage
in ’review farming,’ where they either purchase their products to leave positive reviews or hire individuals
to write misleadingly favorable reviews for them. On the darker side, there might be instances of vendors
leaving malicious negative reviews for competitors to tarnish their reputation.
    Hence, the establishment of reliable brand mechanisms presents substantial challenges. Given this sce-
nario, verifying authentic consumer actions and crafting efficient reputation mechanisms become critical.
While online platforms have the capability to employ algorithms to filter genuine from deceptive actions,
thus allowing third-party producers to construct a legitimate reputation, the efficacy of such methods remains
questionable. A persistent tension exists between the deceptive maneuvers of some third-party producers and
the countermeasures introduced by platform verification algorithms. This dynamic essentially forms a cyclical
battle. Present solutions might demand trade-offs, potentially compromising user privacy or other desirable
attributes [9]. While machine learning offers a promising avenue [10], its implementation requires either an
initial training phase with assured genuine user data or a substantial development period before it becomes
truly effective.
    The advent of blockchain technology, pioneered by Satoshi Nakamoto [11], and augmented by Nick Szabo’s
concept of the smart contract [12]—brought to fruition by Vitalik Buterin through Ethereum in 2014 [13]—has
paved the way for innovative on-chain reputation systems.1 Oracles play a pivotal role in bridging the gap
between the real-world and blockchain technology, as they provide the crucial link by which off-chain data
can be accessed and utilized by on-chain smart contracts. This function is imperative given that blockchains
natively cannot access information outside their network. In 2017, Chainlink introduced its oracle mechanism
[14], significantly amplifying the capabilities of decentralized systems. Its renowned use-case for price feeds
laid the foundation for the blossoming of Decentralized Finance [15, 16]. Essentially, oracles act as third-party
intermediaries, relaying external data to smart contracts. Chainlink’s decentralized oracle network assures
the authenticity and integrity of data relayed into the blockchain. This is achieved by sourcing data from a
plethora of independent oracles and consolidating their responses, mitigating risks associated with singular
data points and enhancing the reliability and security of smart contracts dependent on external data.
    Yet, the functioning of these oracles primarily relies on incentive mechanisms, most notably vesting
incentives—taking, for instance, the native asset ”Link” transitioning from non-circulation to circulation.
Over a period, these incentives might have the potential to dilute the value for all participants. As the
pool of these rewards nears depletion, apprehensions about the system’s enduring viability come to the fore.
Successive enhancements, like Chainlink 2.0 [17], along with other contemporary solutions, have endeavored
to surmount this challenge. Nonetheless, their effectiveness is a subject of continued discussion. While these
refined models and strategies demonstrate potential, their ability to maintain prolonged and unwavering
effectiveness remains under examination [18]. Hence, forging a truly sustainable oracle infrastructure becomes
essential to fortifying the link between the real-world and blockchain technology.
    Recent studies have illuminated various dimensions of blockchain technology, notably the blockchain-
based reputation systems [19, 20]. While these endeavors are commendable, some of them appear more
theoretical and might encounter challenges when catering to all dynamic agent2 interactions. Others have
opted for centralized selection of trusted nodes, potentially introducing vulnerabilities associated with single
points of failure [21, 22, 23, 24]. Mechanisms aiming to emulate real-world settings sometimes lean on
intricate processes for identifying agent types and monitoring their on-chain activities. These processes
occasionally overshadow more direct incentive mechanisms that have demonstrated spontaneous efficacy [25].
Some proposed economic incentive structures seem to lean on increasing blockchain asset ”numbers”, which
might be susceptible to dilution over time [26], instead of furnishing concrete advantages. As mechanism
designs grow in complexity, they might inadvertently elevate intervention costs or introduce unpredictabilities.
Relying heavily on uncertainties akin to those proposed by chaos theory [27]—inspired by the renowned
”Butterfly Effect” [28]—might tread on delicate ground.


    1 In our model, the term ”reputation system” is used generically to denote the alternative solution we propose. However, in

practical application scenarios, it might also be referred to as a ”platform.” The two terms can be used interchangeably.
    2 In our model, we employ the term ”agent” to represent entities involved in the system. Conversely, in real-world application

scenarios, we refer to them as ”users”. Throughout this paper, the term ”agent” is used in the context of the model while ”user”
is employed in the context of real-world applications. Both terms can be considered interchangeable in many scenarios.



                                                                2
    While there appear to be promising solutions, such as ”Truth” [29]—a blockchain-aided reputation sys-
tem aimed at obviating the need to trust e-commerce platforms and ensuring feedback authenticity and
anonymity—the system is not without its potential shortcomings. ”Truth” introduces a hybrid model wherein
the centralized e-commerce platform remains in charge of traditional trading services, but the blockchain
oversees the authentication of feedback. Although ”Truth” presents an innovative approach to the age-old
problem of authenticating e-commerce feedback, certain aspects warrant deeper scrutiny. For example, the
paper does not adequately address the motivations that would drive consumers to engage in the feedback
process. Understanding these incentives is vital for ensuring widespread adoption and sincere feedback. Fur-
thermore, the system seems to overlook potential malicious behaviors by sellers, such as posting negative
feedback against competitors or hiring fictitious consumers to generate positive reviews. While transactions
may take place through the prescribed channels, there is a potential for compensating these ”hired” con-
sumers via alternative methods, thereby circumventing the system’s safeguards. For ”Truth” to fully realize
its potential and to demonstrate its effectiveness in real-world settings, these concerns need to be addressed
in future versions or research.
    Given these challenges, there’s merit in exploring a more streamlined, basic model that inherently incen-
tivizes agent behavior integrity and fosters sustainability [30, 31, 32, 33, 34]. Initial evaluations of this model
could employ Monte-Carlo simulations across vast parameter domains, capturing real-world intricacies. It’s
essential to note that this rudimentary model need not capture every intricate detail of real-world scenarios.
A basic reputation system, even if it offers only a singular credibility rating, can be invaluable in myriad
applications. This value is realized when the reputation information it delivers is accurate and trustworthy,
allowing users to rely on it rather than turning to other platforms that struggle to filter out low-cost fake
ratings, as previously discussed.
    Building upon a well-defined basic model foundation allows for iteration and enhancement. By integrating
corrective components to the foundational equations, we can preserve core incentives while refining the
model towards an everlasting reputation system to mirror real-world scenarios more accurately. Ensuring
this model’s competitive advantage over other platforms or blockchain solutions amplifies its resilience and
sustainability. This strategy not only highlights the model’s practical utility but, as adoption grows, leverages
the network effect. Widespread integration of our system fortifies commercial barriers against replication,
making it increasingly arduous for potential competitors to emulate our unique model and its benefits.
    While the applications of the everlasting reputation system continue to expand across various domains
and demographics, this system can function as a sustainable oracle network with demonstrated reliability.
The integration of Ring Signatures [35, 36, 37, 38, 39] and Zero Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) [40, 41, 42] can
further enhance the privacy dimensions of such oracle mechanisms, especially in situations where privacy is
paramount. Ring Signatures allow for digital signature from a group member without disclosing the identity
of the specific signer. ZKPs represent an advanced cryptographic technique enabling agents to substantiate
certain claims (like their assets or states) without disclosing the specifics.
    The structure of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the relevant blockchain technolo-
gies. Following this, the basic model is presented in Section 3, which lays the foundation for understanding the
incentive mechanisms that promote self-motivated integrity among agents. We then refine this basic model in
Section 4 to mirror real-world scenarios more closely, ensuring that the incentives for integrity-driven ratings
are preserved. After building a robust theoretical base, Section 5 uses Monte Carlo simulations to validate
our propositions, followed by a detailed analysis and discussion of the results. Our findings from the simula-
tions are summarized in Section 6, where we underscore that our reputation system functions effectively as
a universal sustainable oracle. Finally, potential directions for future research are proposed in Section 7.


2. Relevant Blockchain Technologies

    Introduced in 2009 as the foundation of Bitcoin, blockchain technology is a decentralized, immutable
distributed ledger, facilitating the transparent and verifiable recording of transactions. Each transaction is
appended to a structure known as a ’block’, which in turn links to the previous block, thereby forming a
chain.
    The advantages of blockchain are manifested in its transparency, security, decentralization, and im-
mutability. Despite its transformative potential across sectors—such as supply chain management, finance,
healthcare, and voting systems—blockchain grapples with various challenges. These encompass high energy


                                                        3
consumption, scalability, transaction speed, and regulatory issues. A notable challenge, particularly salient
for integrating the real-world with blockchain, is the lack of sustainable oracles. Oracles serve as critical
infrastructure, bridging the gap between on-chain and off-chain environments, yet their sustainability and re-
liability remain areas of concern. Nevertheless, the optimism surrounding blockchain’s ability to revolutionize
diverse industries persists.
    In this section, we will delve into the workings of Oracles as the Connections between Blockchain
and the Real World and Blockchain in Voting Systems, discuss the Scalability Requirements our
reputation system necessitates, and enumerate relevant Blockchain Technologies for Potential Integra-
tion.

2.1. Oracles as the Connections between Blockchain and the Real World
    Oracles, in the realm of blockchain, function as pivotal bridges connecting the real world with on-chain
smart contracts. These systems essentially imbue blockchain platforms with a capability they intrinsically
lack: accessing and processing data from external sources. When a real-world event or condition is met,
oracles convey this information to smart contracts, triggering predefined operations. In such a setting, the
credibility, timeliness, and accuracy of the data become indispensable, as the execution of the contract relies
on this external information.
    Yet, ensuring the sustained and trustworthy operation of oracles presents challenges, a significant one
being the incentive mechanism. To encourage data providers to supply accurate and timely information,
many oracle systems deploy tokens as rewards. However, this approach often entails the transition of native
assets, like ”Link”, from non-circulation to circulation. Over time, this can potentially dilute the value of
the tokens for all holders. As the reservoir of these incentives approaches depletion, questions about the
long-term sustainability of such a system become pressing. How can one maintain the motivation of data
providers without compromising the system’s overall stability and value?
    This paper aims to address the above conundrum by introducing our novel blockchain reputation system.
We posit that this system can function as a sustainable solution for oracle operations. Rather than leaning
heavily on token-based rewards, our approach integrates the principles of reputation and trust, ensuring
that data providers are motivated by both immediate rewards and the longer-term benefits of maintaining
a trustworthy reputation. In the subsequent sections, we will delve into the intricacies of our proposal,
illustrating how it offers a harmonious blend of incentives, trustworthiness, and sustainability.

2.2. Blockchain in Voting Systems
    Blockchain technology, renowned for its decentralized, transparent, and immutable nature, finds a novel
application in voting systems, providing a means to enhance the transparency, security, and integrity of
elections. This section will delve into the fundamental mechanisms underlying blockchain-based voting and
showcase its unique advantages.

2.2.1. Operational Mechanism of Blockchain Voting
    A blockchain-based voting system operates as follows:

  1. Voter Registration: For traditional blockchain-based voting systems aimed at public elections or
     polls, participants are typically required to register on the platform. Once verified, voters are provided
     with a unique cryptographic identity that ensures both anonymity and eligibility. This method mimics
     the conventional voter registration process but integrates the benefits of blockchain.
     However, in the context of blockchain governance, especially on Proof of Stake (PoS) platforms, the
     registration process may differ. In these scenarios, the act of creating a blockchain wallet and acquiring
     assets within that wallet often implicitly grants the holder voting rights. The weight of their vote might
     be determined by the amount of the asset they hold. Thus, there isn’t a separate ’registration’ as such;
     instead, participation in the network (by holding assets) inherently provides the ability to vote.
  2. Voting Process: When casting a vote, the voter signs it with their cryptographic key. This vote is
     then added as a transaction to be confirmed and recorded on the blockchain.
  3. Vote Counting: Once the voting period concludes, the votes can be tallied directly from the blockchain.
     Given the blockchain’s immutable nature, the records cannot be changed, ensuring an accurate count.


                                                      4
  4. Transparency and Verification: At any point, anyone can verify the votes on the blockchain without
     revealing the identity of the voter, ensuring a transparent yet confidential system.

2.2.2. Real-world Implementations
    Many existing blockchain platforms have adopted on-chain governance and voting mechanisms, demon-
strating the feasibility and reliability of this approach. For example:
  • Cosmos (ATOM): The Cosmos Network utilizes a staking and delegation model wherein ATOM hold-
    ers can delegate their stakes to validators [43, 44]. These validators then propose and vote on network
    changes and upgrades, ensuring decentralized decision-making. Each vote’s weight is proportionate to
    the stake, promoting a sense of accountability among validators.
  • Tezos (XTZ): Tezos has an on-chain governance system where XTZ holders vote on protocol up-
    grades [45, 46]. Instead of contentious hard forks, the platform evolves through community consensus,
    emphasizing adaptability.
   To sum up, blockchain’s inherent properties—security, transparency, and decentralization—make it an
ideal candidate for reshaping voting systems. By ensuring a democratic and trustworthy process, it offers a
future-proof solution to traditional voting challenges.

2.3. Scalability Requirements
    Scalability has perennially been one of the most contentious challenges in the blockchain domain [47, 48].
It stands as a stumbling block that has led numerous promising projects to falter or even wither away before
achieving their potential. The crux of the scalability challenge is the need to handle a vast number of
transactions per second (TPS) without compromising on speed, security, or decentralization.
    However, our reputation system elegantly sidesteps this vexing issue. The fundamental reason is its
modular design: while our system is dedicated solely to ratings or votes, the actions and trades of agents can
occur on any external public blockchain. This delineation ensures that the TPS demand for our system is
driven exclusively by the frequency at which agents rate or vote. In reality, such activities are infrequent. On
average, an individual might cast a rating or a vote once every few days. Even in the most engaged scenarios,
a single individual might rate only a few times within a day.
    Given this low-frequency engagement, even with participants in the order of millions, the system would
only necessitate a TPS at the level of hundreds. Notably, this is well within the capabilities of many existing
blockchain platforms [49, 50]. In essence, by confining our system’s operations to these particular tasks and
allowing other actions to be handled elsewhere, we’ve effectively decoupled our platform’s functionality from
the more demanding scalability requirements that have beleaguered so many other projects.

2.4. Blockchain Technologies for Potential Integration
2.4.1. Ring Signatures: Ensuring Anonymity and Authenticity
    Our blockchain-based reputation system can benefit from the technique of Ring Signatures to safeguard
the privacy of agents. This ensures that they can express their opinions without concerns of potential
retaliation or discrimination, especially when giving negative feedback.
    Ring Signatures, originally introduced for ensuring anonymous communications, plays a pivotal role in
ensuring both the authenticity and anonymity of transactions in our reputation system. A ring signature, in
essence, is a type of digital signature that can be generated by any member of a group of users, which we’ll
refer to as a ’ring’. The distinguishing feature of this signature is its ambiguity: while anyone can validate
the signature to ascertain that a member of the group generated it, it remains computationally infeasible to
determine the exact individual who created the signature.
    Within our reputation system, when a user wishes to endorse or rate an entity, they can use ring signatures
to validate their authenticity (proving they belong to a group of legitimate users) while keeping their individual
identity concealed. This ensures that while ratings and feedbacks are trustworthy and genuine, raters can
maintain their privacy.
    For instance, if Alice wants to rate a service, she can produce a ring signature using her private key and
the public keys of other members in the ring. When others verify this rating, they can be confident that
it originated from someone within the group, but they can’t pinpoint it specifically to Alice, ensuring her
anonymity.


                                                        5
interface RingSignature {
    function generateSignature(bytes memory _data, bytes[] memory _publicKeys) public
        ,→ returns (bytes memory);
    function verifySignature(bytes memory _data, bytes memory _signature) public returns (
        ,→ bool);
}


2.4.2. Threshold Functions in Zero Knowledge Proofs
    Zero Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs), specifically in our design at a later stage when the computing environment
is allow, can be implemented to introduce a threshold functionality. This is a sophisticated feature allowing
agents to prove their reputation score exceeds a set threshold without unveiling the exact score, preserving
user’s privacy. Although valuable, this feature introduces a computational overhead due to the intrinsic
complexity of ZKPs. As a starting point, our design opts to unveil interfaces for this threshold functionality
without instant deployment, preserving computational efficiency.

interface ThresholdZKP {
    function verifyProof(bytes memory _proof) public returns (bool);
    // Potential future functions
}

2.4.3. Commitment Schemes with Rounds
    To accentuate fairness, especially in scenarios where real-time rating or feedback might be infeasible,
our system envisages the use of Commitment Schemes [51, 52] in a round-based manner. In this paradigm,
participants first ’commit’ to their ratings within a specific round. Following the round’s conclusion, these
commitments are ’revealed’. This stratagem promotes fairness within each round, eliminating the possibility
of preemptive actions based on insights or predictions. If our system doesn’t adopt this round-based approach
initially, we envision the Commitment Schemes to be woven in at a later stage, bolstering the system’s fairness.

interface CommitmentRounds {
    function commitRating(bytes memory _rating) public;
    function revealRating(bytes memory _commitmentKey) public;
    // Supplementary functions for advanced features
}

    In essence, the blend of Ring Signatures, ZKPs, and Commitment Schemes amplifies the robustness and
fairness of our blockchain-based reputation system. This blend ensures a future-ready framework that starts
lean but is capable of seamlessly adopting advanced features.

3. Basic Model

    In this section, we embark on a deep exploration of the foundational mechanisms underpinning our
reputation-based blockchain. We initiate our discourse with the On-chain reputation system, elucidating
how reputation metrics are embedded and maintained directly within the blockchain environment. Progress-
ing further, we tackle the essential task of Connecting the real world to our digital framework, ensuring
seamless integration and applicability. Recognizing the importance of clear foundational premises, we detail
the Assumptions of the Gains or Losses for Any Agent, shedding light on the anticipated dynamics
each participant might experience. This naturally leads us to an examination of the Distribution of Agent
Actions within the system, offering insights into the varied interactions and behaviors exhibited by agents.
Finally, we delve deep into the Action Analysis in Reputation Systems, providing a granular breakdown
of the ripple effects and broader implications of agent activities within our reputation ecosystem.




                                                       6
3.1. On-chain reputation system
    The idea is to introduce a cross-rating system in the blockchain-based free market. All agent actions
will be rated either positively or negatively by others using staked credit points. The incentive for rating
lies in potential future profits, as the staked credit points for each comment will earn a profit if it aligns
with the general sentiment (positive or negative) of future comments. Conversely, they will incur a loss if
future comments contradict the initial sentiment. The more credit points one stakes, the higher the potential
profit or loss one stands to gain based on future ratings. Simultaneously, this also amplifies the impact on all
previous ratings in the same direction, reinforcing them if they align and diminishing them if they oppose.
Here, an agent is defined as a blockchain wallet holder. An agent can choose to stake any amount of its
credit points between 0 and the balance in the wallet minus the transaction fee (negligible at Layer 2 of the
Ethereum blockchain [53, 54]). An agent can also distribute the amount across multiple wallets, but this
won’t provide any advantage over operating as a single entity since weight is determined by credit point
amounts, not the number of agents.




Figure 1: A typical round of agents interactions in the reputation system: Alice and others rate Bob’s Action, and in the same
round, Bob and others rate Alice’s Action

    The core proposition is to integrate a cross-rating system into the blockchain-based free market. Every
agent’s action gets rated—either positively or negatively—by other agents leveraging staked credit points.
The incentive for this rating mechanism emerges from potential future gains; the staked points for a comment
will appreciate if subsequent comments resonate with its sentiment. In contrast, if future comments diverge,
the staked points depreciate. The magnitude of potential gains or losses directly correlates with the number
of staked credit points. Moreover, these stakes influence all preceding ratings in the same direction, either
amplifying or attenuating them. In this context, an agent is delineated as a blockchain wallet holder. This
agent can stake any quantity of its credit points, bounded between zero and the wallet balance after accounting
for transaction fees. While agents can distribute their credit points across multiple wallets, this doesn’t confer
any strategic advantage since the weight stems from the quantity of staked points, not the agent count.
    Figure 1 showcases an archetypal interaction round among agents within the reputation system. In any
given round or block, agents, be it Alice, Bob, or any other participant, can partake in a mix of actions,
ratings, or trades. For instance, if Alice rates Bob’s action positively in a round, Bob garners positive returns.
On the other hand, a negative rating imposes a loss on Bob. Other agents can similarly rate Bob’s action
within the round, influencing his credit point balance based on the rating’s nature.


                                                              7
    When delving deeper into ratings, if an agent’s rating of Bob’s action aligns with Alice’s sentiment, both
Alice and that agent benefit. However, conflicting ratings lead to losses for both parties.
    The dynamic nature of potential gains and losses, contingent upon future ratings, fosters authentic feed-
back from agents, mitigating false ratings. Given that a significant portion of these ratings are genuine, the
ecosystem offers a tangible advantage over traditional online platforms, which often grapple with counterfeit,
low-cost ratings. Over time, this advantage is projected to burgeon, drawing an expanding user base. As the
positive reinforcement loop of ratings solidifies, the continuously growing influence of the reputation system
will inspire participants to proactively contribute, transforming these ratings into the system’s cornerstone.
Such inherent positive externalities vouch for the sustainability of this reputation system, setting it apart
from numerous other blockchain paradigms that lean heavily on credit point vesting, such as the renowned
Chainlink 2.0 [18].

3.2. Connecting the real world
    Following the introduction of ”soulbound credit points” by Ethereum’s co-founder, Vitalik Buterin [55, 56],
and Elon Musk’s vision of integrating blockchain with Twitter accounts [57], a unique opportunity arises to
associate each wallet address from the on-chain reputation system with a specific individual or entity in the
real world. This association implies that actions undertaken offline could be evaluated, and these evaluations
could subsequently result in tangible gains or losses based on evolving collective ratings. As blockchain
continues to evolve and integrate with real world including Real World Assets (RWAs) [58, 59] via oracle or
similar mechanisms, an increasing number of high-value economic activities are likely to find connections to
the blockchain.
    Given the promising potentials discussed in Subsection 3.1, individuals with a higher risk tolerance might
be incentivized to link their real-world actions to their blockchain wallet addresses. On the other hand,
participants of the reputation system, essentially the wallet holders, are the ones recognizing the value of
this association and are willing to submit their ratings in anticipation of future benefits. This sentiment
is particularly pronounced during the initial phases of the project. Although speculators may invest in
credit points expecting them to appreciate in value, they don’t possess a strong economic motive to submit
misleading ratings. As a result, their activities should not compromise the system’s functionality.
    We’ll now transition from these theoretical underpinnings to a practical application, beginning with a
rudimentary model. Let’s consider the following categories of agents participating in the reputation system:

C1. Agents with Actions
C2. Rating Participants
C3. Investors

    Any given agent can belong to one, two, or all three of these categories simultaneously.
    C1 agents, due to potential gains or losses stemming from others’ ratings, are more likely to be responsive
to rating if they have staked a higher number of credit points. It is logical to assume that agents staking more
credit points will prioritize meeting consumer expectations. Since this staking information is transparent,
consumers will naturally gravitate towards producers who have staked more credit points, creating an initial
incentive for credit points purchase when someone decides to join the reputation system. While producers
can also rate consumers, this mechanism naturally promotes responsible action across the board. To preserve
individual privacy and provide flexibility in engagement, the model permits C1 agents to choose the amount
they would like to stake – anywhere from zero to their full wallet balance (minus transaction fees) – for any
given action they want to be rated on. The staking information is transparent on the chain, and therefore
consumers may also use this information when choosing providers. They are more likely to prefer those who
have staked more credit points due to the reasoning above.
    C2 agents similarly determine their staked amounts based on the confidence level of their beliefs when
providing ratings. Since these agents are subject to potential gains or losses depending on the conformity
of others’ ratings to the actions they have rated, they are incentivized to rate in a responsible and genuine
manner.
    C3 agents, or traders between the credit points and other assets at anywhere external to the reputation
system, are individuals who primarily buy or sell credit points without engaging in other actions within the
system. Their actions are largely inconsequential to the reputation system’s functionity. However, traders
could indirectly benefit the system in its initial phase by driving up credit point prices with their purchases.


                                                       8
3.3. Assumptions of the Gains or Losses for Any Agent
    Consider an agent i as a general example of any agent. We categorise its involvement in the reputation
system into three parts: functioning as a C1, C2, and C3. Considering trader agents categorised as C3 are
not directly affecting the credit point-number-based gains or losses of any other specific agents, we now focus
on C1 and C2 categories and denote them as ”A” for action agents and ”R” for agents providing ratings.
    For Agent i, let SiAm represent the credit points staked on action im when acting as a producer or consumer,
which is always a positive value. Meanwhile, Sik   R
                                                     l
                                                       represents the credit points staked on rating the action kl
when acting as a rating provider on the action kl of another agent k. This value can be positive if the ratings
align in direction, and negative if they are opposite.
    For action im of agent i, the gains or losses incurred are influenced by any agent j who provides ratings.
This influence is proportional to the amount of credit points staked by both i and j. This influence is denoted
as


                                             ∆CPiji
                                                A
                                                   m
                                                           =     CR2A SiAm Sji
                                                                            R
                                                                              m
                                                                                ,                              (1)

   where ∆CPiji A
                  m
                     is the gains of agent i from its action im as an action agent rated by agent j, CR2A is the
constant coefficient from rating to action.
   Concerning the rating ni from agent i on the bahaviour kl , by k, any agent j rating the same action
by k (with staked credit points represented by Sj,k  A
                                                       l
                                                         ) influences the gains or losses. Again, this influence is
proportional to the amount of credit points staked by both i and j. We label this influence as


                                             ∆CPijk
                                                R
                                                   l
                                                           = CR2R Sik
                                                                   R
                                                                       SR ,
                                                                      l jkl
                                                                                                               (2)

   where CR2R represents the constant coefficient of a rating’s impact on another rating.
   In reference to agent i, the cumulative contribution from all other agents can be summarised as:


                                ∆CPi     =    Σj,m CR2A SiAm SjRm + Σj,k,l CR2R Sik
                                                                                 R
                                                                                     SR ,
                                                                                    l jkl
                                                                                                               (3)

where ∆CPi denotes the total gains agent i accrues from its participation in the reputation system.
  We can naturally assign example values to the constant coefficient CR2A as

                                                                      1
                                              CR2A     =                       ,                               (4)
                                                               Σj,m |SiAm Sji
                                                                           R |
                                                                             m


   and to the constant coefficient CR2R as
                                                                        1
                                              CR2A     =                         .                             (5)
                                                               Σj,k,l |Sik
                                                                         R SR |
                                                                           l jkl


   Thus, the total gains agent i accrues from its participation in the reputation system are:

                                                  Σj,m SiAm Sji
                                                             R      Σj,k,l Sik
                                                                            R
                                                                                SR
                                                                               l jkl
                                    ∆CPi     =                 m
                                                                  +                  .                         (6)
                                                  Σj,m |Sim Sjim | Σj,k,l |Sikl Sjk
                                                         A   R              R    R |
                                                                                   l


    Given that ∆CPi can become negative due to losses, it is imperative to ensure that the cumulative result of
the formulas mentioned earlier always remains less than the total assets possessed by agent i. To achieve this,
we introduce an added assumption: within the same category, whether actions or ratings, credit points can
be internally redistributed or restaked. However, credit points designated for actions cannot be reallocated
for ratings, and vice versa. This means that credit points staked for one category can be used within that
category’s respective behaviours3 , but not beyond. Furthermore, for each agent, the maximum loss within

  3 Here, the term ”behaviour” is used to encompass all three types: action, rating, and trading




                                                                9
a category cannot exceed the credit points allocated for that specific category. This stipulation implies that
every agent must earmark a specific portion of their credit for each staking category from the outset, and
these cannot be liquidated until they are unstaked. In more advanced models, this foundational assumption
can be replaced with intricate mechanisms that more closely mirror real-world scenarios, ensuring that total
losses never surpass assets, even though total gains might exceed them.

3.4. Distribution of Agent Actions
   For the reputation system, we assume that the action of various agents conforms to a normal distribution
N (µ, σ 2 ). This is characterized by its average action level, represented by µ, and its variance σ 2 . The
probability density function of this distribution is:
                                                                  1
                                                                           e− 2 ( σ ) ,
                                                                               1   x−µ    2
                                                    f (x) =       √                                                                  (7)
                                                              σ       2π
where x ∈ (−∞, ∞).
    Now, for a specific agent i, we assume that its actions across various activities follow an individual
normal distribution. This distribution captures the variability of i’s actions over time or in different contexts,
as opposed to the variability observed among different agents. We represent this normal distribution as
N (µi , σi 2 ), where it is characterized by its mean action level µi and its variance σi 2 . The variance can be
assigned a value smaller than that observed across different agents if it more accurately reflects the real-world
scenario. The corresponding probability density function for this agent is:
                                                        1        xi −µi 2
                                                                       
                                                             −1
                                            fi (xi ) = √ e 2 σi           ,                                    (8)
                                                      σi 2π
where, once again, xi ∈ (−∞, ∞).
  Although this is an infinite interval, its cumulative distribution function (CDF) is:

                                                 1
                                                                    
                                                              xi − µi
                                      Fi (xi ) =    1 + erf      √       ,                                                           (9)
                                                 2             σi 2
where the error function is defined as:

                                                               2
                                                                        Z xi
                                                                                      2
                                                    erf(xi ) = √                   e−t dt.                                         (10)
                                                                 π         0

   The CDF lies within the finite interval [0,1]. For F (xi )i (xi = 0), representing the cumulative distribution
from (−∞, 0), it indicates the likelihood of the agent showing negative action on average. Hence, CDF can
be used to simulate as the cumulative probability of negative ratings from others in general.4

3.5. Action Analysis in Reputation Systems
    Considering a reputation system where agents rate each other based on action, we posit that an agent’s
rating can either be positive or negative. Each agent’s action and rating can influence the gains or losses for
others. Thus, the total gains agent i accrues from its participation in the reputation system are given by
formula (6).
    Given that the inherent nature of an individual’s action is unobservable, we do not differentiate between
others’ ratings and the actual nature of one’s action. Instead, we interpret F (x)A
                                                                                  i (x = 0) as the likelihood of
receiving negative ratings on its action on average.
    Let us denote the probability of agent i providing a positive rating as P+ and that of negative rating as
P− . The joint probabilities of rating interactions between i and j under different scenarios are:
1. i and j both provide positive rating: P++ = P+ × P+ .
2. i and j both provide negative rating: P−− = P− × P− .


    4 Here, the term ”action level” is used as a relative measure to describe the positive or negative inclination of an agent’s actions.

A higher action level implies a positive action, while a lower one suggests the opposite. In addition, we do not distinguish the
intrinsic or intentional level of action of an agent and the cumulative probability of negative ratings from others since the rating
is observable but ”intrinsic or intentional” level of action is not.


                                                                   10
3. i provides positive rating, and j provides negative rating: P+− = P+ × P− .
4. i provides negative rating, and j provides positive rating: P−+ = P− × P+ .
    The chances that rating from two agents align in sentiment (either both positive or both negative) is:


                                     Palign = P++ + P−− = P+2 + P−2 .                                       (11)

   To ascertain whether the majority of agents will benefit from such a system without specially designed
favourable mechanism, we examine the relative magnitude of probabilities for congruent rating (both positive
or both negative) against incongruent rating. Specifically, we need to verify:

                                           P+2 + P−2 ≥ 2 × P+ × P− .                                        (12)
   Breaking it down and reordering:

                                               (P+ − P− )2 ≥ 0.                                             (13)
    By the fundamental properties of real numbers, the square of any real number is always non-negative.
This implies that the combined probability of agents giving congruent rating (either both positive or both
negative) will always be at least as high as that of giving incongruent rating. Thus, when agents’ rating
aligns, the majority in the system stands to benefit. This dynamic promotes a system where congruent
ratings are more prevalent than incongruent ones, underscoring the collaborative nature of such reputation
systems. In theory, this mechanism should encourage agents to participate actively in ratings. We can use
Monte Carlo simulations to determine whether this is noticeable in practice.

4. Advanced Models for Real-World Scenarios

    As we venture deeper into the intricacies of adapting blockchain models for practical, real-world ap-
plications, this section elucidates several advanced modeling techniques tailored to address real-life com-
plexities. We commence by understanding the strategy of Allowing Agents to Skip Rounds, which
presents flexibility in participation and caters to intermittent engagements. Transitioning to the realm of
consumer interactions, we present Non-Random Consumer Selection, detailing methodologies for tar-
geted and non-arbitrary engagement. Recognizing the dynamic nature of real-world systems, we then explore
an Adaptive Model with Learning and Adjustment, ensuring our model remains agile, responsive, and
self-evolving. Diving into motivational structures, the Contribution Incentive Mechanisms subsection
delineates strategic rewards to galvanize proactive participation. Lastly, foreseeing the future of decentralized
systems, we examine the Integration with Decentralized Autonomous Organizations, highlighting
the fusion of our advanced models with self-governing, decentralized entities.

4.1. Allowing Agents to Skip Rounds
    In real-life scenarios, it is not a given that every individual will interact with or evaluate every other
individual at all times. A parallel situation can naturally be anticipated once the reputation system is
operational. To enhance the model’s reflection of reality, we will design it to allow agents the flexibility to
skip rounds. This implies that in each round, a certain proportion of agents may not undertake any actions,
and a proportion may refrain from providing any ratings. In all the aforementioned formulae, assigning a
value of zero to the staking amount of credit points signifies that the agent is abstaining from participating
in the current round. To state explicitly, Si,t
                                              A
                                                = 0 denotes that agent i refrains from actions in round t, and
Sj,t′ = 0 signifies that agent j abstains from providing ratings in round t′ .
  R


4.2. Non-Random Consumer Selection
    As described in Section 3.2, when agents (C1) stake more credit points, they are more likely to respond
actively to ratings due to the potential gains or losses brought about by the ratings from others. Logically
speaking, agents who are willing to stake more credit points are more likely to meet the needs and expectations
of consumers. Owing to the transparency of staking information, consumers tend to prefer producers who
have staked more credit points due to the nature of risk aversion [60, 61, 62, 63, 64]. To initially implement


                                                       11
this model, which integrates non-random consumer selection, we can adopt a method wherein, in each round,
agents who stake fewer credit points not only have a higher probability of being bypassed for their actions,
but also increase the likelihood of being bypassed by other agents for evaluations.

4.3. Adaptive Model with Learning and Adjustment
    In the intricate realm of reputation systems, the actions of agents are influenced by both their past
experiences and the ratings received from their peers. This section delves into the complex interplay of these
factors, with a focus on the dynamics of staking in response to observed outcomes.

4.3.1. Self-Staking and Adjustment Based on Ratings
    In the development of our reputation system, agents are characterized by their actions and ratings across
different rounds of interaction, each denoting a time step in the system. Agents engage in actions, staking
a certain amount of credit points to signal their confidence or commitment. However, not every agent is
obligated to perform an action or provide rating in every round, allowing for a more general and flexible
model representation. The rating provided by other participants in the system can be either positive or
negative and subsequently influences the credit point balance of the agent in focus. This change in credit
points is modulated by the initial stake of the agent and the stake accompanying the rating.
    To facilitate computation and Monte Carlo simulation, the model introduces time indices representing
different rounds of interactions. For an agent i in round t, we redefine the notation as follows: Let Si,t  A

represent the credit points staked on action m in round t when acting as a producer or consumer, which
is always a positive value. Meanwhile, Sik,tR
                                               represents the credit points staked on rating the action l of
another agent k in round t. This value can be positive if the ratings align in direction, and negative if they
are opposite. Here, m and l denote different actions within the round t, and agents may not necessarily
undertake an action or provide a rating in every round.

                                            ∆CPi,t
                                               A
                                                   = f (Si,t
                                                         A      R
                                                             , Sji,t )                                      (14)
   Where:
  • ∆CPi,t
       A
           represents the change in credit points for agent i at time t.

  • Si,t
     A
         is the staking amount by agent i at time t.

  • Sji,t
     R
          denotes the rating (along with its stake) from another agent j at time t.
  • f is a function that determines the change in credit points based on the stake and rating.

   In the subsequent round, the agent adjusts their action based staking on the outcomes they observed:
               A
              Si,t+1 = Si,t
                        A
                            + αL × sign(∆CP (A)i,t ) × min(|∆CPi,t
                                                               A           A
                                                                   |, β × Si,t , β × 1 − Si,t
                                                                                          A
                                                                                              ),            (15)
    where αL < 1 is the learning rate parameter, which ranges in [0,1] (with 0% representing the non-learning
case), and the minimum function, along with the constant parameter β (where β < 1), ensures that the
staking rate remains non-negative and meaningful in the range of [0,1].
    Following the equation, the positive or negative sign of αL × sign(∆CP (A)i,t ) × min(|∆CP (A)i,t |, β ×
   A
 Si,t , β × 1 − Si,t
                 A
                     ) provides insights into the adaptive nature of agents’ staking behavior. Positive outcomes
lead agents to gradually increase their staking on actions, amplifying their gains, while agents experiencing
negative outcomes, indicative of a higher likelihood of receiving negative ratings, decrease their action staking
to limit losses. Over multiple rounds, the number of agents with positive returns increases in high-staking
areas, and the number with negative returns decreases, illustrating a natural evolution in the free market
where the most proficient individuals specialize in tasks they excel at, and others withdraw from the domain.
The exact number of rounds required for significant differences to emerge will be examined through subsequent
Monte Carlo simulations.




                                                       12
4.3.2. Staking on Others and Adjustment Based on Outcomes
    Agents also evaluate the actions of their peers, staking credit points on their evaluations. The magnitude
of their stake amplifies the gains or losses they incur, contingent on the congruence of their evaluations with
the consensus.
    For an evaluation by agent i on agent k’s action at time t, the change in credit points is represented as:

                                          ∆CP (R)i,t = g(Sik,t
                                                          R       R
                                                               , Sjk,t )                                   (16)
   Where:
  • ∆CP (R)i,t denotes the change in credit points for agent i when evaluating other agents at time t.
  • Sik,t
     R
          is the staking rate of agent i on the action of agent k at time t.

  • Sjk,t
     R
          represents the staking rate of a different agent j on the action of agent k at time t.
  • g is a function determining the change in credit points based on the stake and the evaluated action.

   To clarify, in the above formula, j and k represent indices running through all the agents in the system.
   In subsequent rounds, agents adjust their staking rates for ratings based on the outcomes observed. Here,
we use S R Ti,t+1 to represent a temporary result before considering the total staking rate, which also includes
that for actions:

            S R Ti,t+1 = Si,t
                          R
                              + αL × sign(∆CP (R)i,t ) × min |∆CP (R)i,t | , β × Si,t
                                                                                  R
                                                                                      , β × 1 − Si,t
                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                           (17)
                                                                                                       

   Subsequently, to ensure that the total staking does not exceed 100%, additional constraints are applied:
                                        R
                                              = min 1 − Si,t+1
                                                         A
                                                               , S R Ti,t+1                                (18)
                                                                              
                                       Si,t+1
    where αL < 1 is the learning rate parameter, which ranges in [0,1] (with 0% representing the non-learning
case), and β < 1 ensures that the staking rate remains non-negative and within the [0,1] range.
    This dual-layered rating and adjustment mechanism induces a dynamic evolution of staking actions in
the system, thereby ensuring adaptability and responsiveness to the continuously shifting landscape of agent
actions and evaluations.
    In summary, understanding and modeling the dynamics of actions and ratings is crucial in predicting the
evolution of staking systems, and our approach, combining psychological insights, economic reasoning, and
rigorous mathematical modeling, offers a comprehensive view of the potential outcomes in such systems.

4.4. Contribution Incentive Mechanisms
    Enhancing the robustness and sustainability of the reputation system requires more than just leveraging
its intrinsic advantages, such as more authentic ratings and demonstrated integrity. It is equally crucial to
incentivize those participants who bring significant positive externalities to the platform.
    A positive externality [65, 66] arises when the actions of an individual or firm confer benefits on others
without being compensated for them. A standard illustration from economics is the realm of education:
individuals who invest in their education not only gain personal advantages but also indirectly bestow broader
societal benefits, like spurring productivity and innovation.
    Within our reputation system’s framework, such positive externalities could emanate from:

  • Direct Investment: Participants contributing directly to the platform aid its development and expan-
    sion. Such contributions can manifest in diverse forms, whether financial resources, technical know-how,
    or other crucial assets. For instance, backers financing the inception of novel features can amplify the
    platform’s capabilities, thereby magnetizing a larger user base. This prospect aligns with the evident
    interest of traditional financial entities that are keen on supporting innovative blockchain ventures or
    other forms of alternative finance [67, 68].




                                                        13
  • Liquidity Provision: By ensuring seamless transactions and bolstering market efficiency, liquidity
    providers hold paramount importance. In the sphere of decentralized finance (DeFi), they are in-
    dispensable, pouring assets into liquidity pools to facilitate smoother trade operations while reaping
    returns for their contributions. Furthermore, it’s worth considering tailored incentive schemes for liq-
    uidity providers within centralized cryptocurrency exchanges, which often resonate more with users
    less versed in blockchain intricacies. Established financial institutions, as well as individual economists,
    advisors, and analysts, are progressively showing interest in exploring or trading in cryptocurrencies
    [69, 70, 71].
  • Community Engagement: An involved community is the backbone of a platform’s success, as they
    amplify its virtues, actively partake in governance, and regularly offer feedback. A fervent user commu-
    nity can catalyze widespread adoption, inspire collaboration, and engender a shared sense of purpose
    among its members.

4.4.1. Modeling Externality Incentives
    To incorporate externality incentives into the model, we introduce an additional parameter, γ, representing
the impact of positive externalities on the reputation of agents. The total reputation of an agent i in round
t can be expressed as:

                                 CPi,t = CPi,t−1 + ∆CPi,t
                                                      A
                                                          + ∆CPi,t
                                                               R
                                                                   + γCPi,t
                                                                        E
                                                                                                             (19)
   where CPi,t is the credit points of agent i at time t, ∆CPi,t
                                                              A
                                                                 is the credit point change w.r.t. actions of
the agent, ∆CPi,t is the credit point change w.r.t. ratings of the agent, and CPi,t
                 R                                                                 E
                                                                                      represents the positive
externality contributed by the agent.

4.5. Integration with Decentralized Autonomous Organizations
    Once both the reputation system and the contribution incentive mechanisms have been simulated and
rigorously tested without any issues, further development of the blockchain can be driven by the route
of a DAO (Decentralized Autonomous Organizations) [72, 73, 74, 75]. In a Decentralized Autonomous
Organization (DAO) model, user engagement is enhanced in two significant capacities. Firstly, as users, they
execute actions, conduct trades, and cast ratings. Secondly, they serve as governors, casting votes on rule
changes and deciding the overall direction of the blockchain. Their dual role ensures alignment with the
reputation system’s success, as the platform’s growth and sustainability directly impact their benefits.
    Drawing inspiration from existing blockchain projects can expedite the integration of DAO principles into
our reputation system. Aragon, for instance, specializes in providing tools and a platform for decentralized
organizations to operate [76, 77]. It offers a suite of applications and services that streamline the creation and
management of decentralized autonomous organizations, thereby removing many of the traditional barriers
to entry. On the other hand, Tezos represents a self-amending blockchain where decisions about protocol
upgrades are made through on-chain governance, relying on stakeholders’ voting [78, 79]. Stakeholders can
propose, select, or vote on amendments, allowing the blockchain to evolve and adapt without the need for a
hard fork. Adapting elements from Aragon’s specialized DAO solutions and Tezos’ self-evolving structure can
help our reputation blockchain achieve the desired autonomy and adaptability, ensuring long-term relevance
and resilience.

5. Monte Carlo Simulations

    Having meticulously constructed our models in preceding sections, it’s now imperative to subject them
to rigorous simulations and discern whether their performance aligns with our expectations. Central to our
simulation methodology is the renowned Monte Carlo technique. We begin our journey with a Brief In-
troduction to Monte Carlo Simulation, setting the stage for newcomers and grounding our approaches
in a theoretical foundation. We then delve into the General Settings for Monte Carlo Simulation
of the Reputation System, laying out the parameters and configurations vital for our experiments.
Two contrasting initial credit distribution scenarios are subsequently examined: one where Scenario of
Credit Points Uniformly-Distributed among Agents Initially, and another highlighting a Scenario


                                                       14
of Credit Points Initially Distributed in Power-Law among Agents. As we venture deeper into the
simulation results, our focus bifurcates into two segments: the Results and Interpretations of Monte
Carlo Simulations for the Basic Model and the Results and Interpretations of Monte Carlo
Simulations for Advanced Models, each shedding light on their respective model outcomes and drawing
comparisons where necessary.

5.1. Brief Introduction to Monte Carlo Simulation
    Monte Carlo Simulation (MCS) [80] is a powerful statistical technique that enables a probabilistic approach
to comprehending complex systems. Essentially, MCS employs random sampling and statistical analysis to
approximate solutions to mathematical challenges.

5.1.1. Basic Principles
    The central concept of MCS is simple: by executing a large enough number of random simulations or
”trials”, one can derive an approximation of a desired quantity. Mathematically, let’s take a random variable
X with an expected value E[X]. The Monte Carlo estimate of E[X] is:
                                                             N
                                                         1   Xsim

                                             E[X] ≈                 Xi                                    (20)
                                                       Nsim i=1
   where Xi are independent samples drawn from the distribution of X, and Nsim represents the number of
simulations.

5.1.2. Application to Structural Reliability
    In structural engineering, from which MCS has its origins [81], MCS has become an essential tool for
gauging the reliability of structures. Let’s consider a limit state function (LSF) G(x) that delineates the
boundary between failure and successful states of a structure. A typical representation is:

                                            G(x) = RandR − RandS                                          (21)
Here, RandR signifies the resistance of the structure (a random variable influenced by factors like material
properties and geometry), while RandS corresponds to the applied load or stress (another random variable
determined by external influences).
    The structure’s failure probability Pf can be defined as the probability where G(x) is less than or equal
to zero:
                                              Pf = P (G(x) ≤ 0)                                          (22)
   To estimate this failure probability through MCS, one can:

  1. Randomly sample values for RandR and RandS from their respective probability distributions.
  2. Calculate the value of G(x).
  3. Check if G(x) ≤ 0 (indicating a failure).

  4. Repeat the above for a large number Nsim of simulations.
  5. Estimate the failure probability as:

                                                   Number of Failures
                                            Pf ≈                                                          (23)
                                                        Nsim
   Upon determining Pf , a reliability index β can be formulated using:

                                                   β = −Φ−1 (Pf )                                         (24)

   where Φ−1 (.) represents the inverse of the standard normal cumulative distribution function. A higher β
value signifies increased reliability.


                                                        15
5.1.3. Limitations and Considerations
    Despite its versatility, MCS has inherent challenges. For intricate problems or situations with extremely
low failure probabilities, an enormous amount of simulations might be essential for achieving adequate accu-
racy. Moreover, selecting appropriate probability distributions for input random variables (like RandR and
RandS ) is vital, as they directly impact the outcomes.

5.2. General Settings for Monte Carlo Simulation of the Reputation System
    Within complex reputation systems, particularly those governed by mechanisms like ’staked credit points’,
the challenge lies not just in constructing a robust theoretical framework, but also in validating its viability
in diverse real-world scenarios. Here, the Monte Carlo simulation stands as a quintessential tool, bridging the
often-gaping chasm between theoretical robustness and empirical efficacy. By simulating numerous rounds
of agent actions, rating, and adjustments, we can gain insights into the system’s stability, the distribution of
credit points, and the effectiveness of the staking mechanism in promoting desired actions.
    The nature of staking, especially with non-traditional metrics like ’credit points’, introduces layers of
variability and potential strategic actions by participants. The Monte Carlo simulation, with its inherent
stochastic modeling, enables a comprehensive exploration of these actions under myriad conditions. By
running numerous simulations, each representing a possible state of the world, it unveils vulnerabilities,
strengths, and unforeseen outcomes tied to the system.
    This systematic exploration also establishes a rating loop. Findings from the simulation can guide re-
finements in the underlying model, ensuring that the reputation system remains adaptive and resilient. For
instance, should simulation results indicate certain strategies where producers might overly centralize stak-
ing, the theoretical constructs can be adjusted to deter such actions, thereby ensuring a more equitable and
effective system, if it is what the model aims for.
    To underscore its significance: the Monte Carlo method isn’t merely a testing instrument. It’s an iterative
dialogue between the abstracted world of theory and the unpredictable terrains of practical application. In
the context of a reputation system driven by ’staked credit points’, this dialogue is crucial, fortifying the
model’s architecture against real-world exigencies and guaranteeing its longevity and relevance.
    The results of the MCSs will be illustrated and discussed in detail in Section 5.5 and Section 5.6. It’s worth
noting that some anomalies were observed within the results of our MCSs. These outlier data points can be
attributed to the inherent randomness and stochastic nature of the simulation method. Monte Carlo, by its
design, employs random sampling to obtain numerical results for problems that might be deterministic in
principle. While the law of large numbers ensures that these simulations converge to the expected value over
a vast number of runs, occasional deviations from the expected outcome are not only possible but expected
due to this randomness. Detailed examination of these anomalies provides insights into the range of possible
outcomes, even if they occur with low probability.

5.2.1. Division of Staking Rates Between Actions and Ratings
    In order to ensure that each agent can independently set their staking ratios for actions and ratings, while
maintaining an unbiased overall probability, the initial staking ratios are set as follows. Each agent is first
assigned a random value SRA which acts as the upper limit for their action staking ratio. This is calculated
as:

                                               SRA = rand(n, 1)                                              (25)
   Subsequently, the actual action staking ratio S A for each agent is determined by multiplying SRA by
another random value, ensuring that it is within the limit:

                                             S A = SRA · rand(n, 1)                                          (26)
    Similarly, the staking ratio for ratings S R is determined by considering the remaining portion from the
action staking ratio, thus ensuring the total staking ratio sums up to 1:

                                         S R = (1 − SRA ) · rand(n, 1)                                       (27)




                                                       16
5.3. Scenario of Credit Points Uniformly-Distributed among Agents Initially
    In the context of our reputation system theoretical model, we employ Monte Carlo simulation to generate
synthetic data that adheres to specific statistical properties. For the initial MCS of the reputation system
model, we propose an approach where each agent is initially provided with an equal share of credit points.
Agents, with their respective credit point allocations, will then randomly determine a staking ratio for various
activities within the system. The core intention behind this setup is to examine if such an even distribution
combined with a random staking approach can incentivize active participation and promote positive actions
among agents.
    Every agent Ai in the system, where i ranges from 1 to n (total number of agents), starts with an equal
amount of credit points:
                                                            CPtotal
                                               CPinitial =                                                  (28)
                                                               n
    where CPtotal is the total amount of credit points in the system.
    Once credit points are distributed, each agent determines a staking ratio for their activities. This ratio
SiA and SiR are random values between 0 and 1 and signifies the proportion of their credit point allocation
they are willing to stake for a particular activity, action and rating, respectively.

                                             SiA ∼ Uniform(0, 1)                                           (29)
                                             SiR ∼ Uniform(0, 1)                                           (30)
   With uniform initial credit point distribution and random staking ratios, the system’s primary goal is to
understand if agents are inclined towards positive participation. Key points of examination include:

  • Active Participation: Whether agents, having an equal footing at the beginning, are more likely to
    participate actively.

  • Risk and Reward Analysis: How agents balance their staking decisions when the potential rewards
    and risks are uncertain.
  • Action Dynamics: If and how agents adjust their staking ratios based on observed outcomes, either
    from their own actions or from the actions of other agents.

   This model offers a fresh perspective on agent action when introduced to a reputation system that starts
with equality and then introduces randomness in staking decisions. By monitoring the agents’ actions under
these conditions, we can gain insights into the optimal strategies and adjustments required to foster a more
cooperative and engaged environment.

5.4. Scenario of Credit Points Initially Distributed in Power-Law among Agents
    One of the fundamental challenges in designing any computational model is selecting the right initial
conditions and distributions that mirror the complexity and irregularity of the real world. Empirical studies
across numerous domains, ranging from economics to natural phenomena, often demonstrate that certain
systems do not follow a simple uniform distribution. Instead, they lean towards distributions characterized
by a power law.
    The Pareto Principle, colloquially known as the 80-20 rule, is a striking manifestation of power law
distributions in socio-economic settings. It suggests that roughly 80% of the effects come from 20% of the
causes, be it wealth distribution, sales figures, or other phenomena. Rooted in both economic reasoning and
mathematical underpinnings, this principle highlights the skewed nature of many real-world distributions.
    In light of this, while beginning with a uniform distribution offers a clean, symmetric baseline for our
model, it’s imperative to also examine the action under power law distributions. By doing so, we can
ensure our model’s robustness and its capability to generalize to real-world scenarios where inequalities and
imbalances are often the norm.
    In the random sampling of MCS, one of the primary challenges is the generation of random numbers that
adhere to a non-uniform distribution, such as the power-law distribution. The inverse transform method
offers an elegant solution to this problem [82, 83, 84, 85, 86].



                                                      17
5.4.1. Inverse Transformation Method
    The inverse transformation method is a fundamental technique for generating random samples from
a specified distribution. By utilizing the inverse of the cumulative distribution function (CDF) — which
is derived from the probability density function (PDF) for continuous variables and the probability mass
function (PMF) for discrete variables — this method can transform uniformly distributed random numbers,
typically from the interval (0, 1), into values consistent with the target distribution. Referring to the CDF
formula 9 in Section 3.4, we categorize the application of this method into two scenarios: continuous and
discrete.
    Continuous Case: Let Xc be a continuous random variable with PDF denoted as fc (x). The CDF of
Xc is represented as Fc (x). Assuming Fc (x) is continuous and strictly increases, its inverse is denoted by
Fc−1 (u) or the inverse CDF. This inverse function relates to the uniformly distributed random variable U .
    To generate a random value from the continuous distribution fc (x), the process is:
  1. Generate U ∼ U (0, 1).

  2. Compute Xc = Fc−1 (U ).

For the continuous case, the relationship between Fc (x) and Fc−1 (u) can be represented as:

                                        u = Fc (x) =⇒ x = Fc−1 (u)                                       (31)

   Discrete Case: For a discrete random variable Xd , where the PMF is pd (xi ), the cumulative PMF is:
                                                         X
                                   Fd (x) = P (Xd ≤ x) =     pd (xi )                              (32)
                                                                 xi ≤x

   To generate a random value from this discrete distribution, identify the smallest integer I such that
U ≤ Fd (xI ). Then, set Xd = xI .

5.4.2. Application of the Inverse Transformation Method to Power-law Distributions
    Power-law, also known as Pareto distributions, appear frequently in various natural and societal phenom-
ena. They are characterized by ”heavy tails”, indicating that tail events (those of low probability) are still
notably impactful.
    For a power-law distribution with a PDF given by p(x) ∼ x−α where α > 1, its CDF is:
                                                                  1−α
                                                             x
                                          F (x) = 1 −                                                    (33)
                                                            xmin

Here, xmin signifies the smallest conceivable value of x.
   The inverse of this CDF, essential for the inverse transformation method, is:
                                                                       1
                                                                    − α−1
                                        F −1 (u) = xmin (1 − u)                                          (34)

   The inverse transformation method is favored when modeling systems with power-law traits due to:
  • Its straightforward implementation, exemplified by the analytical form of the inverse CDF in equation
    (34).
  • Its aptness at mirroring the unique heavy-tailed nature innate to power-law distributions.
    However, for distributions lacking a defined inverse CDF, the method might be less efficacious. Such
scenarios would require iterative numerical procedures, potentially augmenting computational costs and
introducing potential inaccuracies.
    In summation, the inverse transform method adeptly translates uniformly distributed random numbers
to ones adhering to a non-uniform distribution. In our reputation system model, this methodology proved
invaluable for generating synthetic data that mirrored a power-law distribution, affirming the model’s au-
thenticity and precision.


                                                     18
5.5. Results and Interpretations of Monte Carlo Simulations for the Basic Model
   Following the preparations outlined in Section 5.2, we seamlessly executed MCSs on the basic model. The
outcomes aligned perfectly with our expectations generated from Section 3.

5.5.1. Credit Point Dynamics based on Agent Actions
    In our model, the implications of agent actions are distinctly reflected through the benefits or penalties
they accrue in the form of credit points. Our MCSs categorically delineate agents into two prominent
categories based on the mean values assigned to their actions with a smaller variance than that across agents,
as introduced in Formula 8 of Section 3.4.

  1. Beneficial Actors: Agents endowed with higher mean action values in the simulations invariably
     experience positive returns when evaluated by their peers. The magnitude of their credit point gains
     is directly proportional to the amount they staked during their actions and the stake amount of the
     evaluating peers.
  2. Detrimental Actors: Conversely, agents assigned lower mean action values incur losses in credit points
     when evaluated. Similar to the beneficial actors, the quantum of these losses is directly influenced by
     the agent’s staked amount during their actions and the stake of the evaluating counterparts.

    To analyze the variation in action levels among agents, we use the variable CDF, as defined in Formula 9
of Section 3.4. As the simulation progresses, differences in credit point distributions become more pronounced
based on agents’ action quality. This leads to a clear trend: agents with consistent positive actions experience
an increase in benefits, while those with negative actions face mounting penalties.

5.5.2. Stake-to-Reward Relationship with respect to Ratings
    Our MCSs, initiated with a uniform distribution of credit points, elucidate the intricate dynamics between
agent actions and the progressive distribution of credit points. As the simulation progresses, we observe that
the cumulative benefit or loss an agent incurs for each review is primarily determined by two pivotal factors:
the sign (positive or negative) of their review for a particular agent, and its alignment or disparity with the
majority consensus. Furthermore, the magnitude of these benefits or losses is also proportionally affected by
the amount an agent pledges during the review, as well as the pledges made by other reviewers. Essentially,
the staked amount acts as a multiplier, amplifying the potential gains or detriments. Therefore, agents
will experience varying cumulative gains or detriments over time. These cumulative benefits, or the sum of
individual rating outcomes, depend on factors like the magnitude of their own and other raters’ stakes, and
especially, the degree of alignment of their ratings with the prevailing majority opinion.
    In the context of a power law distribution, our conclusions remain strikingly similar. Our simulations,
initialized with agents adhering to a power law distribution of credit points, underscore the complex rela-
tionship between individual agent actions and the ensuing distribution dynamics. It becomes evident that
an agent’s cumulative gain or loss from each evaluation is fundamentally governed by the polarity (positive
or negative) of their feedback for a given agent and its congruence or divergence from the majority con-
sensus. The cumulative benefits, being an aggregate of outcomes from individual ratings, are influenced by
various factors: an agent’s rating frequency, the quantum of stakes they commit during their evaluations,
and predominantly, the extent to which their feedback mirrors the predominant majority viewpoint.

5.6. Results and Interpretations of Monte Carlo Simulations for Advanced Models
   It is crucial to simulate more advanced models that closely resemble real-world scenarios. This step is
imperative to understand the dynamics and implications of the proposed system comprehensively. Further-
more, before the formal launch of the reputation system, extensive real-world testing with actual users is
of paramount importance to ensure the robustness and reliability of the system. This not only helps in
identifying potential challenges but also aids in refining and optimizing the model for practical applications.




                                                      19
Figure 2: Non-Learning Model: Changes of Credit Points over Staking Rate for Actions from the uniform initial distribution




  Figure 3: Learning Model: Changes of Credit Points over Staking Rate for Actions from the uniform initial distribution


5.6.1. Adaptive Model with Learning and Adjustment
    Based on the theoretical analysis in Section 4.2, we discern a marked difference between the adaptive
model with learning and adjustment and the non-learning models regarding staking on actions. As rounds
progress, agents with positive returns—often acknowledged by their peers—increase their staking, enhancing
their rewards. Conversely, agents experiencing negative returns, mainly due to unfavorable ratings, decrease
their staking, thereby reducing their losses. The magnitude of these adjustments correlates with learning
intensities (denoted by αL , as discussed in Section 4.3) and the return outcomes until the staking rate
approaches 0 or 1, at which point intervals become negligible.
    This behavior is corroborated by the results of Monte Carlo simulations (MCS), particularly in high-
staking regions. A comparative study between the adaptive learning model (see Figure 3 for a uniform initial
distribution and Figure 5 for a power-law initial distribution) and the non-learning model (refer to Figure 2
and Figure 4) underscores this trend. Agents with positive outcomes increase their staking in high-staking



                                                           20
Figure 4: Non-Learning Model: Changes of Credit Points over Staking Rate for Actions from the power-law initial distribution




  Figure 5: Learning Model: Changes of Credit Points over Staking Rate for Actions from the power-law initial distribution


regions, as evident in the right portions of the figures. In contrast, those with negative results decrease their
stakes, gravitating towards the left of the diagrams.
    Over multiple rounds, the adaptive model with learning and adjustment demonstrates a rise in agents
achieving positive returns in high-staking actions, while the non-learning model shows a decline in such
agents. This dynamic resembles the natural evolution of free markets where specialists excel in their domain,
echoing the adage, ”the most adept individuals handle the most nuanced tasks.”
    Within the learning model, we utilized Monte Carlo simulations to assess varying learning intensities
(denoted by αL ) among agents, elaborated further in Section 4.3. We explored two scenarios: uniform
learning intensity across agents and individual intensities.
    For a uniform αL , the behavior is straightforward. A higher αL prompts agents with positive outcomes
to increase their staking, while those with negative outcomes retract.
    We pursued two approaches for individualized learning intensities. Initially, we assigned random values



                                                            21
Figure 6: Changes of Credit Points w.r.t. Actions vs. Staking Rate for Actions & Random Learning Intensity (Uniform-Initial-
Distribution)




Figure 7: Changes of Credit Points w.r.t. Actions vs. Staking Rate for Actions & Random Learning Intensity (Power-Law-
Initial-Distribution)


from the range [0, 1] to each agent’s learning intensity, illustrated in Figure 6 for uniform initial credit points
and Figure 7 for Power-Law initial credit points. Then, we established a direct correlation between the
learning intensity αL and an agent’s staking rate, depicted in Figure 8 and Figure 9.
    For both approaches, the overarching trends are consistent: Agents with higher learning intensities tend
to experience amplified credit gains and fewer losses. Influenced by previous outcomes, they adjust their
stakes, optimizing their risk-reward balance.
    Notably, the patterns are more pronounced in Figure 8 and Figure 9 than in Figure 6 and Figure 7. This
distinction arises from the cumulative effect of increasing both staking and learning intensities over rounds,
suggesting that credit changes align with these intensities over time.
    Moreover, the differences between Uniformly-distributed and Power-Law-distributed initial credit points
are consistent with our prior discussions. The role of learning intensity in altering credit points remains


                                                            22
Figure 8: Changes of Credit Points w.r.t. Actions vs. Staking Rate for Actions & Positive-Correlated Learning Intensity
(Uniform-Initial-Distribution)




Figure 9: Changes of Credit Points w.r.t. Actions vs. Staking Rate for Actions & Positive-Correlated Learning Intensity (Power-
Law-Initial-Distribution)


uniform across varying initial distributions, with the Power-Law distribution maintaining its long-tail effect.
    In contrast to staking on actions, the discrepancy between the adaptive and non-learning models con-
cerning staking on ratings is more subtle. This nuance originates from the complexities of learning from
rating consequences. Agents benefit when their ratings align with the majority but face challenges when
they differ. This variance somewhat moderates the ”Keynesian Beauty Contest” effect [87], where agents
anticipate majority ratings rather than providing genuine assessments.
    These simulation results resonate with the theoretical insights from Section 4.3. They suggest our
blockchain-centric reputation system effectively establishes an on-chain market mechanism, adeptly avoid-
ing the challenges of falsified ratings prevalent in traditional third-party vendor platforms, as highlighted in
Section 1.



                                                              23
5.6.2. Allowing Agents to Skip Rounds
    We have developed a MCS program that incorporates the mechanism allowing agents to skip rounds.
Specifically, in each round, a certain proportion of agents will neither perform any actions nor provide any
ratings. Unless otherwise specified, all subsequent simulation results presented will account for this skipping
mechanism.

5.6.3. Simulation of Non-Random Consumer Selection




Figure 10: Non-Learning Model with Consumer Selection: Changes of Credit Points over Staking Rate for Actions from the
uniform initial distribution




Figure 11: Learning Model with Consumer Selection: Changes of Credit Points over Staking Rate for Actions from the uniform
initial distribution

   As elaborated in Section 4.2, the transparency of staking information naturally inclines consumers to favor
producers who have staked a larger amount of credit points. Given that consumers inherently favor provider
agents with a higher stake in credit points, it follows that those with minimal credit points staked for actions


                                                           24
Figure 12: Non-Learning Model with Consumer Selection: Changes of Credit Points over Staking Rate for Actions from the
power-law initial distribution




Figure 13: Learning Model with Consumer Selection: Changes of Credit Points over Staking Rate for Actions from the power-law
initial distribution


are more likely to be overlooked and skipped by consumers, in line with the skipping mechanism delineated
in Section 4.1 and Section 5.6.2. We now incorporate this skipping mechanism in simulating non-random
consumer selection.
    The MCSs elucidate the dynamics of credit points relative to the staking rate for actions, especially when
consumer selection mechanisms are incorporated. Starting from a uniform initial distribution, the outcomes
for the non-learning model are depicted in Figure 10, while the learning model outcomes are presented in
Figure 11. Outcomes derived from the power-law initial distribution are similarly demonstrated in Figure 12
and Figure 13.
    Across these simulations, a clear trend becomes evident: the influence of consumer selection mechanisms
results in virtually negligible positive or negative returns for those who stake minimal credit points on actions.
The patterns observed in the high staking rate regions, or the right half of the figures, align with previous


                                                            25
observations: agents receiving positive returns are inclined to increase their stakes, whereas those incurring
negative returns tend to reduce their staking rates, shifting towards the lower staking regions, i.e., the left
sections of the figures.
    This again tells, tasks tend to be more frequently allocated to individuals who stake a higher number
of credit points for their actions. From a national economic standpoint, it is plausible to infer that these
agents are more willing to commit to their actions, perhaps due to their specialized skills, or for other
reasons. Consequently, they often receive positive ratings. On the flip side, those who are less specialized or
consistently receive less favorable reviews find themselves marginalized over time. This evolving landscape
resonates with the time-tested belief: ”the most specialized individuals handle the most specialized tasks.”

5.6.4. Contribution Incentive Mechanisms
    MCSs with contribution incentive mechanisms indicate that the allocation of credit points for actions and
ratings outside the system can dilute the credit points for others. However, the network effect, which brings
competitive advantages among peers, can enhance the intrinsic value of each credit point. It is anticipated
that if the incentive mechanism is designed appropriately, meaning the increase in credit points outweighs
the dilution effect, then overall, everyone in the system stands to benefit.

6. Conclusions

    Building on the insights drawn from our Monte Carlo simulation results, this culminating section distills
our findings and teases out the intricate nuances that emerged throughout our study. We commence by prob-
ing the bedrock of our model—Intrinsic Incentive Mechanisms for Integrity-driven Ratings—which
underscores the spontaneous motivations driving genuine ratings. Progressing further, we then delineate
the Incentive Mechanisms for Actions, shedding light on the various levers and pulleys that can be
manipulated to promote desired agent behaviors. As a summary to the contribution incentive mechanisms,
a crucial balancing act then comes into focus as we navigate the dynamics of Balancing Stakeholders’
Shares and Network Effects, emphasizing the delicate equilibrium necessary for a thriving ecosystem.
Rounding off our discourse, we elevate our gaze to a holistic vista, capturing the grand vision of the The
Everlasting Reputation System as a Universal Sustainable Oracle, which places our system in the
broader context of the blockchain oracle landscape.

6.1. Intrinsic Incentive Mechanisms for Integrity-driven Ratings
    In the realm of online ratings, ensuring integrity-driven feedback is pivotal. Our system’s design incorpo-
rates a mechanism that penalizes agents whose ratings diverge from the consensus, especially when they have
staked a significant amount. This is instrumental in thwarting malicious actors. Vendors offering subpar
products or services, contemplating artificially boosting their ratings or undermining their rivals, confront
imminent hefty losses. Even if spurious reviews momentarily influence the consensus, integrity-driven re-
views, over time, can redress the balance. This may relegate their staked ratings to the minority, inflicting
substantial losses.
    Concurrently, vendors deliberating on posting negative reviews against competitors with top-notch prod-
ucts or services encounter an analogous predicament. Considering that the majority of consumers are pre-
disposed to furnish positive feedback for high-caliber products or services, a malevolent negative review can
swiftly be overshadowed, culminating in substantial losses for the deceitful vendor. This architecture ensures
that, viewed through the lens of economic incentives, agents are propelled to rate with an integrity-driven
mindset grounded in their firsthand experiences.
    Venturing into game theory, while agents may kick off with endeavors to ascertain the predominant
sentiment, the game is poised to settle into a state where the lion’s share of agents unambiguously rate
driven by their integrity-driven experience. This resonates with specific game theoretic models where cyclical
guessing games gravitate towards the integrity-driven modus operandi espoused by autonomous participants
[88].
    Such findings not only bolster our theoretical postulations but also accentuate the tangible applicability
of our blockchain-anchored reputation system. By synergizing individual motivations with the overarching
system mechanics, we unfurl a resilient platform wherein integrity-driven ratings gain momentum, while
duplicitous manipulations face retribution.


                                                      26
6.2. Incentive Mechanisms for Actions
    From our Monte Carlo Simulations (MCS) results and interpretations, we’ve distilled core insights on
action-related staking behaviors within a blockchain-based reputation system:
    A clear distinction arises when comparing the adaptive model, which includes learning and adjustment
mechanisms, to its non-learning counterparts in the context of staking on actions. Agents receiving positive
feedback often increase their stakes, aiming to maximize their rewards. Conversely, those encountering
negative outcomes tend to reduce their stakes to minimize losses.
    The trends observed in high-staking scenarios further reinforce these findings. Agents reaping positive
benefits amplify their staking commitments, whereas those on the receiving end of negative feedback tend
to retract. This pattern is akin to free-market behaviors where tasks naturally shift towards more proficient
agents, sidelining the less adept ones.
    The introduction of features such as the option for agents to skip rounds and the utilization of non-random
consumer selection provides deeper insights into staking behaviors. Notably, tasks are predominantly assigned
to agents who commit significant credit points, an indicator of their dedication or skill set in specific roles.
Agents with higher stakes simplify the selection criteria for consumers, giving them a competitive advantage
and attracting newcomers. As a result, our blockchain-based reputation system effectively manages an on-
chain marketplace, steering clear of the fake rating problems common in traditional platforms.
    In summary, these findings highlight the platform’s intrinsic mechanisms for encouraging integrity and
cultivating a beneficial relationship between consumers and providers. Importantly, the ability of our platform
to counter fake reviews gives it a competitive edge, drawing in users and third-party vendors from competing
systems. This positive feedback not only enhances the platform’s reputation but also leverages the network
effect [89, 90], strengthening its market presence.

6.3. Balancing Stakeholders’ Shares and Network Effects
    Through our simulations, which incorporate contribution incentive mechanisms, we elucidate the poten-
tial equilibriums in credit point distributions. While external incentives may reduce the shares of existing
stakeholders, they can simultaneously enhance the intrinsic value of each credit point via the network effect.
    There is a pivotal balance, achievable through judiciously crafted mechanisms and DAO governance,
where an optimal outcome that serves all stakeholders’ interests can be realized. The aim is to crystallize this
equilibrium and possibly enshrine it within a constitutional framework, thus establishing a robust foundation
for the reputation system’s functionality.

6.4. The Everlasting Reputation System as a Universal Sustainable Oracle
    The rapid progression of blockchain technology has opened new horizons for decentralized applications.
Within this paradigm, the oracle problem—the challenge of securely and reliably transmitting external data to
the blockchain—emerges as a significant hurdle. Although Chainlink’s decentralized oracle aimed to address
this, it faces challenges concerning long-term sustainability and potential dilution of asset value.
    Drawing from the inherent features of blockchain such as transparency and immutability, the everlasting
reputation system presents a straightforward and sustainable solution to the universal oracle problem. It is
anchored in a decentralized, collective rating mechanism, making it organically adaptive to supply real-world
data to smart contracts, thereby functioning as a dynamic oracle network.
    The reputation system’s intrinsic advantage stems from its foundational principles. It endows participants
with a robust and enduring incentive to rate transparently and honestly. This distinct methodology yields
unparalleled advantages. For consumers, it acts as a guiding beacon, steering them to vendors who meet their
anticipated standards. For vendors, it stands as a defensive shield against unfounded negative feedback from
malevolent competitors, enabling them to foster and uphold their credibility. As the system magnetically
draws an escalating number of consumers and vendors, its network effect burgeons. This amplifying network
effect continually reinforces the oracle. Moreover, its adaptability and universality negate the need for
complex, case-specific designs. As it intuitively attracts diverse users and data providers, the reputation
system is poised to rival other oracles like Chainlink.
    Furthermore, with the potential integration of cryptographic tools such as Ring Signatures and Zero-
Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) to the reputation system, the oracle offers enhanced privacy adaptability:




                                                      27
  1. Ring Signature Oracles: Ring Signatures allow for digital signing by a group member, disclosing
     that a group member signed it but concealing the signer’s identity. Within oracles, this protects
     data providers’ identities. Specifically, as oracle providers feed data to smart contracts, using Ring
     Signatures ensures that the data’s specific provider remains undisclosed, offering oracle participants a
     layer of privacy.

  2. ZKP Oracles: ZKPs let a prover authenticate a statement’s veracity to a verifier without revealing
     further relevant information about the statement. In oracles, ZKPs protect the data contents submitted
     to smart contracts, permitting data verification without unveiling the data’s detailed specifics. By
     integrating ZKPs, the system can effortlessly merge with existing blockchain frameworks, ensuring
     data privacy without compromising its accuracy or truth.

    The evolving nature of the reputation system, driven by agent participation and feedback, epitomizes
a self-tuning mechanism. Incorporating a Decentralized Autonomous Organization (DAO) in future phases
will endow the oracle with perpetual evolution, distinguishing it from static oracle systems reliant on manual
interventions or enhancements.

6.4.1. Advantageous Scenarios for the Universal Sustainable Oracle
   1. Privacy-Sensitive Applications: Integration of Ring Signatures and ZKPs makes this system ideal
      for applications demanding high data confidentiality, such as banking transactions, confidential business
      dealings, legal documents, medical records, and private voting mechanisms.
  2. Decentralized Finance (DeFi): Precise data is the lifeblood of DeFi. The reputation-based oracle
     can enhance financial protocols with reliable market data, optimizing the efficacy of platforms related
     to lending, borrowing, trading, or even risk management and insurance.
  3. Supply Chain Management: The reputation system, with its emphasis on transparency and accu-
     racy, can ensure product authenticity throughout supply chains. Industries prioritizing authenticity like
     agriculture, pharmaceuticals, electronics, luxury goods, and even art and antiques can greatly benefit.

   In summary, rooted in blockchain principles and supplemented with ZKPs, the everlasting reputation
system offers a comprehensive solution to the pertinent oracle dilemma. As blockchain garners wider ac-
ceptance, the need for a trustworthy oracle will surge, positioning this model as a leading contender that
harmoniously blends data privacy, reliability, and durability.


7. Future Investigations

    As our research journey navigates the intricate tapestry of the reputation system and its myriad facets,
there remain certain areas poised for deeper exploration in subsequent phases of our investigation. Our
anticipation is to cast our intellectual net even wider, to capture the more nuanced dynamics and emer-
gent properties that our initial inquiry might have only touched upon. Firstly, we delve into the realm of
Additional and Multiple Ratings, seeking to comprehend how multiple layers of feedback can enrich
the analytical depth of our system. Proceeding from there, the lens of our inquiry shifts to an anticipatory
stance, focusing on the Early Detection of Potential Problems — a proactive measure to ensure the
seamless functioning of the reputation mechanism. As we transition into the practicalities of system deploy-
ment, the Adaptive Incentive Mechanisms for Post-Launch Stage promises a set of guiding principles
and methodologies tailored for the evolving needs of a live system. Lastly, but by no means least, our
exploration culminates in the conceptualization of a Perpetually Self-Adaptively-Evolving Universal
Oracle, envisaging a system that not only evolves but also continually refines itself, embodying the principles
of perpetual learning and adaptation.

7.1. Additional and Multiple Ratings
    In our subsequent studies, we aim to delve deeper into the intricacies of a singular agent assigning multiple
ratings to a counterpart. We are conceptualizing an innovative weighting formula that, rather than merely



                                                       28
focusing on staking quantity, places added emphasis on recent ratings. Such a revision is aimed at capturing
the fluidity of actions and potential shifts in an agent’s viewpoint over time.
   To operationalize this, we propose the incorporation of indices representing an agent’s historical actions,
coupled with a decay function to account for intervals between successive ratings. Our objective with this
methodology is to temper the impact of aged ratings, acknowledging that the context of the scrutinized action
may transform. To ensure its feasibility, we plan to employ MCSs within an expansive parameter spectrum.
This will entail examining an array of decay functions related to diverse time spans.

7.2. Early Detection of Potential Problems
7.2.1. Manual Intervention During Testnets
    Despite the inherent design of the reputation system, which instinctively promotes agent integrity, and its
satisfactory performance in simulations, it might be prudent to retain the option for manual interventions,
particularly during the testnet phase. Potential indicators, like abrupt transaction surges or atypical staking
by an agent, could be warning signs of looming issues or exploitation. Given the feedback dynamics of
reputation systems, user reviews and ratings might act as preliminary alert signals. For example, a sharp
decline in an agent’s reputation could necessitate in-depth scrutiny. This can be optimally executed if the
manual intervention guidelines are unambiguous, thereby ensuring seamless coexistence with the autonomous
functioning of the reputation system.

7.2.2. Machine Learning Integration
    Employing advanced analytics and machine learning algorithms can facilitate real-time transaction pattern
monitoring. By amalgamating continuous oversight with adaptive algorithms proficient in learning from
past data, the system can proactively pinpoint and address concerns, fortifying the trustworthiness of the
blockchain and all its stakeholders. This anticipatory stance not only reduces potential threats but also
nurtures user trust, bolstering durability and adaptability in a swiftly changing digital landscape.

7.3. Adaptive Incentive Mechanisms for Post-Launch Stage
7.3.1. Incentive Mechanisms for Early Problem Finders
    To counteract the ”Keynesian beauty contest” effect, as delineated by Keynes in 1936 [87], we contemplate
the application of skewed functions to endorse rating diversity. If the collective outcomes of this ”contest”
exceed a predetermined threshold, the system might autonomously incentivize divergent actions, aiming for
recalibration. Designing such mechanisms necessitates meticulous scheming, exhaustive simulation-based
validation, and thorough field testing to ensure interventions remain well-measured and intentional.

7.3.2. Strengthening Community Participation
    Besides prioritizing early problem identification, it’s essential to reward the astute minority who identify
these issues promptly. Echoing sentiments from earlier chapters, a renewed focus will be directed towards
championing community engagement. Establishing an organic incentive framework can ensure sustained
competitiveness of the reputation system. This strategy not only lauds individuals for their proactive con-
tributions but also consolidates the efficacy and integrity of the overarching system.

7.3.3. Exploring Decentralized Autonomy through DAO
    The exploration of Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs) presents an innovative blueprint
for a self-regulating, independent system. By their design, DAOs, anchored in predefined rules, circumvent
centralized control, potentially ensuring unbiased decision-making mechanisms. These organizations can
be tailored to autonomously reward contributors, manage resources, and make judgements rooted in the
community’s collective wisdom. Incorporating DAOs into our system’s architecture might further bolster
incentivized participation, aligning individual rewards with collective benefits.




                                                      29
7.4. Perpetually Self-Adaptively-Evolving Universal Oracle
    An astutely crafted reputation system with intrinsic incentive mechanisms for integrity ratings, coupled
with the principles of DAO, paves the way for a perpetually self-operating, self-correcting, and adaptively
evolving Universal Oracle. This union merges the immutable trust mechanism of a DAO with the dynamic
adaptability of our model, crafting a system poised for long-term resilience and relevance. Users, being both
beneficiaries and decision-makers regarding the oracle’s direction, ensure each update carries the legacy of
existing participants while extending to new ones. This reinforces the network effect and establishes barriers
against imitators. Consequently, such a system, by continuously recalibrating its parameters and practices
in response to evolving circumstances, can potentially maintain its integrity and relevance indefinitely, sur-
passing any other competitors.




                                                     30
References
[1] Carlo Morelli, Information Costs and Information Asymmetry in British Food Retailing, The Service
   Industries Journal, Volume 19, 1999 - Issue 3, Pages 175-186.
[2] Tülin Erdem, Joffre Swait, Brand Credibility, Brand Consideration, and Choice, Journal of Consumer
   Research, Volume 31, Issue 1, June 2004, Pages 191–198.
[3] Tae Hyun Baek, Jooyoung Kim, Jay Hyunjae Yu, The Differential Roles of Brand Credibility and Brand
   Prestige in Consumer Brand Choice, Psychology & Marketing, Vol. 27(7): 662–678, July 2010.
[4] Gerald Bloom, Hilary Standing, Robert Lloyd, Markets, information asymmetry and health care: Towards
   new social contracts, Social Science & Medicine, Volume 66, Issue 10, May 2008, Pages 2076-2087.
[5] Xueping Zhen, Shuangshuang Xu, Yongjian Li, Dan Shi, When and how should a retailer use third-party
   platform channels? The Impact of spillover effects, European Journal of Operational Research, Volume
   301, Issue 2, 1 September 2022, Pages 624-637.
[6] Wu, Y., Ngai, E.W.T., Wu, P., & Wu, C. (2020). Fake online reviews: Literature review, synthesis, and
   directions for future research. Decision Support Systems, 132, [online] Available at: https://doi.org/10.
   1016/j.dss.2020.113280.
[7] Sekar, S. (2023). Technical Perspective: A Rare Glimpse of Tracking Fake Reviews. Communications of
   the ACM, 66(10), 97. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1145/3615429.
[8] Harrison-Walker, L.J., & Jiang, Y. (2023). Suspicion of online product reviews as fake: Cues and conse-
   quences. Journal of Business Research, 160, [online] Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.
   2023.113780.
[9] Shukla, A.D., & Goh, J.M. (2023). Fighting fake reviews: Authenticated anonymous reviews using identity
   verification. Business Horizons, [In Press, Journal Pre-proof], [online] Available at: https://doi.org/10.
   1016/j.bushor.2023.08.002.
[10] JP Vergne, Decentralized vs. Distributed Organization: Blockchain, Machine Learning and the Future
   of the Digital Platform, Organization Theory, Volume 1, Issue 4, October-December 2020, https://doi.
   org/10.1177/2631787720977052.
[11] Satoshi Nakamoto, 2008, Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System, https://www.bitcoin.org.
[12] Jiin-Chiou Cheng, Narn-Yih Lee, Chien Chi, Yi-Hua Chen, Blockchain and smart contract for digital
   certificate, 2018 IEEE International Conference.
[13] Ethereum whitepaper, https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/.
[14] Steve Ellis, Ari Juels, and Sergey Nazarov, ChainLink: A Decentralized Oracle Network, 4 September
   2017.
[15] Giulio Caldarelli and Joshua Ellul, The Blockchain Oracle Problem in Decentralized Finance—A Multi-
   vocal Approach, Applied Sciences, Volume 11, Issue 16, 2021, https://doi.org/10.3390/app11167572.
[16] Kenneth Hsien Yung Chung, Dan Li, Peter Adriaens, Technology-enabled financing of sustainable infras-
   tructure: A case for blockchains and decentralized oracle networks, Technological Forecasting and Social
   Change, Volume 187, February 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.122258.
[17] Lorenz Breidenbach et al., Chainlink 2.0: Next Steps in the Evolution of Decentralized Oracle Networks,
   15 April 2021.
[18] Eric Wall, What’s Wrong With the Chainlink 2.0 Whitepaper? (For Simpletons), May 1, 2021.
[19] Ahmed S. Almasoud, Farookh Khadeer Hussain, Omar K. Hussain, Smart contracts for blockchain-
   based reputation systems: A systematic literature review, Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
   Volume 170, 15 November 2020.


                                                     31
[20] Claudio Piccolo Fernandes et al., A blockchain-based reputation system for trusted VANET nodes, Ad
   Hoc Networks, Volume 140, 1 March 2023.
[21] Yaqoob, I., Salah, K., Jayaraman, R., & Al-Hammadi, Y. (2022). Blockchain for healthcare data man-
   agement: opportunities, challenges, and future recommendations. Neural Computing and Applications, 34,
   11475–11490.
[22] Catalini, C., & Gans, J.S. (2020). Some simple economics of the blockchain. Communications of the
   ACM, 63(7), 80-90. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1145/3359552.
[23] Yakubov, A., Shbair, W., Wallbom, A., et al. (2018). A Blockchain-Based PKI Management Framework.
   In The First IEEE/IFIP International Workshop on Managing and Managed by Blockchain colocated
   with IEEE/IFIP NOMS 2018, Taipei, Taiwan, 23-27 April 2018. Available at: https://hdl.handle.net/
   10993/35468.
[24] Abdullah, N., Hakansson, A., & Moradian, E. (2017). Blockchain based approach to enhance big data
   authentication in distributed environment. In 2017 Ninth International Conference. IEEE. Available at:
   https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7993927.

[25] Atzori, M. (2016). Blockchain Technology and Decentralized Governance: Is the State Still Necessary?
   SSRN. Available at: https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=number_here.
[26] Metelski, D. & Sobieraj, J. (2022). Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Projects: A Study of Key Performance
   Indicators in Terms of DeFi Protocols’ Valuations. Int. J. Financial Stud., 10(4), 108. [online] Available
   at: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijfs10040108.
[27] RP Murphy, Chaos theory, 2010, http://www.mises.org.
[28] Edward Norton Lorenz, Deterministic nonperiodic flow, Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, 1963.
[29] Saiyu Qi, Yue Li, Wei Wei, Qian Li, Ke Qiao, & Yong Qi, Truth: A Blockchain-Aided Secure Reputation
   System With Genuine Feedbacks, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 2022.
[30] Zibin Zheng et al., An overview on smart contracts: Challenges, advances and platforms, Future Gen-
   eration Computer Systems, Volume 105, April 2020, Pages 475-491.
[31] Li, X., Liu, Q., Wu, S., Cao, Z., & Bai, Q. (2023). Game theory based compatible incentive mecha-
   nism design for non-cryptocurrency blockchain systems. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 31,
   [online] Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2022.100426.
[32] Han, R., Yan, Z., Liang, X., & Yang, L.T. (2023). How Can Incentive Mechanisms and Blockchain
   Benefit with Each Other? A Survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(7), Article No.: 136, pp.1-38, [online]
   Available at: https://doi.org/10.1145/3539604.

[33] Xu, Z., Liu, C., Zhang, P., Lu, T., & Gu, N. (2021). URIM: Utility-Oriented Role-Centric Incentive
   Mechanism Design for Blockchain-Based Crowdsensing. In DASFAA 2021: Database Systems for Advanced
   Applications (pp. 358-374).
[34] Liu, Z., Li, Y., Min, Q., & Chang, M. (2022). User incentive mechanism in blockchain-based online
   community: An empirical study of steemit. Information & Management, 59(7), [online] Available at:
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2022.103596.
[35] Eiichiro Fujisaki & Koutarou Suzuki, Traceable Ring Signature, PKC 2007: Public Key Cryptography.
[36] Fangguo Zhang & Kwangjo Kim, ID-Based Blind Signature and Ring Signature from Pairings, ASI-
   ACRYPT 2002: Advances in Cryptology.

[37] Lingling Wang, Guoyin Zhang, & Chunguang Ma, A survey of ring signature, Frontiers of Electrical and
   Electronic Engineering in China, January 2008.



                                                     32
[38] Sherman S. M. Chow, Siu-Ming Yiu, & Lucas C. K. Hui, Efficient Identity Based Ring Signature, ACNS
   2005: Applied Cryptography and Network Security.
[39] Carlos Aguilar Melchor, Pierre-Louis Cayrel, Philippe Gaborit, & Fabien Laguillaumie, A New Efficient
   Threshold Ring Signature Scheme Based on Coding Theory, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION
   THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011.
[40] U. Fiege, A. Fiat, & A. Shamir, Zero knowledge proofs of identity, STOC ’87: Proceedings of the
   nineteenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, January 1987, https://doi.org/10.1145/
   28395.28419.

[41] A. De Santis & G. Persiano, Zero-knowledge proofs of knowledge without interaction, Proceedings., 33rd
   Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 1992, https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.1992.
   267809.
[42] Joe Kilian, A note on efficient zero-knowledge proofs and arguments (extended abstract), STOC ’92:
   Proceedings of the twenty-fourth annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing, July 1992, https:
   //doi.org/10.1145/129712.129782.

[43] Jae Kwon, Ethan Buchman Cosmos: A Network of Distributed Ledgers, GitHub Repository, https:
   //github.com/cosmos/cosmos/blob/master/WHITEPAPER.md.
[44] Jae Kwon, Ethan Buchman Cosmos: A Network of Distributed Ledgers, Whitepaper.io, https:
   //whitepaper.io/document/582/cosmos-whitepaper.

[45] Tezos Tezos Whitepaper, GitHub Repository, https://github.com/tezos/tezos-papers/blob/
   master/white_paper.tex.
[46] Tezos Tezos Whitepaper, The Whitepaper Database, https://www.allcryptowhitepapers.com/
   tezos-whitepaper/.

[47] Yang, D., Long, C., Xu, H., & Peng, S. (2020). A Review on Scalability of Blockchain. In ICBCT’20:
   Proceedings of the 2020 The 2nd International Conference on Blockchain Technology (pp. 1-6). https:
   //doi.org/10.1145/3390566.3391665
[48] Chauhan, A., Malviya, O. P., Verma, M., et al. (2018). Blockchain and Scalability. In 2018 IEEE
   International Conference. IEEE.

[49] Pierro, G. A., & Tonelli, R. (2022). Can Solana be the Solution to the Blockchain Scalability Problem?.
   In 2022 IEEE International Conference. IEEE.
[50] Crain, T., Natoli, C., & Gramoli, V. (2021). Red Belly: A Secure, Fair and Scalable Open Blockchain.
   In 2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. IEEE.

[51] Xianji Cai, Yanli Ren, Xinpeng Zhang Privacy-Protected Deletable Blockchain, IEEE Access, Volume
   8, 2019, 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2962816
[52] Kim, Young Soo; Park, Young-Soo; Lee, Byoung Yup Security Model of Smart Contract Based Private
   BlockChain Using Commitment Scheme, The Journal of the Korea Contents Association, Volume 18, Issue
   7, 2018, Pages 620–627 https://doi.org/10.5392/JKCA.2018.18.07.620

[53] Asgaonkar, A. (2022). Scaling Blockchains and the Case for Ethereum. In: Handbook on Blockchain,
   pp. 197–213. Springer Optimization and Its Applications, vol 194. Available at: https://link.springer.
   com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-07535-3_6.
[54] Kudzin, A., Toyoda, K., Takayama, S., & Ishigame, A. (2022). Scaling Ethereum 2.0s Cross-Shard
   Transactions with Refined Data Structures. Cryptography, 6(4), 57. Available at: https://doi.org/10.
   3390/cryptography6040057.




                                                    33
[55] Quilia, links, Trewkat, & Tonytad (2023). A Primer on Soulbound Tokens: Potential Game-Changer
   for Decentralized Operations in Web3. Bankless Publishing. Available at: https://banklesspublishing.
   com/a-primer-on-soulbound-tokens/.
[56] Owens, D. (2022). Soulbound Tokens: Social credit system or spark for global adoption? Cointelegraph.
   Available at: https://cointelegraph.com/magazine/soulbound-cryptocurrency-tokens-social-credit-system-
   spark-next-bull-run/.
[57] Handagama, S. (2022). Elon Musk Was Mulling Creating a Blockchain-Based Social Media Firm Before
   Offering to Buy Twitter. Coindesk. Available at: https://www.coindesk.com/business/2022/09/30/elon-
   musk-was-mulling-creating-a-blockchain-based-social-media-firm-before-offering-to-buy-twitter/.

[58] Yan Zhu, Weijing Song, Di Wang, Di Ma, & William Cheng-Chung Chu, TA-SPESC: Toward Asset-
   Driven Smart Contract Language Supporting Ownership Transaction and Rule-Based Generation on
   Blockchain, IEEE Transactions on Reliability, Volume: 70, Issue: 3, September 2021.
[59] Dongsheng Hou, Wenjing Ma, Wei Zhang, Yixuan Li, Yu Du, & Yukun Hao, An on-chain trading model
   of real world asset backed digital assets, Institution of Engineering and Technology, First published: 05
   September 2023. https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1049/blc2.12045
[60] C. F. Menezes and D. L. Hanson On the Theory of Risk Aversion International Economic Review, Vol.
   11, No. 3 (Oct., 1970), pp. 481-487 (7 pages) https://https://www.jstor.org/stable/2525326
[61] Bernard Friedman Risk Aversion and the Consumer Choice of Health Insurance Option The Review of
   Economics and Statistics, Vol. 56, No. 2 (May, 1974), pp. 209-214 (6 pages) https://www.jstor.org/
   stable/1924441
[62] John W. Pratt Risk Aversion In The Small And In The Large Uncertainty in Economics, 1978, Pages
   59, 61-75, 77-79 https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-214850-7.50010-3
[63] Roger-A. Morin, A. Fernandez Suarez, Risk Aversion Revisited The Journal of Finance, 1983 https:
   //doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1983.tb02291.x
[64] Luigi Guiso and Monica Paiella The Role of Risk Aversion in Predicting Individual Behaviors Available
   at SSRN : https://ssrn.com/abstract=608262
[65] Carl J. Dahlman, The Problem of Externality The Journal of Law and Economics, Volume 22, Number
   1
[66] Jeroen C.J.M. van den Bergh Externality or sustainability economics? Ecological Economics, Volume
   69, Issue 11, 15 September 2010, Pages 2047-2052 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2010.02.009
[67] Yanuar Andrianto and Yoda Diputra, The Effect of Cryptocurrency on Investment Portfolio Effective-
   ness, Journal of Finance and Accounting, Vol. 5, No. 6, 2017, Pages 229-238, https://doi.org/10.11648/
   j.jfa.20170506.14.
[68] Pooja Singh, Is the Financial Market ready for Cryptocurrency ETFs? - A critical evaluation, Journal
   of Risk Finance, 2022 Vol. 23, No. 4, pp. 456-460. https://doi.org/10.1108/JRF-08-2022-241.
[69] Ariah Klages-Mundt and Andreea Minca, While stability lasts: A stochastic model of noncustodial
   stablecoins, Mathematical Finance, Volume 32, Issue 4, 2022, Firstpublished:22July2022.
[70] Wenpin Tang and David D. Yao, Trading under the proof-of-stake protocol – A continuous-time control
   approach, Mathematical Finance, Volume 33, Issue 4, 2023, Firstpublished:24May2023.
[71] Carol Alexander, Ding Chen, and Arben Imeraj, Crypto quanto and inverse options, Mathematical
   Finance, Volume 33, Issue 4, 2023, Firstpublished:11July2023.




                                                    34
[72] Wang, S., Ding, W., Li, J., Yuan, Y., Ouyang, L., & Wang, F.-Y. (2019). Decentralized Autonomous
   Organizations: Concept, Model, and Applications. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL
   SOCIAL SYSTEMS, 6(5), [online] Available at: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=
   &arnumber=8836488.
[73] Diallo, N., Shi, W., Xu, L., Gao, Z., Chen, L., Lu, Y., Shah, N., Carranco, L., Le, T.-C., Surez,
   A. B., & Turner, G. eGov-DAO: a Better Government using Blockchain based Decentralized Autonomous
   Organization. International Conference on eDemocracy & eGovernment (ICEDEG), 2018 [online] Available
   at: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8372356.
[74] El Faqir, Y., Arroyo, J., & Hassan, S. (2020). An overview of decentralized autonomous organizations
   on the blockchain. OpenSym ’20: Proceedings of the 16th International Symposium on Open Collaboration,
   Article No.: 11, Pages 1–8. [online] Available at: https://doi.org/10.1145/3412569.3412579.
[75] DuPont, Q. (2017). Experiments in algorithmic governance: A history and ethnography of “The DAO,”
   a failed decentralized autonomous organization. In Bitcoin and Beyond. 1st Edition. Routledge. [online]
   Available at: https://www.routledge.com/Bitcoin-and-Beyond/.
[76] Aragon Aragon Whitepaper, GitHub Repository, https://github.com/aragon/whitepaper.
[77] Aragon Aragon Whitepaper, The Whitepaper Database, https://www.allcryptowhitepapers.com/
   aragon-whitepaper/.
[78] Victor Allombert, Mathias Bourgoin, Julien Tesson Introduction to the Tezos Blockchain, 2019 Inter-
   national Conference on High Performance Computing & Simulation (HPCS), Publisher: IEEE.
[79] Daniel Perez, Jiahua Xu, Benjamin Livshits Revisiting Transactional Statistics of High-scalability
   Blockchains, IMC ’20: Proceedings of the ACM Internet Measurement Conference, October 2020, Pages
   535–550, https://doi.org/10.1145/3419394.3423628.
[80] Nicholas Metropolis and S. Ulam, The Monte Carlo Method, Journal of the American Statistical Asso-
   ciation, Volume 44, No. 247, Sep. 1949, pp. 335-341, http://www.jstor.org/stable/2280232.
[81] Changqi Luo, Behrooz Keshtegar, Shun Peng Zhu, Osman Taylan, Xiao-Peng Niu, Hybrid enhanced
   Monte Carlo simulation coupled with advanced machine learning approach for accurate and efficient
   structural reliability analysis, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg., Volume 388, 2022, Article 114218,
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2021.114218.
[82] George S. Fishman, Discrete-Event Simulation: Modeling, Programming, and Analysis, Springer Series in
   Operations Research and Financial Engineering, 2001. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-3552-9
[83] Samik Raychaudhuri, Introduction to Monte Carlo simulation, In: 2008 Winter Simulation Conference,
   Date of Conference: 07-10 December 2008, DOI: 10.1109/WSC.2008.4736059, Publisher: IEEE. https:
   //ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/4736059
[84] Luc Devroye, Non-Uniform Random Variate Generation, Springer-Verlag, 1986. https://doi.org/10.
   1007/978-1-4613-8643-8
[85] Averill M. Law and W. David Kelton, Simulation Modeling and Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 3rd Edition,
   2000.
[86] Reuven Y. Rubinstein and Dirk P. Kroese, Simulation and the Monte Carlo Method, Wiley, 2nd Edition,
   2007. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470181463
[87] John Maynard Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, Chapter 12, 1936.
[88] Danya E Keene, Alana Rosenberg, Penelope Schlesinger, Shannon Whittaker, Linda Niccolai, Kim M
   Blankenship “The Squeaky Wheel Gets the Grease”: Rental Assistance Applicants’ Quests for a Rationed
   and Scarce Resource, Social Problems, Volume 70, Issue 1, February 2023, Pages 203–218, https://doi.
   org/10.1093/socpro/spab035


                                                   35
[89] Timothy Peterson, Metcalfe’s Law as a Model for Bitcoin’s Value, Alternative Investment Analyst Review,
   Volume 7, No. 2, 2018, pp. 9-18, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3078248.
[90] G.M.Peter Swann, The functional form of network effects, Information Economics and Policy,
   Volume 14, No. 3, 2002, pp. 417-429, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
   S0167624502000513.




                                                    36
