                                         Ethics of Software Programming with Generative
                                           AI: Is Programming without Generative AI
                                                          always radical?

                                         Marcellin Atemkeng1 , Sisipho Hamlomo1,2 , Brian Welman1 , Nicole Oyetunji1 ,




arXiv:2408.10554v2 [cs.SE] 31 Oct 2024
                                                         Pouya Ataei3 , and Jean Louis K. E Fendji4
                                         1
                                           Department of Mathematics, Rhodes University, Makhanda m.atemkeng@ru.ac.za,
                                                      n.oyetunji@gmail.com, brianallisterwelman@gmail.com
                                           2
                                             Department of Statistics, Rhodes University, Makhanda s.hamlomo@ru.ac.za
                                         3
                                           School of Engineering Computer and Mathematical Sciences, Auckland University
                                                               of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand
                                                                       pouya.ataei@aut.ac.nz
                                             4
                                               Department of Computer Engineering, University Institute of Technology,
                                                                University of Ngaoundere, Cameroon
                                                                         lfendji@gmail.com



                                               Abstract. This paper provides a comprehensive analysis of Generative
                                               AI (GenAI) potential to revolutionise software coding through increased
                                               eﬃciency and reduced time span for writing code. It acknowledges the
                                               transformative power of GenAI in software code generation, while also
                                               cautioning against the inherent risks of bias and errors if left unchecked.
                                               Emphasising the irreplaceable value of traditional programming, it posits
                                               that GenAI is not a replacement but a complementary tool for writ-
                                               ing software code. Ethical considerations are paramount with the paper
                                               advocating for stringent ethical guidelines to ensure GenAI serves the
                                               greater good and does not compromise on accountability in writing soft-
                                               ware code. It suggests a balanced approach, combining human oversight
                                               with AI’s capabilities, to mitigate risks and enhance reliability. The pa-
                                               per concludes by proposing guidelines for GenAI utilisation in coding,
                                               which will empower developers to navigate its complexities and employ
                                               it responsibly. This approach addresses current ethical concerns and sets
                                               a foundation for the judicious use of GenAI in the future, ensuring its
                                               beneﬁts are harnessed eﬀectively while maintaining moral integrity.

                                               Keywords: Generative AI · Large Language Models, · Ethics · Software
                                               Programming.


                                         1   Introduction

                                         Generative AI (GenAI) refers to algorithms and systems capable of generating
                                         new content, such as images, text, audio, and videos, that mimic human cre-
                                         ativity and intelligence [21,11,7]. These systems use deep learning architectures
                                         [35,23], including Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs [16,24]), Variational
2       M. Atemkeng et al.

Autoencoders (VAEs [18]), and Transformers [37,33], to learn patterns from
large datasets and generate novel outputs. ChatGPT, developed by OpenAI, is
one of several prominent large language models. It has gained significant pub-
lic attention for its ability to generate human-like text and engage in various
language tasks. Its performance in text generation, comprehension, and adapt-
ability to different contexts has made it a widely discussed model in the field
of AI, though it is one among many advanced language models contributing to
progress in this area. Its versatility extends to coding, essay writing, and poetry,
marking a significant leap in AI technology. Similarly, AlphaCode, a cutting-edge
coding assistant, leverages the latest AI advancements to aid developers. It has
shown impressive results in code writing, bug detection, and providing optimal
programming strategies, earning acclaim from developers for boosting workflow
efficiency, automating tasks, and easing the learning curve of new programming
languages. AlphaCode is quickly becoming essential for coders aiming to en-
hance their development process. Google’s Bard, powered by LaMDA’s trans-
former technology, debuted in March 2023 to test GenAI’s impact on creativity
and efficiency. Now rebranded as Gemini, it marks a leap in AI, offering a suite
of services from writing aid to intricate problem-solving, showcasing Google’s
dedication to AI’s ethical and user-focused progression. Recent advancements
in AI language models, such as OpenAI’s GPT-4o and Anthropic’s Claude 3.5
Sonnet, have significantly enhanced text generation capabilities across various
languages and information streams. These models excel in content creation and
offer substantial support to writers, coders, and educators. While GPT-4 has re-
ceived considerable attention, other models like Claude have also demonstrated
impressive capabilities, contributing to the rapid advancement of AI-driven con-
tent generation.

GenAI has shown considerable promise, yet its implementation is not without
ethical concerns and considerations. The integration of such technology neces-
sitates a careful examination of its impact on various aspects of society and
individual rights. Several authors have highlighted the ethical considerations of
GenAI across various fields of research. The complex challenges of GenAI, such
as ChatGPT are highlighted in [19]. Ethical concerns arise due to AI’s inability
to fully understand legal and ethical norms, leading to potential misuse. Lack of
transparency and inherent biases in training data may result in misinformation.
GenAI presents complex legal challenges, particularly when it concerns intellec-
tual property rights. There are ongoing uncertainties regarding how copyright,
patent, and trademark laws apply to content created by AI. Questions about who
holds ownership rights and how these laws intersect with AI-generated works re-
main largely unanswered [44]. This means that the provisions for confidentiality
ought to be strengthened to prevent the inclusion of sensitive information in the
text prompts of AI tools [5]. The issue of "hallucinations" in GenAI which can
produce incorrect information, is underscored in the work of [9]. They stress the
need for consistent human oversight to ensure the accuracy of content generated
by AI. Similarly, [14] underlined the importance of GenAI content addressing
                                  Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length        3

significant societal challenges to ensure its responsible and beneficial use for the
community. This accentuates the important role of reliability and accountability
in GenAI systems.

When examining software programming in light of the current GenAI revolu-
tion, it is evident that GenAI offers unprecedented capabilities. GenAI’s pro-
ficiency in generating code, from snippets to entire modules, has the potential
to significantly speed up software programming, reducing time-to-market for
software products and enabling developers to focus on more complex, creative
tasks [38,28,13]. However, this advancement in technology also introduces ethical
concerns that need to be carefully considered to guarantee the ethical use of a
portion or full code generated by any GenAI tool [17,8,55]. The question of who
holds the rights to AI-generated software code is particularly a concern. We ask
how one can appropriately acknowledge GenAI code. Establishing guidelines for
the use and recognition of AI-generated software code is crucial to maintaining
a fair and equitable creative landscape. Also, there is the potential for bias in
AI-generated software code [48,4]. AI systems are only as unbiased as the data
on which they are trained, and if this data contains prejudices, the generated
software code may also reflect these biases. GenAI systems also raise privacy
concerns because they are trained on vast datasets that may contain sensitive
personal data [30,20,32]. When generating software code, these systems typically
produce code along with simple examples to illustrate usage. However, as with
any AI-generated content, it’s important for programmers to review the output
carefully. While privacy concerns exist with AI systems in general, major coding
assistants are designed with safeguards to avoid including personal or sensitive
information in their outputs.

This paper discusses the benefits of GenAI, like improved efficiency and stream-
lined coding, which can cut down on development time. However, it also points
out the risks, such as the chance of creating biased or incorrect code if algo-
rithms are not properly checked. It considers if programming without GenAI
is fundamentally different and suggests that, although traditional methods are
valuable, GenAI could lead to new advancements. The paper discusses the ethi-
cal issues in using GenAI code, highlighting the importance of transparency and
accountability for code generated by AI. It argues that ethical rules are cru-
cial for responsible GenAI code use, which should serve the common good. The
paper emphasises the importance of GenAI-generated code and advocates for
a balanced approach that combines human oversight with AI, which minimises
risks and enhances the reliability of code. The paper proposes a plan with clear
rules for using GenAI in software writing, aimed at helping developers grasp its
complex parts and use it correctly. It contributes to the debate on ethical AI
use in programming and prepares for a future where GenAI tools are used with
precision and care.
4         M. Atemkeng et al.

2      The Advantages of GenAI Software Codes

This section looks at the key benefits of GenAI to programming, focusing on code
generation, consistency in code style and structure, enhanced software testing,
optimised problem-solving approaches and analysing code.

    – Code Generation: GenAI supports programmers by generating code frag-
      ments. This capability enables developers to save considerable time and
      effort, as they can focus on higher-level design and problem-solving tasks
      rather than writing repetitive or boilerplate code [54]. For instance, in the
      context of dynamic web development, one could utilise GenAI to generate
      standard code components, such as authentication modules. In addition,
      GenAI could also be used to create input validation tests against erroneous
      inputs from users, allowing developers to dedicate their expertise to the most
      challenging aspects of the project.
    – Consistency in Code Style and Structure: Maintaining a consistent code style
      and structure across a project is essential for readability, maintainability
      and collaboration within development teams. GenAI can help enforce coding
      standards by automatically checking code to ensure compliance with prede-
      fined style guidelines [30]. For example, it can ensure that indentation is con-
      sistent, that variable names are descriptive and follow a consistent pattern,
      and that functions are appropriately documented. GenAI can also suggest
      refactoring opportunities to improve the structure of the code. For example,
      it might recommend splitting a large, complex function into smaller, more
      manageable modules or replacing repeated snippets of code with reusable
      functions.
    – Enhanced Software Testing: GenAI also plays a crucial role in enhancing soft-
      ware testing practices. Traditional testing methods often require substantial
      manual effort to provide extensive testing coverage. However, GenAI can au-
      tomatically generate test cases that cover a wide range of testing scenarios,
      e.g. edge cases that developers might overlook [29,13]. In addition, GenAI
      can analyse code to identify potential bugs or vulnerabilities before compile-
      or run-time, thereby improving the reliability and security of the software.
      For example, AI-driven tools can suggest tests that simulate various user
      behaviours, ensuring the software performs as expected under different con-
      ditions. This leads to more robust and reliable software releases.
    – Optimised Problem-Solving Approaches: GenAI can propose optimised solu-
      tions for coding challenges. When developers encounter complex problems,
      GenAI can suggest the best approaches based on its vast knowledge of coding
      patterns and algorithms [52,20,41]. This feature is particularly valuable in
      scenarios where multiple solutions are possible, but the optimal one is not im-
      mediately apparent. For instance, GenAI can recommend the most efficient
      data structures and algorithms when optimising a search algorithm, reduc-
      ing development time and computational resources. This not only helps in
      overcoming coding obstacles but also contributes to the overall performance
      and efficiency of the software.
                                 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length       5

 – Analysing Code: Code analysis is a critical aspect of software development,
   ensuring that code is not only functional but also efficient, secure, and main-
   tainable. GenAI offers tools to analyse code at various stages of development,
   providing insights that can significantly enhance the quality and performance
   of software projects [52,41]. By using GenAI, developers can detect inconsis-
   tencies, optimise performance, and ensure code quality in a more automated
   and intelligent manner.


3   The Disadvantages of GenAI Software Codes
While GenAI software offers powerful capabilities in automating code generation,
it also has drawbacks that can affect the results’ reliability, transparency and
fairness. The following subsections explore these challenges in detail, focusing
on the fragility of the generated code, the difficulty of debugging, the need for
extensive testing, and the risks associated with inherent biases. Understanding
these limitations is critical for developers and organisations who use GenAI code.
 – Fragile Outputs: GenAI software codes are very sensitive to variations in in-
   put prompts. Even minor adjustments to prompt scripts can result in dras-
   tically different code output that may not work as intended [27,39,51]. This
   vulnerability requires careful, prompt engineering and iterative refinement.
   Developers must experiment with different prompt structures and wording
   to achieve the desired results, which can be time-consuming. This unpre-
   dictability poses challenges, particularly in environments where consistent
   and reliable code is critical, such as production systems or mission-critical
   applications.
 – Hard to Debug: One of the primary challenges with GenAI code is the dif-
   ficulty of debugging. GenAI models operate as black boxes, meaning their
   internal decision-making processes are challenging to interpret. If the gen-
   erated code does not work as expected, it can be challenging to understand
   why it does not work and how it can be corrected [36,56,40]. Traditional
   debugging methods rely on understanding the logic and structure of the
   code, but with GenAI, this is often opaque. This opacity can lead to longer
   development cycles as developers spend additional time deciphering the gen-
   erated code and identifying the root causes of problems. Furthermore, the
   lack of transparency can also hinder collaboration and knowledge sharing
   between team members as it becomes difficult to explain the reasons behind
   the generated code.
 – Code Need Testing: Since the results of GenAI are unpredictable, rigorous
   testing is essential to ensure reliability and accuracy. Each generated code
   snippet must be thoroughly tested to verify it works correctly under various
   conditions. This need for extensive testing increases the development work-
   load and extends the project duration. Automated testing frameworks can
   help, but they may not capture all edge cases or subtle bugs introduced by
   GenAI. Ensuring comprehensive test coverage is critical to mitigate the risk
   of deploying faulty or insecure code.
6         M. Atemkeng et al.

    – Bias: GenAI relies on large amounts of training data to understand language
      patterns, and the quality of their outputs is strongly influenced by the data
      on which they were trained. GenAI can amplify any biases or errors in the
      training data. For example, the original GPT-4 was initially trained on data
      up to September 2021, so its suggestions had no knowledge of developments
      over the years until more recent updates. The generated code may reflect
      these biases and lead to unfair or discriminatory results [43,25,26]. This
      problem is of particular concern in applications where fairness and justice are
      critical, such as hiring algorithms, credit approvals, healthcare, or criminal
      justice systems. The presence of bias in GenAI results can lead to legal and
      reputational risks for companies. Biased code can lead to discriminatory
      practices that may violate legal regulations and damage a company’s public
      image.


4      Is Programming without GenAI always radical?

The short, overarching and unsatisfactory answer is yes. The current momen-
tum and rapid adoption of AI in society and industry utterly wash out any
specific demographic’s thoughts and concerns about the matter and its impact
[12]. Therefore, from the overall and generalised perspective, opposing this trend
inherently makes one radical. The longer and more nuanced answer would be
that it depends. As discussed in Section 2, there is growing evidence that the
use of GenAI within programming through coding assistants has a net positive
impact. It is highly beneficial for simple and repetitive tasks, improving the pro-
ductivity and efficiency of programmers in producing programs. This includes
the writing of small, non-critical snippets of code or generating test cases for
existing code. Moreover, the pairing of programmers with AI assistants has been
shown to significantly speed up technical learning across all levels of computer
science expertise [46,45,57].
     These statements are substantiated by the community-based StackOverflow
Developer Survey (SODS) for 2023 and 2024. In these surveys, respondents were
asked to associate benefits with AI tools within the software development pro-
cess. In 2023, out of 38594 responses, 32.81% said it increases productivity,
25.17% said it speeds up learning and 24.96% claimed it allows them to be more
efficient. Following this in 2024 with 36894 responses, these benefits remain the
top associated benefits at 81%, 62.4% and 58.5%, respectively, indicating that
the majority of AI tool users noticed a significant positive impact on their over-
all productivity. In the same surveys, respondents were asked what they use AI
tools for. In 2023 with 37726 responses, 82.55% use AI tools for writing code,
48.89% use it to debug or ask for help, 34.37% use it to document their code,
30.1% use it to help them learn a codebase, and 23.87% use it for testing code.
In 2024 with 35978 responses, 82% of users use it to write code, 67% use it
to search for answers, 56.7% use it to debug or ask for help, 40.1% use it for
documenting code, 34.8% use it for generating or synthesising content, 30.9%
use it to help them learn a codebase and 27.2% use it for testing code. Overall,
                                 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length       7

the benefits have tended towards using GenAI for addressing the tasks as stated
previously. Noting that AI sentiment was favourable or very favourable amongst
all respondents at 77% in 2023 and 72% in 2024, there is a good reason to use
GenAI for these often repetitive and monotonous tasks [49,50].
    However, there exist several key concerns. This is best described by exam-
ining the responses to the first question provided by the SODS for 2023 and
2024: “Do you currently use AI tools in your development process?". In 2023,
out of 89184 responses, 43.78% said they currently are, 25.46% said that they
are currently not using it, but plan to use it, and 29.4% said they are currently
not using and do not plan to use AI tools. Compared to 2024, where out of
60907 responses, the corresponding percentages to the previous year’s answers
were 61.8%, 13.8% and 24.4%, respectively. Based on these measures, most par-
ticipants are already using AI, increasing in 2024 presumably due to those who
planned to use it from 2023. However, the number of participants who plan to use
AI within programming in 2024 has roughly halved, which indicates a decrease
in per-year uptake in the use of this technology. In addition, the percentage dif-
ference of respondents who do not currently use and do not plan to use AI tools
remains approximately the same with a minor decrease in 2024 [49,50]. This
is a potential indication of the indifference felt towards the current usefulness
and innovations surrounding GenAI within programming. [46] conducted a thor-
ough qualitative survey amongst 100 screened software engineers from several
countries to investigate the adoption, integration and related concerns surround-
ing GenAI within software development. Amongst several conclusions reached,
the major concern with the adoption of GenAI with existing software develop-
ment workflows came down to compatibility, i.e. how well the AI technology
integrates with their programming workflow. In contrast, the study analysed the
developer’s overall perceptions towards the technology and found that there is no
significance between the software engineer’s overall perception and the adoption
of the AI tools. Despite several participants including concerns about security
risks, code quality and ethics, the most prominent opinion towards the adoption
of AI in programming came down to whether it fits their current workflow. This
indicates the pervasive level of indifference felt at a professional level and the
overall neutrality towards its uptake. As shown above, there is indeed a strong
indication that GenAI is useful within programming, but several programmers
may be indifferent to its usage due to the existing performance and security is-
sues surrounding proprietary AI tools. Namely, GenAI tools are great at simple,
repetitive tasks, but do not perform as well when it comes to more complex
tasks.
    There exists an insightful demonstration of this provided by the prominent
software developer YouTuber, Michael Paulson, known as “ThePrimeagen" [53].
It entails asking the GenAI coding assistants to generate a solution to the famous
Quick Sort algorithm using the TypeScript language. In their demonstration,
GitHub-Copilot was used and generated the solution provided in listing 1.1. As
ThePrimeagen notes in the demonstration, the solution will work and there are
no evident errors. However, the original algorithm is designed to be optimised for
8       M. Atemkeng et al.

memory usage and efficient at sorting. In listing 1.1, explicit arrays are created at
each recursion at lines 7, 8 and 16. This contradicts the goals of the Quick Sort
algorithm and therefore cannot be an accepted implementation. The correct
solution is given in listing 1.2. This view is reflected in the SODS 2024. Of
30661 responses, 66.2% said the most noticeable challenge with the use of AI
in their programming was that they did not trust the output the AI provided.
Moreover, 63.3% said AI tools lacked the context of their codebase, internal
architecture and company knowledge, further increasing the probability of these
assistants producing irrelevant and unsuitable outputs [50]. Knowing that the
code generated by these AI tools is inherently incorrect requires training and
experience in programming and general computer science topics. Therefore, only
sufficiently qualified developers would be knowledgeable to pick up on these
issues. Furthermore, if there exists a significant risk for these coding assistants
to create vulnerabilities or ineffective code in developer workflows, then the
potential adoption of such software would only occur in low-risk scenarios, i.e.
simple and repetitive tasks [46].

    The final concern with adopting the use of GenAI in programming is the
impact on programming education and beginner or casual programmers. In com-
puter science and related education programmes, the prevalence of AI tools is
high. This has led to several issues with the quality of education these future
programmers attain. Since some publicly available large language models have
been shown to pass most introductory programming courses, there are concerns
about over-reliance on such tools by students. Before GenAI, it was noted that
coding knowledge obtained through search engines led to lower rates of recall
of the same information. Even though search engines were helpful for profes-
sional developers, they negatively impacted the student’s critical evaluation and
problem-solving skills. With large language models amalgamating this informa-
tion and tailoring it to the style and requirements of the user, this issue has
the potential to have even more detrimental effects on the student and their
programming ability. Due to the increased usage of AI tools in programming
assignments, educational institutions have shown a motion towards opposing its
use by implementing more sophisticated anti-cheating and plagiarism tools or
adapting the assignments to make it harder for AI tools to solve them. This can
be viewed as contradictory since the goal of programming education is to inform
and equip students of methods used in industry [12].

    As [46] notes, we are currently at the beginning of the era of GenAI tools
within programming. Therefore, opinions and insights can be volatile and the
opinion of programming without using GenAI is far more nuanced. Sufficient
evidence exists to show how useful it can be, but more refinement, improvements
and education surrounding GenAI tools are needed. Hence, the answer is that
it depends on the ethical guidelines established by educational institutions and
industries while programmers are expected to uphold responsible programming
practices. Additionally,
                                    Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length          9

5    Ethical Concerns in GenAI Code
One fundamental question that continues to be debated is whether it is ethical
to incorporate AI-generated code into software development projects without
disclosing its AI-based origins. Consider the following potential reasons that
may raise ethical concerns. The software programmer using the GenAI code is
presenting the code as if it were their original work. While it may seem problem-
atic when the required acknowledgement is not given when using GenAI code,
this practice might not be as unusual as it appears. This type of copying and
pasting has been part of software programmers’ daily routine even before the
advent of generative models. Programmers frequently use code or solutions from
various platforms such as Stack Overflow or GitHub’s Copilot for AI-assisted
coding often without proper acknowledgement or consequences. Sometimes, ex-
tensive portions of code are taken from GitHub, or practices such as reusing
code from our repositories that were originally written by someone else are em-
ployed without proper acknowledgement. These practices are quite common in
the programming world and can be seen as part of a collaborative and iterative
development process [2,34].
     Programming is a multifaceted discipline that prospers on collaboration and
the cumulative knowledge of the software development community. The belief
that every line of code must be originally written is not only unrealistic but also
inefficient or ineffective. The true measure of code’s worth lies in its ability to per-
form the tasks it was written for, its robustness against errors, and its readability
and reusability. Software programmers are encouraged to effectively leverage ex-
isting functions, classes, and libraries, which can save time and resources. This
practice is not only logical but also widely encouraged within the programming
community. Ethical considerations arise concerning disclosure. Typically, in code
reuse, disclosure is inherently part of the code, accessible to those who examine
it thoroughly. It is rare for programmers to be obligated to provide a detailed
list of all used components unless legal requirements dictate otherwise. However,
certain circumstances, such as legal stipulations or specific industry standards,
may necessitate such disclosures [22].
     The central point of the debate on code reuse is not the act of reusing code,
which is a universally acknowledged and fundamental practice in software en-
gineering. Instead, it is about the degree of transparency that should be main-
tained. Transparency is vital in code reuse, not just for preserving trust among
developers but also for proper attribution, particularly when leveraging open-
source materials [1,15].
     The use of GenAI for code generation may raise ethical concerns in specific
scenarios, such as certain academic assignments or coding assessments during
job interviews. However, its use can be appropriate and even beneficial in other
contexts, such as creating Proofs of Concept (POCs) or for learning purposes,
as long as it is used transparently and per established guidelines. Clear poli-
cies should be specified by educational institutions or employers regarding this
matter. If regulations explicitly prohibit the use of GenAI-assisted code without
proper attribution, its use would indeed be unethical. The purpose of these guide-
10      M. Atemkeng et al.

lines is often to evaluate a student or programmer’s individual problem-solving
and coding skills. In educational settings, these guidelines ensure that learning
objectives are achieved, and students develop the required competencies [6,10].
During job interviews, the guidelines enable employers to assess a candidate’s
true abilities to code. Therefore, transparency and compliance with established
guidelines are essential to uphold the integrity of both student learning and the
assessments.
    It is considered unethical and potentially illegal if the license or terms of use
for the GenAI tool mandate disclosure. Compliance with licensing agreements is
crucial, as it respects the intellectual property and usage rights set by the creators
or providers of software tools. Violating these terms can lead to serious legal
consequences and undermine the trust in a company’s commitment to ethical
practices.


6    Responsible Ways to use GenAI Code
Responsible programming practices are essential in upholding ethical and legal
standards and ensuring the integrity of software programming. Responsible pro-
gramming practices include transparency, accountability, adherence to ethical
and legal guidelines, learning from past successes, and acknowledging contribu-
tions.
 – Transparency: The increasing prevalence of GenAI in society has highlighted
   the importance of incorporating human values in software programming. Hu-
   man values, according to [47], represent individuals’ core principles and be-
   liefs, which influence behaviour, decision-making, and interactions. An im-
   portant aspect of human values in software development is transparency,
   which involves honesty about decision-making during the development pro-
   cess [42]. In a preliminary study conducted in [42], developers emphasised
   the significance of transparency in establishing trust with users and stake-
   holders, enhancing accountability while cultivating ethical practices. This
   can be achieved by providing users with clear information about the ori-
   gin and authenticity of AI-generated content, providing insights on data
   collection, usage and protection, and implementing industry best practices,
   adhering to regulatory frameworks designed to ensure responsible AI devel-
   opment. Currently, developers make use of a variety of strategies to improve
   transparency in software development, this includes conducting thorough
   investigation and root cause analyses to identify underlying factors which
   may lead to transparency violations. Subsequently developing corrective ac-
   tion plans, and performing testing and verification to resolve violations [42].
   However, it is important to strike a balance between transparency and ethi-
   cal considerations. Transparency, if not accompanied by proper safeguards,
   may inadvertently expose sensitive information or proprietary code, which
   could result in security vulnerabilities and confidentiality breaches.
 – Accountability: Accountability is essential for the successful operation of or-
   ganisations, as it involves individuals in every aspect of the organisation tak-
                                 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length       11

   ing responsibility for their actions and providing explanations for them [3]. In
   the context of software programming, accountability to its users is particu-
   larly crucial. In a study conducted in [3], two primary forms of accountability
   for software developers are identified: institutionalised and grassroots. Insti-
   tutionalised accountability is driven by structural and formal processes such
   as performance evaluations, while grassroots accountability develops natu-
   rally within teams based on peers’ and individuals’ expectations [3]. This
   encourages a collective sense of responsibility grounded in team norms, and
   the personal and professional values of programmers [3].
 – Ethical Guidelines: Establishing clear regulations, especially in professional
   and academic institutions, regarding the use of GenAI for code generation
   is essential. This will enable programmers to maintain the integrity of their
   work, while complying with intellectual property rights, fostering a culture
   of ethical practice and promoting fair use. Adherence to established ethical
   guidelines and frameworks, such as the IEEE Global Initiative for Ethical
   Considerations in AI and Autonomous Systems, can help programmers nav-
   igate ethical challenges, and make informed decisions throughout the devel-
   opment lifecycle. By offering resources, recommended practices, and ethical
   principles, the IEEE Global Initiative equips programmers with the neces-
   sary tools to identify, assess and address ethical considerations in their work
   [31].
 – Strategies: Responsible practices in programming, particularly when making
   use of GenAI, can be achieved through a clear communication. Establish-
   ing clear communication channels and expectations between programmers
   and stakeholders, to ensure that accountability, transparency and ethics are
   being upheld throughout the development process. Maintaining detailed doc-
   umentation of the software code which will provide a clear record of decisions
   made, code changes and test results, which are accounted for. This will, in
   turn, help identify possible areas of improvement. Implementing regular rou-
   tine evaluations to assist in determining issues early on, and provide oppor-
   tunities for feedback and improvement. Providing educational resources and
   training on ethical and legal considerations in software programming, par-
   ticularly when using GenAI tools, to help programmers understand their re-
   sponsibilities and the potential impact of their decisions and actions. Learn-
   ing from past successes, looking at case studies and previous instances where
   ethical challenges were successfully addressed.

7   Conclusion
In the era of the GenAI revolution, the landscape of software programming
is undergoing a significant transformation. GenAI’s ability to generate code
rapidly accelerates development processes, shortens the time-to-market for soft-
ware products, and allows developers to allocate more time to intricate and in-
novative tasks. Despite these advantages, the integration of GenAI raises critical
ethical questions, particularly regarding the ownership and proper acknowledge-
ment of AI-generated code. It is imperative to establish clear guidelines for the
12     M. Atemkeng et al.

ethical use and recognition of such code to preserve a just and equitable creative
environment. Moreover, the potential for bias in AI-generated code and privacy
concerns due to the use of extensive datasets necessitates a cautious approach.
Programmers must diligently review AI-generated code to ensure it is free of
biases and does not compromise privacy, leveraging the built-in safeguards of
advanced coding assistants to protect sensitive information.
    This paper provides a comprehensive analysis of GenAI in software code gen-
eration. It highlights GenAI’s potential to enhance efficiency and reduce software
coding time. However, it also addresses the inherent risks, such as the produc-
tion of biased or flawed code due to inadequate algorithmic oversight. The pa-
per debates the distinctiveness of programming with GenAI compared to tradi-
tional methods, acknowledging the value of the latter. Central to the discussion
are the ethical considerations surrounding GenAI, emphasising the necessity for
transparency in algorithms and accountability for AI-generated code. The pa-
per insists on the importance of ethical guidelines to ensure GenAI’s responsible
application for the greater good. It advocates for a balanced approach to pro-
gramming, combining human oversight with AI autonomy to mitigate risks and
enhance code reliability. A framework with explicit regulations for employing
GenAI in code generation is proposed, aiming to equip programmers with the
understanding needed to navigate GenAI’s complexities and utilise it effectively.
The paper contributes to the ongoing discourse on ethical AI practices in pro-
gramming, envisioning a future where GenAI is employed with meticulousness
and responsibility.
                                       Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length       13

 1   // write the quicksort function for me
 2   function qs ( arr : number []) : number [] {
 3     if ( arr . length <= 1) {
 4       return arr ;
 5     }
 6     const pivot = arr [ arr . length - 1];
 7     const left = [];
 8     const right = [];
 9     for ( let i = 1; i < arr . length ; i ++) {
10       if ( arr [ i ] < pivot ) {
11          left . push ( arr [ i ]) ;
12       } else {
13          right . push ( arr [ i ]) ;
14       }
15     }
16     return [... qs ( left ) , pivot , ... qs ( right ) ];
17   }
     Listing 1.1. GitHub-Copilot solution to the Quick Sort Algorithm in TypeScript based
     on the demonstration by [53].


1         /* *
2     * Split array and swap values
3     *
4     * @param { Array < number >} array
5     * @param { number } [ left =0]
6     * @param { number } [ right = array . length - 1]
7     * @returns { number }
8     */
9    function partition ( array : Array < number > , left : number = 0 ,
          right : number = array . length - 1) {
10      const pivot = array [ Math . floor (( right + left ) / 2) ];
11      let i = left ;
12      let j = right ;
13
14     while ( i <= j ) {
15       while ( array [ i ] < pivot ) {
16         i ++;
17       }
18
19         while ( array [ j ] > pivot ) {
20           j - -;
21         }
22
23         if ( i <= j ) {
24           [ array [ i ] , array [ j ]] = [ array [ j ] , array [ i ]];
25           i ++;
26           j - -;
27         }
28     }
     14         M. Atemkeng et al.

29
30        return i ;
31   }
32
33   /* *
34    * Quicksort implementati on
35    *
36    * @param { Array < number >} array
37    * @param { number } [ left =0]
38    * @param { number } [ right = array . length - 1]
39    * @returns { Array < number >}
40    */
41   function quickSort ( array : Array < number > , left : number = 0 ,
          right : number = array . length - 1) {
42      let index ;
43
44        if ( array . length > 1) {
45          index = partition ( array , left , right ) ;
46
47            if ( left < index - 1) {
48              quickSort ( array , left , index - 1) ;
49            }
50
51            if ( index < right ) {
52              quickSort ( array , index , right ) ;
53            }
54        }
55
56        return array ;
57   }
58
59   console . assert (
60      quickSort ( array , 0 , array . length - 1) . toString () === ’
             1 ,1 ,2 ,2 ,6 ,24 ,31 ,32 ,33 ,63 ,123 ,346 ,943’ ,
61      ’ Wrong Implementatio n ’
62   );
     Listing 1.2. Correct solution to the Quick Sort Algorithm using TypeScript. Credit:
     github/AvraamMavridis.
                                    Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length          15

Acknowledgments.




References

 1. Ahmaro, I., Abualkishik, A.M., Yusoﬀ, M.Z.M.: Taxonomy, deﬁnition, approaches,
    beneﬁts, reusability levels, factors and adaption of software reusability: a review
    of the research literature. Journal of Applied Sciences 14(20), 2396 (2014)
 2. Ahmed, T.M., Shang, W., Hassan, A.E.: An empirical study of the copy and paste
    behavior during development. In: 2015 IEEE/ACM 12th Working Conference on
    Mining Software Repositories. pp. 99–110. IEEE (2015)
 3. Alami, A., Ernst, N.: Understanding the building blocks of accountability in soft-
    ware engineering (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01926
 4. Ambati, S.: Security and Authenticity of AI-generated code. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
    sity of Saskatchewan (2023)
 5. Appel, G., Neelbauer, J., Schweidel, D.A.: Generative ai has an intellectual prop-
    erty problem. Harvard Business Review 7 (2023)
 6. Açıkgöz, T., Babadoğan, M.C.: Competency-based education: The-
    ory and practice. Psycho-Educational Research Reviews 10(3), 67–95
    (Dec          2021).         https://doi.org/10.52963/PERR_Biruni_V10.N3.06,
    https://perrjournal.com/index.php/perrjournal/article/view/15
 7. Bandi, A., Adapa, P.V.S.R., Kuchi, Y.E.V.P.K.: The power of generative ai: A
    review of requirements, models, input–output formats, evaluation metrics, and
    challenges. Future Internet 15(8), 260 (2023)
 8. Bayer, J.: Legal implications of using generative ai in the media. Information &
    Communications Technology Law pp. 1–20 (2024)
 9. Brand, J., Israeli, A., Ngwe, D.: Using llms for market research. SSRN
    Electronic      Journal      (2023).      https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4395751,
    https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=4395751
10. Brandt, W.C.: Measuring student success skills: A review of the literature on self-
    directed learning. 21st century success skills. National Center for the Improvement
    of Educational Assessment (2020)
11. Brynjolfsson, E., Li, D., Raymond, L.R.: Generative ai at work. Tech. rep., National
    Bureau of Economic Research (2023)
12. Bull, C., Kharrufa, A.: Generative artiﬁcial intelligence assistants in software
    development education: A vision for integrating generative artiﬁcial intelligence
    into educational practice, not instinctively defending against it. IEEE Soft-
    ware 41(2), 52–59 (Mar 2024). https://doi.org/10.1109/ms.2023.3300574,
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MS.2023.3300574
13. de Campos, A., Melegati, J., Nascimento, N., Chanin, R., Sales, A., Wiese, I.: Some
    things never change: how far generative ai can really change software engineering
    practice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09725 (2024)
14. Cao, Y., Li, S., Liu, Y., Yan, Z., Dai, Y., Yu, P.S., Sun, L.: A comprehensive survey
    of ai-generated content (aigc): A history of generative ai from gan to chatgpt. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2303.04226 (2023)
15. Capilla, R., Gallina, B., Cetina Englada, C.: The new era of software reuse. J Softw
    Evol Process 31(8), e2221 (2019)
16     M. Atemkeng et al.

16. Creswell, A., White, T., Dumoulin, V., Arulkumaran, K., Sengupta, B., Bharath,
    A.A.: Generative adversarial networks: An overview. IEEE signal processing mag-
    azine 35(1), 53–65 (2018)
17. Desai, D.R., Riedl, M.: Between copyright and computer science: The law and
    ethics of generative ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14653 (2024)
18. Doersch, C.: Tutorial on variational autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05908
    (2016)
19. Dwivedi, Y.K., Kshetri, N., Hughes, L., Slade, E.L., Jeyaraj, A., Kar, A.K., Baab-
    dullah, A.M., Koohang, A., Raghavan, V., Ahuja, M., et al.: Opinion paper:“so
    what if chatgpt wrote it?” multidisciplinary perspectives on opportunities, chal-
    lenges and implications of generative conversational ai for research, practice and
    policy. International Journal of Information Management 71, 102642 (2023)
20. Eskandani, N., Salvaneschi, G.: Towards ai for software systems. In: Proceedings of
    the 1st ACM International Conference on AI-Powered Software. pp. 79–84 (2024)
21. Feuerriegel, S., Hartmann, J., Janiesch, C., Zschech, P.: Generative ai. Business &
    Information Systems Engineering 66(1), 111–126 (2024)
22. Gogoll, J., Zuber, N., Kacianka, S., Greger, T., Pretschner, A., Nida-Rümelin,
    J.: Ethics in the software development process: from codes of conduct to ethical
    deliberation. Philosophy & Technology 34(4), 1085–1108 (2021)
23. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., Courville, A.: Deep learning. MIT press (2016)
24. Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S.,
    Courville, A., Bengio, Y.: Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
    ACM 63(11), 139–144 (2020)
25. Grossman, M.R., Grimm, P.W., Brown, D.G., Xu, M.: The gptjudge: justice in a
    generative ai world. Duke Law & Technology Review 23(1) (2023)
26. Hacker, P., Mittelstadt, B., Borgesius, F.Z., Wachter, S.: Generative discrimination:
    What happens when generative ai exhibits bias, and what can be done about it.
    arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10329 (2024)
27. Hadi, M.U., Qureshi, R., Shah, A., Irfan, M., Zafar, A., Shaikh, M.B., Akhtar,
    N., Wu, J., Mirjalili, S., et al.: Large language models: a comprehensive survey of
    its applications, challenges, limitations, and future prospects. Authorea Preprints
    (2023)
28. Haidabrus, B.: Generative ai in agile, project, and delivery management. In: De-
    sign, Simulation, Manufacturing: The Innovation Exchange, pp. 100–110. Springer
    (2024)
29. Hnatushenko, V., Pavlenko, I.: The use of generative artiﬁcial intelligence in soft-
    ware testing. System technologies 2(151), 113–123 (2024)
30. Huang, K., Huang, G., Dawson, A., Wu, D.: Genai application level security. In:
    Generative AI Security: Theories and Practices, pp. 199–237. Springer (2024)
31. IEEE:         The          IEEE          global        initiative      on      ethics
    of         autonomous            and         intelligent         systems      (2024),
    https://standards.ieee.org/industry-connections/activities/ieee-global-initiative/
32. Kapitsaki, G.M.: Generative ai for code generation: Software reuse implications.
    In: International Conference on Software and Software Reuse. pp. 37–47. Springer
    (2024)
33. Khan, S., Naseer, M., Hayat, M., Zamir, S.W., Khan, F.S., Shah, M.: Transformers
    in vision: A survey. ACM computing surveys (CSUR) 54(10s), 1–41 (2022)
34. Kim, M., Bergman, L., Lau, T., Notkin, D.: An ethnographic study of copy and
    paste programming practices in oopl. In: Proceedings. 2004 International Sympo-
    sium on Empirical Software Engineering, 2004. ISESE’04. pp. 83–92. IEEE (2004)
                              Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length   17

35. LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., Hinton, G.: Deep learning. nature 521(7553), 436–444
    (2015)
36. Liang, J.T., Yang, C., Myers, B.A.: A large-scale survey on the usability of ai pro-
    gramming assistants: Successes and challenges. in 2024 ieee/acm 46th international
    conference on software engineering (icse). IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos,
    CA, USA pp. 605–617 (2024)
37. Lin, T., Wang, Y., Liu, X., Qiu, X.: A survey of transformers. AI open 3, 111–132
    (2022)
38. Lintula, M.: Exploring AI-driven Use Cases in Integration Platform Red Hat.
    Master’s thesis, Novia University of Applied Sciences, Vaasa, Finland (5 2024),
    https://www.theseus.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/864082/Lintula_Mari.pdf?sequence=2&isAllowed=y,
    degree: Master of Engineering (UAS) in Industrial Management and Engineering
39. Liu, Y., Deng, G., Xu, Z., Li, Y., Zheng, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhao, L., Zhang, T., Wang,
    K., Liu, Y.: Jailbreaking chatgpt via prompt engineering: An empirical study. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2305.13860 (2023)
40. Nam, D., Macvean, A., Hellendoorn, V., Vasilescu, B., Myers, B.: Using an llm to
    help with code understanding. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th Interna-
    tional Conference on Software Engineering. pp. 1–13 (2024)
41. Nguyen-Duc, A., Cabrero-Daniel, B., Przybylek, A., Arora, C., Khanna, D.,
    Herda, T., Raﬁq, U., Melegati, J., Guerra, E., Kemell, K.K., et al.: Generative
    artiﬁcial intelligence for software engineering–a research agenda. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2310.18648 (2023)
42. Obie, H.O., Ukwella, J., Madampe, K., Grundy, J., Shahin, M.: Towards an un-
    derstanding of developers’ perceptions of transparency in software development: A
    preliminary study (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.06161
43. OpenAI: Models (2024), https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/
44. Parikh, N.A.: Empowering business transformation: The positive impact and eth-
    ical considerations of generative ai in software product management–a systematic
    literature review. Transformational Interventions for Business, Technology, and
    Healthcare pp. 269–293 (2023)
45. Peng, S., Kalliamvakou, E., Cihon, P., Demirer, M.: The impact of ai on devel-
    oper productivity: Evidence from github copilot. ArXiv abs/2302.06590 (2023).
    https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.06590
46. Russo,      D.:    Navigating   the     complexity   of    generative   ai    adop-
    tion     in     software    engineering.     ArXiv    abs/2307.06081         (2023).
    https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.06081
47. Schwartz, S.H.: Universals in the Content and Structure of Values: The-
    oretical Advances and Empirical Tests in 20 Countries, vol. 25, p.
    1–65. Elsevier (1992). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60281-6,
    https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0065260108602816
48. Sherje, N.: Enhancing software development eﬃciency through ai-powered code
    generation. Research Journal of Computer Systems and Engineering 5(1), 01–12
    (2024)
49. Stack Exchange Inc.: Stack Overﬂow Developer Survey 2023 (2023),
    https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2023/
50. Stack Exchange Inc.: Stack Overﬂow Developer Survey 2024 (2024),
    https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2024/
51. Sun, W., Fang, C., You, Y., Miao, Y., Liu, Y., Li, Y., Deng, G., Huang, S., Chen,
    Y., Zhang, Q., et al.: Automatic code summarization via chatgpt: How far are we?
    arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12865 (2023)
18      M. Atemkeng et al.

52. Tembhekar, P., Devan, M., Jeyaraman, J.: Role of genai in automated code gen-
    eration within devops practices: Explore how generative ai. Journal of Knowledge
    Learning and Science Technology ISSN: 2959-6386 (online) 2(2), 500–512 (2023)
53. ThePrimeagen: Title (February 2023), CoPilotReview:MyThoughtsAfter6Months,
    accessed: 2024-08-11
54. Ugare, S., Suresh, T., Kang, H., Misailovic, S., Singh, G.: Improving llm code
    generation with grammar augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01632 (2024)
55. Ungureanu, C.T., Amironesei, A.E.: Legal issues concerning generative ai technolo-
    gies. Eastern Journal of European Studies 45 (2023)
56. Vaithilingam, P., Zhang, T., Glassman, E.L.: Expectation vs. experience: Evalu-
    ating the usability of code generation tools powered by large language models. In:
    Chi conference on human factors in computing systems extended abstracts. pp. 1–7
    (2022)
57. Yetistiren, B., Özsoy, I., Ayerdem, M., Tüzün, E.: Evaluating the code qual-
    ity of ai-assisted code generation tools: An empirical study on github copi-
    lot, amazon codewhisperer, and chatgpt. ArXiv abs/2304.10778 (2023).
    https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.10778
ϱϬ
ϰϱ
ϰϬ           ĂƚĂ
ϯϱ           ĂƚĂ
ϯϬ
Ϯϱ
ϮϬ
ϭϱ
ϭϬ
 ϱ
 Ϭ
     Ϭ   ϱ            ϭϬ   ϭϱ   ϮϬ   Ϯϱ   ϯϬ
