                                        Interacting with AI Reasoning Models:
                                        Harnessing “Thoughts” for AI-Driven Software Engineering

                                        CHRISTOPH TREUDE, Singapore Management University, Singapore
                                        RAULA GAIKOVINA KULA, Osaka University, Japan
                                        Recent advances in AI reasoning models provide unprecedented transparency into their decision-making processes, transforming
                                        them from traditional black-box systems into models that articulate step-by-step chains of thought rather than producing opaque




arXiv:2503.00483v1 [cs.SE] 1 Mar 2025
                                        outputs. This shift has the potential to improve software quality, explainability, and trust in AI-augmented development. However,
                                        software engineers rarely have the time or cognitive bandwidth to analyze, verify, and interpret every AI-generated thought in detail.
                                        Without an eﬀective interface, this transparency could become a burden rather than a beneﬁt.
                                           In this paper, we propose a vision for structuring the interaction between AI reasoning models and software engineers to maximize
                                        trust, eﬃciency, and decision-making power. We argue that simply exposing AI’s reasoning is not enough – software engineers need
                                        tools and frameworks that selectively highlight critical insights, ﬁlter out noise, and facilitate rapid validation of key assumptions. To
                                        illustrate this challenge, we present motivating examples in which AI reasoning models state their assumptions when deciding which
                                        external library to use and produce divergent reasoning paths and recommendations about security vulnerabilities, highlighting
                                        the need for an interface that prioritizes actionable insights while managing uncertainty and resolving conﬂicts. We then outline a
                                        research roadmap for integrating automated summarization, assumption validation, and multi-model conﬂict resolution into software
                                        engineering workﬂows. Achieving this vision will unlock the full potential of AI reasoning models to enable software engineers to
                                        make faster, more informed decisions without being overwhelmed by unnecessary detail.

                                        CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering; • Computing methodologies → Artiﬁcial intelligence; • Theory of compu-
                                        tation → Automated reasoning;

                                        Additional Key Words and Phrases: AI-Assisted Software Engineering, AI Reasoning, Human-AI Interaction

                                        ACM Reference Format:
                                        Christoph Treude and Raula Gaikovina Kula. 2025. Interacting with AI Reasoning Models: Harnessing “Thoughts” for AI-Driven
                                        Software Engineering. 1, 1 (March 2025), 10 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX


                                        1 Introduction
                                        Recent advances in AI reasoning models have led to higher quality outputs because these models engage in structured
                                        reasoning rather than merely generating responses [9]. By explicitly working through logical steps, AI reasoning mod-
                                        els have the potential to produce more accurate, insightful, and useful recommendations for software engineers [15].
                                        However, beyond just improving output quality, these models also help address the long-standing problem of AI being
                                        a black box [4]. Instead of producing results without explanation, they now reveal their thought processes, making it
                                        possible to understand why AI reaches speciﬁc conclusions and how it evaluates alternatives [26].
                                        Authors’ Contact Information: Christoph Treude, Singapore Management University, Singapore, Singapore, ctreude@smu.edu.sg; Raula Gaikovina Kula,
                                        Osaka University, Osaka, Japan, raula-k@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp.

                                        Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
                                        made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components
                                        of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on
                                        servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
                                        © 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
                                        Manuscript submitted to ACM


                                        Manuscript submitted to ACM                                                                                                                           1
2                                                                          Christoph Treude and Raula Gaikovina Kula


    This ability to “show their thoughts” represents a fundamental shift in AI-assisted software development. It enables
developers not only to trust AI-generated recommendations, but also to verify and scrutinize the reasoning behind
them. This shift means that developers are no longer forced to rely on AI without knowing why it works or how
it comes to decisions [8]. By making AI’s thought process transparent, these models help overcome the historical
challenge of opaque AI decision making [6] and allow developers to critically assess each step before taking action.
    Despite these improvements, the sheer volume of AI-generated reasoning paths can be overwhelming. Developers
may be confronted with redundant details, implicit assumptions, and conﬂicting conclusions, making it diﬃcult to ef-
fectively extract actionable insights [22]. Without methods to interpret and validate these thought traces, AI reasoning
can become more of a burden than a beneﬁt.
    To address these challenges, we propose a vision for structured interaction with AI reasoning models. Instead of
presenting raw thought traces, AI systems should ﬁlter, summarize, and highlight key decision factors, ensuring that
developers can eﬃciently validate assumptions and compare alternative reasoning paths. We illustrate these issues
through two motivating examples in which AI-generated reasoning signiﬁcantly inﬂuences software decisions: one
where implicit assumptions lead to a library choice recommended by AI that may not align with the needs of the
developer, and another where diﬀerent AI reasoning models provide conﬂicting perspectives on security vulnerabilities.
This paper outlines a research roadmap for harnessing AI reasoning in software engineering, focusing on automated
summarization, assumption extraction, and multi-model alignment. Our goal is to enable software engineers to beneﬁt
from the power of AI-driven reasoning without being overwhelmed by unnecessary detail, ultimately improving trust,
eﬃciency, and decision making in AI-assisted software development.

2 Motivating Examples
In this section, we present two examples in which being aware of AI reasoning would have the potential to signiﬁcantly
impact software engineering decisions. The complete prompts, reasoning paths, and responses for these examples are
available in our online appendix at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14946531.

2.1   Hidden Assumptions in AI Reasoning
    Decision making in software engineering often relies on implicit assumptions. In the ﬁrst example shown in Figure 1,
Google’s Gemini Flash Thinking [1] is asked to modify a function to generate a PDF report. The AI correctly identiﬁes
that an external library is needed and recommends PyFPDF. Looking at the reasoning of the model, it turns out that
this recommendation is based on an assumption made by the model: “For this example, since the initial request is
simple (just "Financial Summary" and data), and for ease of demonstration, PyFPDF seems like a good starting point.”
    If the developer requires advanced formatting, embedded images, or interactive elements, PyFPDF may be the wrong
choice. A more suitable library, such as ReportLab or an HTML-to-PDF tool, might be needed. Another AI reasoning
model, OpenAI o1 [12], indeed suggests Foxit PDF, highlighting how diﬀerent reasoning paths lead to diﬀerent con-
clusions. Without visibility into AI assumptions, developers risk blindly following recommendations that may not ﬁt
their actual needs.

2.2   Diverging AI Reasoning Paths
    The second example shown in Figure 2 explores how diﬀerent AI reasoning models use diﬀerent reasoning paths
when analyzing security vulnerabilities in C code. The code snippet was taken from related work [25] with the follow-
ing ground truth: “The function ‘add_numbers‘ initializes a short int ‘sum‘ and in a while loop calls ‘get_collective_sum‘
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Interacting with AI Reasoning Models:
Harnessing “Thoughts” for AI-Driven Software Engineering                                                                   3

    Motivating Example 1: Generating a PDF Report

    Prompt: Modify this function to generate a PDF report from the given data.
    1 def generate_report ( data ):
    2     report_content = f " Financial ␣ Summary :\ n { data } "
    3     return report_content

    Thought Process of Gemini 2.0 Flash Thinking Experimental 01-21

    Here’s a breakdown of my thought process in approaching the request to generate a PDF report
    from data:
         (1) Understanding the Core Requirement: The user wants to take some data (presumably ﬁnancial
             data, based on the "Financial Summary" string) and turn it into a PDF report. The original function just
             returned a plain text string. The key is to move from plain text to a formatted PDF document.
         (2) Identifying the Need for a PDF Library: Python doesn’t have built-in PDF generation capabilities.
             We need a library. Several options come to mind:
             • ReportLab: Powerful, feature-rich, but can have a steeper learning curve. Excellent for complex
               layouts and professional reports.
             • PyFPDF: Simpler to use, good for basic text and images in PDFs. More lightweight than ReportLab.
             • xhtml2pdf (or WeasyPrint): Converts HTML/CSS to PDF. Excellent if you’re comfortable with web
               technologies and want more visually appealing layouts.
             • Other libraries (like PDFKit, which wraps wkhtmltopdf): Also HTML-to-PDF based.
             For this example, since the initial request is simple (just "Financial Summary" and data), and for ease of
             demonstration, PyFPDF seems like a good starting point. It’s relatively easy to install and use for basic
             text-based PDFs. If the user needed more complex layouts, images, tables, etc., I might have considered
             ReportLab or an HTML-to-PDF approach.
    [...]



                                              Fig. 1. First Motivating Example




to accumulate ‘sum‘ with a random number from the ‘nums‘ array. While doing so the ‘sum‘ can overﬂow and
wraparound. Which can make the while loop run for an inﬁnite time. This can cause an integer overﬂow attack.”.
OpenAI o1 immediately focuses on security risks, identifying integer overﬂow, out-of-bounds memory access, and
a potential inﬁnite loop. By contrast, Gemini Flash Thinking appears to focus on general bugs rather than security
vulnerabilities. It correctly identiﬁes problematic code but does not explicitly connect these issues to security risks.
  A developer who only looks at the ﬁnal output of Gemini Flash Thinking would not realize that the AI got distracted
by general software defects, as evident from its thought process. As a result, a developer might mistakenly assume that
no security vulnerabilities exist when, in reality, the AI simply failed to recognize their implications.


3 The Challenge: From Black-Box to Thoughtful Collaboration
Reasoning has long played an important role in software engineering, particularly through symbolic reasoning, where
logic-based systems formally verify software properties [32], check constraints [3], and ﬁnd bugs [5]. However, the rise
of AI reasoning models introduces a new kind of reasoning – one that is less about strict formalism and more about
adaptive thinking processes based on natural language [18]. Unlike symbolic reasoning, which relies on explicit rules
                                                                                                  Manuscript submitted to ACM
4                                                                        Christoph Treude and Raula Gaikovina Kula


    Motivating Example 2: Security Analysis of C Code

    Prompt: Does the following code contain any security vulnerabilities?
     1 # include < stdio .h >
     2 # include < stdlib .h >
     3 # include < limits .h >
     4
     5 short int get_collective _s um ( short int ** arr , short int len , short int num )
     6 {
     7      short int rand_num = rand () % len ;
     8      short int sum = arr [ rand_num ] + num ;
     9      return sum ;
    10 }
    11
    12 int add_numbers ( short int num , short int ** nums )
    13 {
    14      short int sum = 0;
    15      int itr = 0;
    16
    17      while ( sum < SHRT_MAX )
    18      {
    19          sum = get_collectiv e_ su m ( nums , num - 1 , sum );
    20          itr ++;
    21      }
    22      printf ( " Iteration ␣ to ␣ reach ␣ max ␣ sum : ␣% d \ n " , itr );
    23
    24      return 0;
    25 }

    Thought Process of OpenAI o1

    Identifying Potential Risks
    I’m noting that rand() % len might cause integer overﬂow if len is zero, and arr[rand_num] + num could
    overﬂow if the sum exceeds the short int range.
    Spotting Array Access Issues
    I’m checking for out-of-bounds access if num - 1 is negative or num is zero, leading to len being negative or
    zero. The array arr might use pointer arithmetic incorrectly.
    Identifying Type Mismatch
    OK, let me see: the type mismatch in short int sum = arr[rand_num] + num; arises from pointer arithmetic
    on arr[rand_num], leading to severe consequences, including the risk of truncated pointers.
    Potential Inﬁnite Loop
    I’m examining the possibility of the while loop becoming inﬁnite if sum approaches SHRT_MAX, especially due
    to overﬂow or wrap-around. Also considering the lack of memory allocation for nums.
    Thought Process of Gemini 2.0 Flash Thinking Experimental 01-21

    [...] Final Answer Formulation: Focus on the bugs, the incorrect pointer usage, and the potential for integer
    overﬂow to cause incorrect results. Acknowledge that there aren’t obvious classic security vulnerabilities in
    this snippet alone, but highlight the serious ﬂaws in the code’s logic and potential for unexpected behavior.
    Emphasize that incorrect code can sometimes lead to security vulnerabilities in a larger context, even if not
    directly in the isolated snippet.



                                          Fig. 2. Second Motivating Example




Manuscript submitted to ACM
Interacting with AI Reasoning Models:
Harnessing “Thoughts” for AI-Driven Software Engineering                                                                5


and proofs, AI reasoning models generate step-by-step explanations in free text, mixing observations, assumptions,
and conclusions in ways that are often useful but diﬃcult to verify [28].
  Despite the lack of determinism, many software engineers have embraced AI, e.g., to generate code [16], code
reviews [17], bug reports [20], commits [33], Stack Overﬂow answers [34], and tests [19]. This growing reliance on AI
models and their reasoning raises questions about their usability and trustworthiness in software engineering.
  One key challenge is information overload. AI-generated reasoning is often verbose, requiring developers to extract
relevant insights manually. While symbolic reasoning produces structured, rule-based outputs, AI reasoning models
generally lack formal guarantees [13], making it harder to assess their reliability without human review. To beneﬁt from
transparent reasoning, developers must determine which parts of AI reasoning are correct, which are assumptions, and
which are potentially misleading.
  Second, conﬂicting reasoning paths [21]: Diﬀerent AI models, or even diﬀerent runs of the same model, may produce
divergent reasoning traces for the same problem. In contrast, symbolic reasoning is deterministic – given the same
inputs, it produces the same results [29]. AI reasoning models, however, may prioritize diﬀerent aspects of a problem,
for example, leading one to focus on security risks while another highlights performance concerns. This is particularly
relevant in multi-agent environments [11]. Without a way to compare and reconcile these conﬂicting perspectives,
software engineers may struggle to determine which reasoning to trust.
  Third, trust and usability [27]: AI reasoning models provide more transparency than black-box predictions, but trans-
parency alone does not guarantee usefulness. Developers must still verify whether the AI reasoning aligns with domain
knowledge and best practices. Without an interface that ﬁlters out irrelevant details, highlights critical assumptions,
and allows validation, the burden remains on developers to manually extract useful insights, making AI-generated
reasoning as much a cognitive challenge as a technical one.
  Unlike other ﬁelds where AI reasoning models are used primarily for classiﬁcation and prediction, software engineer-
ing requires AI to engage in complex, context-sensitive reasoning that directly inﬂuences developers’ decision-making.
Software engineers must assess AI-generated insights not only for accuracy, but also for relevance within architectural
constraints, evolving project requirements, and team practices. Furthermore, software engineering is highly iterative
and collaborative, meaning that AI-generated reasoning must align with human workﬂows, coding conventions, and
best practices while balancing trade-oﬀs in performance, maintainability, and security. Without interfaces that help
software engineers eﬃciently interpret, validate, and integrate AI reasoning, the cognitive burden of interacting with
these models may outweigh their beneﬁts.




4 Vision: A Human-AI Interface for Thoughtful Software Engineering
Research on human-AI interfaces in software engineering is still in its infancy [23]. To address these challenges, we
need structured interfaces for interacting with AI-generated reasoning. These interfaces must summarize, ﬁlter, and
compare AI thought processes, allowing developers to quickly assess assumptions, resolve conﬂicting reasoning paths,
and focus on insights that truly impact their decision making. Unlike traditional symbolic reasoning systems, which
are rule-based and deterministic, AI reasoning models are contextual and probabilistic, requiring a diﬀerent approach
to validation and integration into software engineering workﬂows.


                                                                                               Manuscript submitted to ACM
6                                                                          Christoph Treude and Raula Gaikovina Kula


4.1    Filtering and Summarization
AI reasoning models generate extensive thought traces, but not all information is equally useful. Some reasoning steps
may be trivial, redundant, or overly verbose, while others contain critical insights that inﬂuence decision making. The
interface should:

      • Distill long reasoning traces into concise, structured summaries that highlight key takeaways.
      • Automatically detect and surface the most relevant reasoning steps while ﬁltering out irrelevant details.
      • Enable customizable views so that developers can choose between high-level summaries and detailed step-by-
        step reasoning when needed.

    Summarization techniques, such as hierarchical reasoning trees or interactive explanations, could help developers
engage with AI reasoning at diﬀerent levels of detail, ensuring that transparency does not come at the cost of usabil-
ity. Work in this area could build on a long line of work in software engineering on information ﬁltering [14] and
summarization [10].

4.2    Assumption Extraction and Verification
AI reasoning models frequently make implicit assumptions that shape their recommendations. If these assumptions
remain hidden, developers may unknowingly accept recommendations that do not align with their actual requirements.
The interface should:

      • Automatically extract and surface key assumptions from AI reasoning traces.
      • Provide mechanisms for developers to validate, reﬁne, or challenge these assumptions before acting on AI-
        generated recommendations.
      • Leverage external knowledge sources, static analysis, or formal veriﬁcation to assess the accuracy of AI assump-
        tions.

    By making AI assumptions explicit, developers can engage in informed decision-making rather than blindly follow-
ing AI-generated suggestions. Work in this area could be based on related work from requirements engineering, for
example [30].

4.3    Multi-Model Alignment and Conflict Resolution
As seen in our motivating examples, diﬀerent AI models – or even diﬀerent runs of the same model – may produce
conﬂicting reasoning paths and conclusions. An interface should:

      • Compare reasoning outputs from multiple AI models, highlighting areas of agreement and disagreement.
      • Provide conﬁdence scores or uncertainty indicators to help developers assess which AI-generated insights are
        more reliable.
      • Allow developers to actively engage with AI-generated conﬂicts, choosing reasoning paths based on their own
        expertise and external validation sources.

    Rather than forcing developers to trust a single AI-generated thought process, the interface should facilitate a col-
laborative reasoning workﬂow, allowing human intuition and AI-generated insights to complement each other. Work
in this area could be based on related work on inter-model agreement on software engineering tasks [2] and conﬂict
resolution [7].
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Interacting with AI Reasoning Models:
Harnessing “Thoughts” for AI-Driven Software Engineering                                                                 7


4.4   Towards AI-Augmented Software Engineering
Building such an interface requires rethinking how AI-generated reasoning integrates into software engineering work-
ﬂows. In one extreme, traditional generative AI simply produces answers without exposing any reasoning, leaving
developers without insight into its decision-making process. At the other extreme, new AI reasoning models generate
extensive thought traces, often overwhelming users with verbose, unstructured reasoning. Neither extreme is ideal:
developers need neither blind trust in opaque outputs nor the cognitive overload of sifting through every AI-generated
assumption and inference. What is needed is a balance: an AI that serves as a thought partner. Instead of merely dump-
ing raw reasoning or providing unexplained answers, AI should present its thought process in a digestible manner.


5 Research Roadmap and Open Challenges
In the following, we outline research questions that should be addressed to integrate AI reasoning into software engi-
neering workﬂows.


5.1   Understanding AI Reasoning in a Software Engineering Context
The ﬁrst two questions explore how AI-generated reasoning appears in software engineering tasks and domains.
  RQ1. How can we collect and analyze large-scale corpora of AI-generated reasoning to understand its characteristics
in software engineering? AI reasoning models generate complex, multi-step explanations, yet little is known about
how these reasoning patterns manifest across diﬀerent software engineering tasks. Empirical software engineering
researchers should use these advancements in AI as an opportunity to ask new questions and analyze new data [24]:
They should systematically collect, categorize, and analyze AI-generated thought processes at scale to identify common
reasoning structures, potential biases, and areas where AI reasoning aligns – or conﬂicts – with human decision-
making.
  RQ2. How does AI-generated reasoning diﬀer between diﬀerent domains and tasks of software engineering? Software
engineering spans diverse activities, from debugging to architectural design to performance optimization. AI reasoning
might be more eﬀective in certain domains (e.g., code generation) while struggling in others (e.g., long-term decisions).


5.2   Summarization and Filtering of AI Reasoning
The next two questions focus on extracting and presenting only the most relevant AI-generated insights.
  RQ3. How can we automatically summarize AI reasoning traces to provide concise and relevant insights to developers?
AI-generated thought traces are often too verbose, containing useful insights and irrelevant details. Developers need
concise explanations that retain essential reasoning steps while ﬁltering out noise. Research on natural language pro-
cessing techniques, combined with empirical studies on developer information needs, could help reﬁne summarization
approaches tailored to software engineering tasks.
  RQ4. How can we determine which parts of AI reasoning are most relevant to software engineers? Not all reasoning
steps are equally useful, some provide critical insights, while others are redundant or misleading. Understanding how
developers navigate AI-generated explanations requires investigating how they prioritize diﬀerent types of reasoning
when debugging, designing software architectures, or making design decisions. Studies on developer workﬂows and
cognitive load could provide information on how reasoning should be structured for maximum usability.
                                                                                                Manuscript submitted to ACM
8                                                                          Christoph Treude and Raula Gaikovina Kula


5.3   Validation and Assumption Checking
The next two questions address identifying and verifying AI-generated assumptions.
    RQ5. How can we extract and formalize implicit assumptions in AI-generated reasoning? AI reasoning models fre-
quently make assumptions that shape their recommendations. If these assumptions are incorrect or misaligned with
project requirements, developers may unknowingly accept ﬂawed suggestions. Techniques from program analysis,
speciﬁcation mining, and knowledge representation could help detect and make these hidden assumptions explicit.
    RQ6. How can we verify whether AI-generated assumptions align with software engineering best practices and are ap-
propriate within the speciﬁc development context? While AI models generate reasoning based on training data, their
assumptions do not always reﬂect best practices or align with the speciﬁc development context, including project
requirements, tech stack, and constraints. Automatically comparing AI-generated insights against patterns from soft-
ware repositories, veriﬁed guidelines, and project-speciﬁc factors could help assess whether AI recommendations are
technically sound and practically applicable.


5.4   Handling Conflicts and Divergent Reasoning Paths
The next two questions examine resolving conﬂicting AI reasoning and handling uncertainty.
    RQ7. How can we align and reconcile conﬂicting reasoning paths produced by diﬀerent AI models? Diﬀerent AI models
– or even diﬀerent runs of the same model – may produce divergent reasoning paths for the same problem. For example,
one model may focus on performance, while another prioritizes maintainability. Understanding how to reconcile these
perspectives is essential for integrating multiple AI reasoning sources into software development workﬂows. Conﬂict
resolution strategies, such as multi-model consensus techniques or decision-support frameworks, could help address
this issue. Trees of thought, similar to those used as a prompting technique [31], could be used to represent common
and divergent reasoning paths.
    RQ8. How can we quantify uncertainty in AI-generated reasoning and communicate it eﬀectively to developers? AI
reasoning models operate probabilistically, which means that they may not always reach the same conclusion given
similar inputs. Developers need to understand the degree of conﬁdence behind an AI-generated reasoning step. Ex-
ploring ways to represent uncertainty, whether through conﬁdence scores, uncertainty visualization, or interactive
explanations, could improve trust in AI-driven decision making.


5.5   Human-AI Collaboration and Usability
The ﬁnal two questions explore how developers interact with and beneﬁt from AI reasoning.
    RQ9. How can we design interfaces that allow software engineers to interact eﬃciently with AI reasoning models? An
AI-generated reasoning trace is only useful if developers can easily interpret and act upon it. Poorly designed interfaces
could overwhelm users rather than help them.
    RQ10. How can we measure the impact of AI-generated reasoning on software engineering productivity and decision-
making? Despite the promise of AI reasoning models, there is little empirical evidence on how they inﬂuence developer
productivity and decision quality. Conducting controlled experiments and real-world case studies could help quantify
their impact, identifying both beneﬁts and potential drawbacks.
    In closing, by addressing these questions, we can move towards an era where AI serves as an eﬀective thought
partner and enhances the ability of software engineers to reason about complex decisions, rather than overwhelm
them with unstructured, diﬃcult-to-interpret thought traces.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Interacting with AI Reasoning Models:
Harnessing “Thoughts” for AI-Driven Software Engineering                                                                                            9


Acknowledgment
We thank Cristian Cadar for inspiring some of the ideas presented in this paper during discussions at Greybox Coﬀee.


References
 [1] [n. d.]. Gemini 2.0 Flash Thinking — deepmind.google. https://deepmind.google/technologies/gemini/ﬂash-thinking/. [Accessed 19-02-2025].
 [2] Touﬁque Ahmed, Premkumar Devanbu, Christoph Treude, and Michael Pradel. 2025. Can LLMs replace manual annotation of software engineering
     artifacts?. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Mining Software Repositories.
 [3] Shoham Ben-David, Baruch Sterin, Joanne M Atlee, and Sandy Beidu. 2015. Symbolic model checking of product-line requirements using sat-based
     methods. In 2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering, Vol. 1. IEEE, 189–199.
 [4] Sicong Cao, Xiaobing Sun, Ratnadira Widyasari, David Lo, Xiaoxue Wu, Lili Bo, Jiale Zhang, Bin Li, Wei Liu, Di Wu, et al. 2024. A systematic
     literature review on explainability for machine/deep learning-based software engineering research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14617 (2024).
 [5] Leonardo De Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. 2010. Bugs, moles and skeletons: Symbolic reasoning for software development. In Automated Reasoning:
     5th International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2010, Edinburgh, UK, July 16-19, 2010. Proceedings 5. Springer, 400–411.
 [6] Farzaneh Dehghani, Mahsa Dibaji, Fahim Anzum, Lily Dey, Alican Basdemir, Sayeh Bayat, Jean-Christophe Boucher, Steve Drew, Sarah Elaine
     Eaton, Richard Frayne, et al. 2024. Trustworthy and Responsible AI for Human-Centric Autonomous Decision-Making Systems. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2408.15550 (2024).
 [7] Jinhao Dong, Jun Sun, Yun Lin, Yedi Zhang, Murong Ma, Jin Song Dong, and Dan Hao. 2024. Revisiting the Conﬂict-Resolving Problem from a
     Semantic Perspective. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering. 141–152.
 [8] Jaimie Drozdal, Justin Weisz, Dakuo Wang, Gaurav Dass, Bingsheng Yao, Changruo Zhao, Michael Muller, Lin Ju, and Hui Su. 2020. Trust in AutoML:
     exploring information needs for establishing trust in automated machine learning systems. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on
     intelligent user interfaces. 297–307.
 [9] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. 2025. Deepseek-
     r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 (2025).
[10] Sonia Haiduc, Jairo Aponte, Laura Moreno, and Andrian Marcus. 2010. On the use of automated text summarization techniques for summarizing
     source code. In 2010 17th Working conference on reverse engineering. IEEE, 35–44.
[11] Junda He, Christoph Treude, and David Lo. 2025. LLM-Based Multi-Agent Systems for Software Engineering: Literature Review, Vision and the
     Road Ahead. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (2025).
[12] Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney,
     et al. 2024. Openai o1 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16720 (2024).
[13] Parnian Kamran, Premkumar Devanbu, and Caleb Stanford. 2024. Vision Paper: Proof-Carrying Code Completions. In Proceedings of the 39th
     IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering Workshops. 35–42.
[14] Mik Kersten and Gail C Murphy. 2006. Using task context to improve programmer productivity. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGSOFT international
     symposium on Foundations of software engineering. 1–11.
[15] Jia Li, Ge Li, Yongmin Li, and Zhi Jin. 2025. Structured chain-of-thought prompting for code generation. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering
     and Methodology 34, 2 (2025), 1–23.
[16] Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Is your code generated by chatgpt really correct? rigorous evaluation of
     large language models for code generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
[17] Junyi Lu, Lei Yu, Xiaojia Li, Li Yang, and Chun Zuo. 2023. LLaMA-Reviewer: Advancing code review automation with large language models
     through parameter-eﬃcient ﬁne-tuning. In 2023 IEEE 34th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 647–658.
[18] Iman Mirzadeh, Keivan Alizadeh, Hooman Shahrokhi, Oncel Tuzel, Samy Bengio, and Mehrdad Farajtabar. 2024. Gsm-symbolic: Understanding
     the limitations of mathematical reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05229 (2024).
[19] Max Schäfer, Sarah Nadi, Aryaz Eghbali, and Frank Tip. 2023. An empirical evaluation of using large language models for automated unit test
     generation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2023).
[20] Lin Shi, Fangwen Mu, Yumin Zhang, Ye Yang, Junjie Chen, Xiao Chen, Hanzhi Jiang, Ziyou Jiang, and Qing Wang. 2022. Buglistener: identifying
     and synthesizing bug reports from collaborative live chats. In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering. 299–311.
[21] Ziyi Tang, Ruilin Wang, Weixing Chen, Keze Wang, Yang Liu, Tianshui Chen, and Liang Lin. 2023. Towards causalgpt: A multi-agent approach for
     faithful knowledge reasoning via promoting causal consistency in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11914 (2023).
[22] Valerio Terragni, Annie Vella, Partha Roop, and Kelly Blincoe. 2025. The Future of AI-Driven Software Engineering. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
     Methodol. (2025).
[23] Christoph Treude and Marco A Gerosa. 2025. How Developers Interact with AI: A Taxonomy of Human-AI Collaboration in Software Engineering.
     In 2nd ACM International Conference on AI Foundation Models and Software Engineering.
[24] Christoph Treude and Margaret-Anne Storey. 2025. Generative AI and Empirical Software Engineering: A Paradigm Shift. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2502.08108 (2025).

                                                                                                                       Manuscript submitted to ACM
10                                                                                         Christoph Treude and Raula Gaikovina Kula


[25] Saad Ullah, Mingji Han, Saurabh Pujar, Hammond Pearce, Ayse Coskun, and Gianluca Stringhini. 2024. LLMs Cannot Reliably Identify and Reason
     About Security Vulnerabilities (Yet?): A Comprehensive Evaluation, Framework, and Benchmarks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security
     and Privacy.
[26] Guoyin Wang, Shengyu Zhang, Tianyu Zhan, Zhouzhou Shen, Jiwei Li, Xueyu Hu, Xiaofei Sun, Fei Wu, Gelei Deng, Jie Zhang, et al. [n. d.].
     Unlocking the Mysteries of OpenAI o1: A Survey of the Reasoning Abilities of Large Language Models. ([n. d.]).
[27] Ruotong Wang, Ruijia Cheng, Denae Ford, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2024. Investigating and designing for trust in ai-powered code generation
     tools. In The 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. 1475–1493.
[28] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting
     elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 (2022), 24824–24837.
[29] Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Fei Xia, Bin Li, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. 2023. Mastering Symbolic Operations: Augmenting Language
     Models with Compiled Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01665 (2023).
[30] Chen Yang, Peng Liang, and Paris Avgeriou. 2018. Assumptions and their management in software development: A systematic mapping study.
     Information and Software Technology 94 (2018), 82–110.
[31] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeﬀrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griﬃths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2024. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem
     solving with large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
[32] Hengbiao Yu, Zhenbang Chen, Ji Wang, Zhendong Su, and Wei Dong. 2018. Symbolic veriﬁcation of regular properties. In Proceedings of the 40th
     International Conference on Software Engineering. 871–881.
[33] Yuxia Zhang, Zhiqing Qiu, Klaas-Jan Stol, Wenhui Zhu, Jiaxin Zhu, Yingchen Tian, and Hui Liu. 2024. Automatic commit message generation: A
     critical review and directions for future work. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2024).
[34] Li Zhong and Zilong Wang. 2024. Can LLM Replace Stack Overﬂow? A Study on Robustness and Reliability of Large Language Model Code
     Generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vol. 38. 21841–21849.




Manuscript submitted to ACM
