                                             FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for
                                                      Real Field Work Tasks

                                         Jun Takahashi1 , Atsunori Moteki1 , Akiyoshi Uchida1 , Shoichi Masui5 , Fan
                                         Yang2 , Kanji Uchino2 , Yueqi Song3 , Yonatan Bisk3 , Graham Neubig3 , Ikuo
                                        Kusajima1 , Yasuto Watanabe1 , Hiroyuki Ishida1 , Koki Nakagawa4⋆ , and Shan
                                                                           Jiang1
                                                                  1
                                                                 Fujitsu Limited, Kanagawa, Japan




arXiv:2505.19662v4 [cs.AI] 7 Jun 2026
                                                              2
                                                               Fujitsu Research of America, CA, USA
                                                         3
                                                           Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
                                                    4
                                                      Master’s Student, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
                                                         5
                                                           Agent Research Collective, Kanagawa, Japan
                                                                   takahashi_jun@fujitsu.com



                                               Abstract. This paper introduces FieldWorkArena, a benchmark for agen-
                                               tic AI targeting real-world ﬁeld work. With the recent increase in demand
                                               for agentic AI, they are built to detect and document safety hazards, pro-
                                               cedural violations, and other critical incidents across real-world manu-
                                               facturing and retail environments. Whereas most agentic AI benchmarks
                                               focus on performance in simulated or digital environments, our work ad-
                                               dresses the fundamental challenge of evaluating agents in the real-world.
                                               In this paper, we improve the evaluation function from previous meth-
                                               ods to assess the performance of agentic AI in diverse real-world tasks.
                                               Our dataset comprises on-site captured images/videos in factories, ware-
                                               houses and retails. Tasks were meticulously developed through interviews
                                               with site workers and managers. Evaluation results conﬁrmed that per-
                                               formance evaluation considering the characteristics of Multimodal LLM
                                               (MLLM) such as GPT-4o is feasible. Furthermore, this study identiﬁes
                                               both the eﬀectiveness and limitations of the proposed new evaluation
                                               methodology. The complete dataset and evaluation program are publicly
                                               accessible on the website6 .

                                               Keywords: Agentic AI, Benchmark, Field work, Multimodal LLM, Ac-
                                               tion space, Evaluation function


                                        1     Introduction

                                        To address labor shortages and improve eﬃciency in manufacturing, logistics,
                                        and other ﬁelds, there is growing interest in using agentic AI for on-site support.
                                        In this paper, agentic AI refers to autonomous intelligent systems capable of ex-
                                        ecuting speciﬁc tasks without human intervention. The introduction of agentic
                                        ⋆
                                            Intern
                                        6
                                            https://en-documents.research.global.fujitsu.com/fieldworkarena/
2          J. Takahashi et al.

AI in the workplace is expected to enable functions such as extracting neces-
sary knowledge from documents, analyzing real time on-site conditions using
sensors like cameras, and notifying relevant members of required information.
However, technical challenges in the ﬁeld implementation of agentic AI include
addressing diverse and multi-stage tasks and adapting to complex and dynamic
on-site environments. To assess the eﬀectiveness of agentic AI in addressing these
challenges, appropriate benchmarks are necessary to objectively evaluate their
performance. However, existing agentic AI benchmarks [32, 15, 13] focus on per-
formance in simulated or digital environments, making it diﬃcult to verify their
versatility and robustness in solving tasks in actual ﬁeld environments. Further-
more, benchmarks that support multimodal inputs such as images, videos and
PDF documents obtained from the ﬁeld are limited.




                                                          Read the manual and detect the           According to the manual, employees
                                                          operating procedure from the video to    are required to wear long sleeves,
    Task                                                  ascertain if safety equipment is being   hats, and gloves. According to the
    1                                                     worn. If there is a rule violation       video, all of these requirements are
                                           Operations     related to safety equipment, please      being met. No alert will be issued and
               Factory scene                Manual        issue an alert by email.                 the inspection will be concluded.
                                                                                                   According to the manual, work that
                                                          Read the points in the manual related
                                                                                                   requires both hands to be occupied is
                                                          to working in the warehouse, count
    Task                                                                                           prohibited. The video shows work that
                                                          the number of health and safety
     2       Both hands
              occupied
                            Not Wearing
                                PPE                       violations that occur in the video and
                                                                                                   requires both hands to be occupied at
                                                                                                   00:01:23, which will be listed as
             Warehouse scene              Safety Manual   summarize them in a list.
                                                                                                   dangerous behavior.

                                                          What is the start time and what is the
                                                          end time of Co eeMaker Cleaning.
    Task                                                                                           The speci ed motion start and end
                                                          The start and end times must be
     3         Work inside the store
                                                          output from the time of the movie
                                                                                                   times are from 00:00:10 to 00:02:36
                                           Operations     itself.
                Retail scene
                                            Manual




Fig. 1. Example of FieldWorkArena dataset which includes images and videos taken
on site, documents, queries, and ground truth.




    To address this, we propose an agentic AI benchmark suite FieldWorkArena,
a benchmark suite aimed at promoting the introduction of agentic AI in per-
forming monitoring tasks in ﬁeldwork environments. The dataset conﬁguration
is shown in Figure 1. FieldWorkArena includes over 400 types of data (images,
videos, work manuals) and approximately 900 ﬁeld-speciﬁc queries from three
real-world ﬁeld scenarios (factories, warehouses, and retail), along with manually
annotated ground truth data. By deﬁning the functions that agentic AI should
process for each category as an action space, the system can comprehensively
handle various types of on-site tasks. This enables users to train existing Mul-
timodal LLMs (MLLMs) or agentic AI under development, as well as perform
quantitative evaluation and comparison.
         FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks          3

2     FieldWorkArena Data Collection
This section describes the types of image and video data, preprocessing methods,
task generation, and annotation guidelines for FieldWorkArena. The dataset is
available on Hugging Face, but user registration is required to download the data
from the web page. The data is provided under a custom license (detailed on
the project website) that restricts its use to non-commercial purposes and pro-
hibits redistribution. This approach is rooted in our data governance principles.
Although the dataset was released after following procedures based on our inter-
nal guidelines for protecting workers’ personal information, these strict licensing
terms are in place to further ensure the privacy and rights of the individuals
depicted. The evaluation program, in contrast, is separately licensed under the
Apache-2.0.

2.1   Input Data Acquisition
Data was collected from factories, warehouses, and retail environments, including
video footage, work manuals, and safety regulations. Image and video data have
been obtained with consent from all persons appearing in the footage for public
disclosure on the web, and faces and necessary areas have been blurred to prevent
identiﬁcation of individuals.
    Factory: The images and videos for the factory scenario in FieldWorkArena
were captured by 11 cameras installed in a communications equipment man-
ufacturing facility. The footage includes close-up shots of assembly processes
for server PCs and telephone equipment, soldering tank cleaning operations, as
well as wide-angle shots of veriﬁcation work on semiconductor production lines.
These 16 types of videos were divided into evaluation videos ranging from several
seconds to several minutes in length, resulting in 64 evaluation videos. Addition-
ally, 31 evaluation images are extracted from the videos. The resolution ranges
from 960x540 to 1280x720, and the frame rate is 15 to 30 FPS. Two types of
documents were prepared for workﬂow extraction: a task list and a task manual.
The task list describes the work procedures captured by the camera, labeled
with labels and summaries. The task manual includes instructions such as how
to wear gloves and how to clean equipment. Both were modiﬁed as appropriate
by removing proper nouns from the actual processes and manuals used.
    Warehouse: Video footage and images of the warehouse are captured using 8
ﬁxed-position cameras installed in a warehouse that handles electronic devices.
Each warehouse operation, that is, receiving, acceptance, sorting, storage, and
shipping is ﬁlmed in 6 types, and the footage is divided into 25 videos and
61 images. The resolution is 1920x1080, and the frame rate is 15 to 25 FPS.
Since the documents related to warehouse operations cannot be made public,
we have modiﬁed and adapted manuals related to general warehouse operations
and forklift usage from other sources for use in this project.
    Retail: Video footage and images are captured in a real convenience store
and a supermarket in Japan. Unlike other cases, it is diﬃcult to obtain the
consent from all customers appearing in the footage for public disclosure on
4         J. Takahashi et al.

the web. Therefore, for retail tasks, while the ﬁlming scenario is realistic, the
performers themselves are actors who have given consent. The footage includes
store staﬀ activities (cleaning, basket collection, restocking merchandise) and
customer actions (taking items, dropping items). The recorded data is divided
into 225 video clips and 6 still images. The resolution is 1920x1080, and the frame
rate is 10 FPS. Since we were unable to directly obtain operational manuals and
other materials from the ﬁlming location, this project has modiﬁed and adapted
cleaning manuals and crew shift information from other sources for use.


2.2     Query Generation

When setting tasks in FieldWorkArena, we make sure that the tasks match
the actual needs of the workplace. Speciﬁcally, through interviews with site
supervisors, consultants, and sales representatives, we identiﬁed “safety and
manufacturing-related near misses” for factories and warehouses, and “employee
compliance and customer behavior analysis regarding purchasing” for retail. We
prioritize incorporating these items when setting tasks.


                  Table 1. Kinds of tasks included in FieldWorkArena

                    Task            Factory Warehouse Retail Total
                    Perception        130     215      366 711
                    Decision making    16      32       73    121
                    Combination        30      17        7     54
                    Total             176     264      446 886



    Table 1 shows the speciﬁc task contents. The tasks are divided into three
main categories: “Perception”, “Decision Making” and “Combination”. Below is
an explanation of each category. Each task includes parameters that allow setting
thresholds for proximity distances or the number of violations within a certain
time frame. These values are either taken from the on-site documentation or set
based on interviews with on-site supervisors to ensure appropriateness.
    Perception is a task that involves extracting useful information for plan-
ning from multimodal inputs across various environments. It includes read-
ing and understanding work manuals and safety instructions, detecting inci-
dents/violations, and spatial/temporal understanding[20]. Perception tasks are
further divided into sub-tasks based on the type of input data and the nature of
the required output.

    – Extract documents (26 tasks): extraction of work procedures from technical
      documents.
    – Abstract from images (98 tasks): detection of safety rule violations, classi-
      ﬁcation of safe rule violations and checking Personal Protective Equipment
      (PPE) wearing status from images.
         FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks          5

 – Abstract from videos (252 tasks): detection of safety rule violations, classi-
   ﬁcation of safe rule violations, checking PPE wearing status, and detection
   of work procedures from videos.
 – Spatial from images (94 tasks): estimating distance between object and de-
   tection of presence of designated areas from images.
 – Spatiotemporal from videos (121 tasks): estimating distance between object
   and detection of presence of designated areas from videos.
 – Temporal from videos (120 tasks): extraction of work duration from videos
   from video footage.

    Decision making is a task that executes plans and decisions based on the
situation understood and detected by Perception tasks. It determines whether
to provide feedback to humans based on events detected by perception, and
includes the actual execution of feedback. Speciﬁcally, “multiple image video
analyses (97 tasks)” and “safety and incident reports (24 tasks)” are included.
    Combination task involves multiple processes to achieve the task and requires
complex decision making. In FieldWorkArena, combination tasks are deﬁned as
tasks that combine Perception/Decision making tasks and have a large number
of actions required to execute individual tasks. Speciﬁc examples of combination
tasks are set as tasks that perform rule understanding, on-site recognition, and
reporting in a single operation.

2.3   Annotation
Each task is associated with a ground truth, which represents the correct answer.
Ground truths can be logical values, quantitative numerical values, or strings.
For tasks that calculate numerical values such as speed or distance, values are set
based on the size of objects that humans can use as a reference, rather than high-
precision actual measurements. To prevent variation in correct answer standards
due to diﬀerences among annotation workers, one worker sets the correct answer,
and two others verify its validity. Additionally, in the reporting task such as
“Decision making” and “Combination”, the execution log of the report is set as
the correct answer format.


3     Benchmarking and Evaluation Methodology
Figure 2 shows the overall scheme of FieldWorkArena. First, the user down-
loads the dataset and applies the data to the agent being evaluated. The system
prompt provides a template that communicates all necessary information to the
agent in a single prompt, including the task to be accomplished, the input data,
the deﬁned actions, and the planning policy. As a result, after the agent performs
actions based on the input data and query, an execution log is generated. The
execution log is compared with the ground truth by evaluation program, and
the accuracy rate is output as a score.
    We clarify the action space that agentic AI for ﬁeld work support should have
in the design of FieldWorkArena, and then describes the details of the tasks. It
6      J. Takahashi et al.

also describes the evaluation environment for agentic AI for ﬁeld work built
based on BrowserGym [9, 13] and the method for calculating evaluation metrics.




                                Evaluated                     Execution                Result
             User                 agent                          log                (avg. score)

                    Download            Run         Output      Input                Output


            Field
            Work Image/Video Document     E-mail Dashboard
            Arena
                                                                    Evaluation
                                          Analyze    Report          program
                      Query    System                                            Refer
                               prompt         Action
                       Input data                                       Ground
                                                                         Truth


             Fig. 2. Overall system conﬁguration of FieldWorkArena.




3.1   Deﬁnition of Action Space
In the context of complex, real-world scenarios, the ability of an intelligent
agent to eﬀectively interact with its environment is fundamentally deﬁned by
its action space. An action space consists of the available actions or choices
that an agent can utilize within the evaluation environment. Within the Field-
WorkArena benchmark, we simply deﬁned following action spaces and added to
BrowserGym. The agent invokes an action space, and the tools or functionali-
ties associated with the invoked action space are then applied to the evaluation
environment to process documents, images, and videos based on the speciﬁed
query and return the results. These tools can include, for example, an MLLM
augmented with a prompt speciﬁc to the action, or a specialized model built
for that particular task In this framework, each action is mapped to a tool,
which is executed when the agent chooses that action: “analyze_documents()”,
“analyze_images()” and “analyze_videos()”. Each action receives the ﬁle
name to be analyzed and the query to be executed as parameters.
    For example, consider the task of verifying that workers are properly wearing
PPE in a warehouse. The input data consists of images in a warehouse, safety
manuals regarding PPE usage, and the query “Is there anyone in this image who
is not wearing PPE?”. The agent does not possess a single action to execute this
task directly. Therefore, it must generate a plan combining actions such as the
following:

1. The agent plans analyze_documents() to obtain information on how to
   use PPE. When this action is selected, an MLLM or a specialized model
   associated with the action performs the document analysis.
         FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks         7

2. The agent plans analyze_images() to determine whether workers in the
   image are using PPE correctly. When this action is selected, an MLLM or a
   specialized model associated with the action performs the image analysis.
3. Based on the results of these analyses, the agent determines whether PPE
   is being worn and outputs this ﬁnding as its answer.

    It is important to note that agents are not simply executing pre-deﬁned
scripts but must make reasoned choices about which action to use and how to
sequence them to solve a particular problem. This example highlights how the
agent must reason about the problem, select relevant actions from the action
space, and orchestrate them into a coherent sequence to accomplish the task.

3.2   Evaluation Environment
This section describes the benchmark implementation of FieldWorkArena based
on BrowserGym. BrowserGym is an evaluation environment for web agents, pro-
viding an environment for evaluating various web agents, including WorkArena.
BrowserGym provides functions for observing the state of the browser, such as
the results of executed actions, and for automatically executing actions such as
browser operations and user chats. Users deﬁne agents that determine the next
action based on observed states. By executing a loop consisting of observation
and action, tasks are performed, and success or failure is determined. In par-
ticular, WorkArena performs tasks such as generating reports and extracting
information on a ServiceNow instance.
    FieldWorkArena extends the scope to tasks that handle multimodal data,
including images, videos, and documents, in addition to browser tasks [32, 15,
14]. Each task is deﬁned by (a) the input data path, (b) the query, and (c) the
output format such as text or JSON. Selecting a task automatically generates a
goal that can be handled by BrowserGym. Responses to queries are provided to
users in a chat format, and reports are also output on the ServiceNow instance,
similar to WorkArena. By executing a batch ﬁle that runs all tasks and passing
the output logs to the evaluation process described in Section 3.3, we perform
benchmarking of the agentic AI.

3.3   Evaluation Method
This section describes the performance evaluation metrics and methods for agen-
tic AI in FieldWorkArena. The performance evaluation metrics for agentic AI
are calculated based on the accuracy rate of responses to tasks, as described in
Section 3.1, for each task group and for all tasks combined. In the conventional
web browser-based benchmark [32, 15, 14], all tasks were evaluated as either cor-
rect or incorrect, and the accuracy rate was calculated as the ratio of the number
of correct tasks to the total number of tasks. Additionally, the three evaluation
functions used, such as fuzzy_match, were designed to evaluate tasks with de-
terministic outputs in a browser-based environment. The tasks proposed in this
paper include tasks that list multiple detections and tasks that calculate speciﬁc
8      J. Takahashi et al.

values, which can take continuous values from 0 (incorrect) to 1 (correct) rather
than simple discrete values. Furthermore, the evaluation functions require judg-
ing the text output and the correct answer text, including ambiguity. Therefore,
the FieldWorkArena judgment results are set to three types: Correct, Incorrect,
and Partially Correct. For Partially Correct, a value corresponding to the degree
of agreement with the correct answer is assigned. Furthermore, fuzzy_match()
from WebArena[32] is improved, and an algorithm more suitable for evaluating
real-world tasks is adopted. Previously, a verbose response could be incorrectly
marked as wrong when evaluated against a concise ground truth. The revised
logic ﬁxes this by judging a response as correct as long as the verbose output
contains the required GT information. The ﬁnal accuracy rate is calculated as
the average of each score.
    Speciﬁcally, we provide the LLM with a query, correct data, and agent infer-
ence results, and calculate two scores: correctness score Sc and Numerical score
Sn . Sc is 1 for Correct / Partially Correct and 0 for Incorrect. The Numerical
score Sn is a value between 0 and 1 calculated as follows:
Distance: Sn = 1 − rd /rth (rd < rth ), rd = |Dgt − Dest |/Dgt
Time: Sn = Td /Tth , Td = |Tgt − Test |
Number: 1 for exact matches, 0 for all other cases.
    The ﬁnal score S is given by the following equation, where α is the weighting
factor: S = α ∗ Sc + (1 − α) · Sn . This method enables detailed quantitative
evaluation between agents.


4     Experiments
4.1   Experimental Condition
To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed tasks and to evaluate the current
existing MLLMs as if they were agents, we conducted the following experiment
by using FieldWorkArena dataset. In this experiment, the following MLLMs were
used: GPT-4o (2024-08-06 ver.), GPT-5.1 (2025-11-13 ver.), GPT-5.2 (2025-12-
11 ver.), Gemini 2.5 Flash and Gemini 2.5 Pro. All parameters used default
values. Regarding video input, some MLLM models do not support direct video
input; therefore, image frames were extracted from videos at 1 FPS intervals and
used as input. For videos exceeding 30 seconds in length, up to 30 image frames
were extracted at intervals and utilized as input. Because some of the tasks
required the participants to respond to time information, each frame was input
together with timestamp information in the video. As for parameters, we used
α = 0.5, rth = 0.5, Tth = 60 based on a preliminary experiment using several
samples.

4.2   Results
Table 2 shows the accuracy rate scores described in Section 3.3 for each MLLM.
The numbers in parentheses for each task in the table indicate the quantity
         FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks            9

of tasks. And, Table 3 shows the detailed results of the perception sub-task
described in 2.2. As a comparative baseline of Table 3 , human performance on
a random sample of perception tasks was manually evaluated, an average score
was 0.74.

               Table 2. Kinds of tasks included in FieldWorkArena

                                                          Gemini-2.5 Gemini-2.5
     Task                    GPT-4o GPT-5.1 GPT-5.2
                                                           (Flash)     (Pro)
     Perception (711)         0.35      0.45      0.52      0.41        0.48
     Decision making (121)    0.40      0.40      0.61      0.40        0.42
     Combination (54)         0.24      0.28      0.26      0.33        0.30
     Total                    0.35      0.43      0.52      0.40        0.46




        Table 3. Kinds of perception sub tasks included in FieldWorkArena

                                                                Gemini-2.5 Gemini-2.5
Perception sub-task                GPT-4o GPT-5.1 GPT-5.2
                                                                 (Flash)     (Pro)
Extract documents (26)               0.69      0.73      0.81     0.73        0.65
Abstract from images (98)            0.34      0.39      0.42     0.38        0.44
Abstract from videos (252)           0.35      0.40      0.45     0.36        0.41
Spational from images (94)           0.07      0.40      0.51     0.41        0.50
Spatiotemporal from videos (121)     0.41      0.47      0.55     0.41        0.45
Temporal from videos (120)           0.42      0.53      0.70     0.44        0.61
Total                                0.35      0.44      0.52     0.41        0.47




The tendency of MLLM inference Overall, the newer and higher-end mod-
els tended to have higher accuracy. GPT-5.2 produced more accurate results
than GPT-4o/GPT-5.1, and Gemini-2.5-Pro yielded more accurate results than
Gemini-2.5-Flash.
    From perception tasks in Table 3, the accuracy for the extraction of informa-
tion from documents was relatively high compared to the other tasks. Text-based
processing is a strong point of LLM. On the other hand, abstract, spatial and spa-
tiotemporal understanding from images and videos were challenging for MLLMs,
resulting in lower accuracy scores. However, the newer and higher-end models
showed relatively better performance, indicating that MLLMs are gradually im-
proving in handling time-based information. In this evaluation, only a simple
action space was deﬁned, and the same MLLM was used for analysis processing.
In the future, a more granular set of action spaces specialized for sub-tasks will be
deﬁned such as detect_ppe_violations, measure_distance_between_objects,
or track_person_movements. This would allow the agent to select a more ap-
propriate and optimized tool for each speciﬁc query.
10     J. Takahashi et al.

    For decision making tasks, this category requires the agent to reason and
synthesize information. The fact that higher-end models like GPT-5.2 outper-
formed their perception scores suggests that stronger reasoning capabilities can
compensate for imperfect perception. Improving these tasks relies on enhanc-
ing the agent’s memory and reasoning. This involves strengthening its working
memory to better integrate information from multiple steps and using advanced
prompting techniques like Chain-of-Thought to ensure evidence is systematically
evaluated, resulting in more robust decisions.
    Regarding combination tasks, the observed low performance suggests that
the agent’s design, rather than an inherent limitation of the MLLM, may have
been insuﬃcient to guide the model through breaking down a rough query into
subtasks and integrating their outcomes. Therefore, the score was low compared
to other tasks. Evaluation with agentic AI systems [29, 24, 27], which have task-
planning functions, may improve the success rate. Additionally, the limited num-
ber of tasks dedicated to planning is an issue compared to other task types. The
task design must be more closely aligned with real-world on-site challenges, such
as adjusting input data for analysis based on time series or utilizing alternative
input data when analysis with one set is impossible.
    Our evaluation methodology relies on an LLM within the modiﬁed fuzzy_match()
function to assess whether a model’s prediction aligns with the ground truth.
We observed that this evaluation process is prone to false positives; although it
seldom misidentiﬁes correct answers as incorrect, it frequently misjudges incor-
rect answers as being correct. This indicates a need for more granular evaluation
logic. Therefore, we believe that enhancing the fuzzy_match() function is nec-
essary. For example, adapting it to apply its logic to each element individually
for list-based tasks could signiﬁcantly improve evaluation accuracy.


Methods for understanding videos Table 2 and 3 indicate that the extrac-
tion of information from videos is currently based on a set of images (up to 30
images) rather than videos due to MLLM limitations. Therefore, the longer the
video, the more temporal inference ability is decreasing. To address this issue,
we further experimented with two approaches: (1) Chunking, which divides the
video into chunks of up to 30 seconds, extract and analyze frame at 1 FPS from
each chunk, and aggregates the results; and (2) Using Qwen3-VL [3], visual-
language-model which is enhanced spatial and video dynamics comprehension.
Qwen3-VL used an 8B parameter model in a local environment and input video
converted to 1 FPS. Due to memory constraints, for videos exceeding 768 sec-
onds, the extraction interval was adjusted to yield a maximum of 768 image
frames.
    Table 4 shows the results for the video perception tasks when using two ap-
proaches compared to the basic GPT-4o method. Chunking method improved
the accuracy in all three video perception tasks, especially in spatiotemporal un-
derstanding tasks. However, since the chunking method increases both analysis
time and input/output tokens depending on the video length, it requires appro-
priate usage tailored to the task. On the other hand, results did not improve
         FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks          11

with Qwen3-VL, this may be due to limitation and the number of parameters.
It’s a future task to determine under what conditions it should be evaluated.


          Table 4. Kinds of perception tasks included in FieldWorkArena

                                                  GPT-4o    GPT-4o
            Sub-Task                     GPT-4o
                                                  (Chunk) (Qwen3-VL)
            Abstract from videos          0.35      0.37     0.34
            Spatiotemporal from videos    0.41      0.50     0.40
            Temporal from videos          0.42      0.43     0.33




5     Related Work

Agentic AI is evolving from simple digital tools to cooperative systems that
handle complex tasks like monitoring conditions, detecting errors, and gener-
ating reports. The goal is to provide real-time support for frontline workers in
diverse domains like manufacturing, logistics, and retail. In these sites, the aging
of workforce and the shortage of human resources are straining resources and
increasing the burden on managers and workers regarding safety and training,
creating a signiﬁcant societal challenge. Agentic AI oﬀers a potential solution to
this problem.
    Realizing a ﬁeld work support agent requires a MLLM capable of monitoring
the ﬁeld via camera input as well as responding to queries in text or voice. Simul-
taneously, for real-time feedback to workers, these LLMs must be lightweight,
suitable for edge AI deployment. Benchmark suites are under active development
to provide a standardized evaluation environment for assessing the performance
(accuracy) of agentic AI across various application domains. This chapter re-
views the technical trends in MLLMs, edge AI-oriented LLM, and benchmark
suites relevant to ﬁeld work support agents.


5.1   Multimodal LLMs

Human-level perception is a fundamental requirement for ﬁeld work support
agents, necessitating multimodal large language models (MLLMs) capable of pro-
cessing images and video data alongside text [25]. Recent years have witnessed
the development of various MLLMs [2, 21, 22, 7] leveraging visual encoders [12]
and modality alignment techniques [16] [8]. For instance, LLaVA [17, 18] inte-
grates a pre-trained CLIP vision encoder [19] with a Vicuna language decoder
[6], while BLIP [16] [8] employs a querying-transformer to bridge the gap be-
tween the frozen vision encoder and the frozen LLM. However, these approaches
primarily utilize 2D image processing, limiting their ability to perceive 3D space
from monocular CCTV footage, a crucial capability for ﬁeld work support agents
12     J. Takahashi et al.

required to understand the 3D positions and distances between people and ob-
jects. To address this limitation, SpatialRGPT [5] has been proposed, a method
that leverages eﬀective learning from 3D scene graphs construction with a data
curation pipeline and a plug-in module incorporating relative depth information
into the existing MLLMs.


5.2   LLM Agents for Edge AI

To provide real-time support for diverse ﬁeld operations, such as manufacturing
and logistics, AI workloads must run on on-premise servers. Two approaches have
been proposed for deploying lightweight LLMs as ﬁeld work support agentic AI:
prompt engineering and ﬁne-tuning [23]. Open-weight models available for the
latter include the previously mentioned LLaVA [17] [18] and LLaMA [21], as
well as Molmo [10], which also released the PixMo image dataset for ﬁne-tuning.
Tools also exist that enable the construction of AI agents to perform searches,
summarization, speech-to-text transcription, or extract speciﬁc information from
related videos[1].


5.3   Benchmark Suite for Agentic AI

While there are many published papers on evaluating agentic AI, those relevant
to ﬁeld work support agents include benchmark suites for web manipulation
tasks and machine learning automation tasks. Early benchmarks for web manip-
ulation agents focused on simple browsing tasks [30], progressing to complex, yet
static, web environments [11]. WebArena subsequently oﬀered a more realistic
and reproducible environment [32], with its input expanding to image [15] and
video [14]. Furthermore, WorkArena focuses on real-world UI operations, such
that form completion and content observation of List/Dashboard screen within
ServiceNow platform are selected as evaluation tasks for agentic AI [13] [4].
    On the other hand, a range of benchmarks have been developed for agents
operating in other specialized digital environments. These include the SWE-
bench[28] series for software development agents, τ -bench[31] for conversational
agents, and OSWorld[26] for agents performing general computer use tasks.


5.4   Contribution

Existing benchmarks have been limited to simulation or virtual data for evalu-
ating the performance of web operations and machine learning. FieldWorkArena
uses data obtained from actual work sites to deﬁne tasks grounded in real-world
enterprise workﬂows. Since completing these tasks often requires interacting with
web-based management tools, our benchmark enables a comprehensive evalua-
tion of agentic AI performancespanning from physical site awareness to digital
system operationwithin authentic real-world applications (Table 5).
    The contributions of this paper are as follows: (1) We propose the ﬁrst stan-
dard benchmark constructed for evaluating the performance of agentic AI that
         FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks        13

supports ﬁeld operations in manufacturing, distribution and retail. This enables
continuous research and development of agentic AI that improve the eﬃciency,
safety, and productivity of ﬁeld operations in the manufacturing, distribution
and retail industries. (2) We propose new metrics to evaluate the reasoning per-
formance of agentic AI for ambiguous, diverse on-site tasks. This will enable
more accurate evaluation of the performance of agentic AI for on-site work sup-
port. (3) Through experiments, demonstrate the validity of the on-site tasks
developed and the performance of existing MLLMs when applied to these tasks.
This will clarify the current challenges and future prospects in this ﬁeld.

          Table 5. Comparison with existing agentic AI benchmark suites

      Name                Developed by Domain             Input Tasks
                                       E-commerce
                                       Reddt
      WebArena [32]       CMU                             Text   812
                                       GitLab
                                       Content Management
                                       E-commerce
                                                          Text
      VisualWebArena [15] CMU          Reddt                     910
                                                          Image
                                       Classiﬁeds
                                                          Text
      WorkArena++ [4]     ServiceNow Web Operation               682
                                                          Image
                                       Manufacturing      Text
      FieldWorkArena      CMU &
                                       Logistics          Image 866
      (Ours)              Fujitsu
                                       Retail             Video




6   Conclusion and Future Work
We introduced FieldWorkArena, a novel benchmark for evaluating agentic AI in
real-world ﬁeld operations. Using authentic data from factories, warehouses, and
retail, we established the ﬁrst standard for evaluating AI performance in practi-
cal, on-site tasks. Our experiments with major MLLMs like GPT-4/5 and Gemini
not only clariﬁed their current strengths, particularly in document processing,
but also highlighted signiﬁcant limitations in complex spatio-temporal reason-
ing from visual data. The newly proposed evaluation function enables granular
performance evaluation. Since this dataset is publicly available, researchers can
use it to evaluate their own agents. Future work will focus on expanding our
evaluation metrics, incorporating more diverse ﬁeld scenarios, and, crucially, en-
hancing the benchmark with a task planning function to better support and
evaluate complex, multi step combination tasks.

References
 1. Nvidia ai blueprint: Video search and summarization, https://github.com/
    NVIDIA-AI-Blueprints/video-search-and-summarization
14      J. Takahashi et al.

 2. Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F.L., Almeida,
    D., Altenschmidt, J., Altman, S., Anadkat, S., et al.: GPT-4 technical report. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2303.08774 (2023)
 3. Bai, S., et al.: Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 (2025)
 4. Boisvert, L., Thakkar, M., Gasse, M., Caccia, M., Le Sellier De Chezelles, T., Cap-
    part, Q., Chapados, N., Lacoste, A., Drouin, A.: WorkArena++: Towards composi-
    tional planning and reasoning-based common knowledge work tasks. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2407.05291 (2024)
 5. Cheng, A.C., Yin, H., Fu, Y., Guo, Q., Yang, R., Kautz, J., Wang, X., Liu, S.:
    SpatialRGPT: Grounded spatial reasoning in vision-language models. In: NeurIPS
    (2024)
 6. Chiang, W.L., Li, Z., Lin, Z., Sheng, Y., Wu, Z., Zhang, H., Zheng, L., Zhuang, S.,
    Zhuang, Y., Gonzalez, J.E., Stoica, I., Xing, E.P.: Vicuna: An open-source chatbot
    impressing gpt-4 with 90% chatgpt quality (March 2023)
 7. Comanici, G., et al.: Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reason-
    ing, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities (2025),
    https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.06261
 8. Dai, W., Li, J., Li, D., Tiong, A.M.H., Zhao, J., Wang, W., Li, B.A., Fung, P.,
    Hoi, S.C.H.: InstructBLIP: Towards general-purpose vision-language models with
    instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06500 (2023)
 9. De Chezelles, T.L.S., Gasse, M., Lacoste, A., Caccia, M., Drouin, A., Boisvert, L.,
    Thakkar, M., Marty, T., Assouel, R., Shayegan, S.O., Jang, L.K., Lù, X.H., Yoran,
    O., Kong, D., Xu, F.F., Reddy, S., Neubig, G., Cappart, Q., Salakhutdinov, R.,
    Chapados, N.: The browsergym ecosystem for web agent research. Transactions on
    Machine Learning Research (TMLR) (February 2025)
10. Deitke, M., Clark, C., Lee, S., Tripathi, R., Yang, Y., Park, J.S., Salehi, M., Muen-
    nighoﬀ, N., Lo, K., Soldaini, L., et al.: Molmo and PixMo: Openweights and open
    data for state-of-the-art vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.17146
    (2024)
11. Deng, X., Gu, Y., Zheng, B., Chen, S., Stevens, S., Wang, B., Sun, H., Su, Y.:
    Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. In: Advances Neural Informa-
    tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2023)
12. Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner,
    T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., et al.: An image is
    worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2010.11929 (2020)
13. Drouin, A., Gasse, M., Caccia, M., Laradji, I.H., Verme, M.D., Marty, T., Vazquez,
    D., Chapados, N., Lacoste, A.: Workarena: how capable are web agents at solving
    common knowledge work tasks? In: Proceedings of the 41st International Confer-
    ence on Machine Learning. ICML’24, JMLR.org (2024)
14. Jang, L., Li, Y., Ding, C., Lin, J., Liang, P.P., Zhao, D., Bonatti, R., Koishida,
    K.: VideoWebArena: Evaluating long context multimodal agents with video un-
    derstanding web tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.19100 (2024)
15. Koh, J.Y., Lo, R., Jang, L., Duvvur, V., Lim, M.C., Huang, P.Y., Neubig, G.,
    Zhou, S., Salakhutdinov, R., Fried, D.: VisualWebArena: Evaluating multimodal
    agents on realistic visual web tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13649 (2024)
16. Li, J., Li, D., Savarese, S., Hoi, S.: BLIP-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
    training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In: International
    Conference on Machine Learning. pp. 19730–19742. PMLR (2023)
          FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks               15

17. Liu, H., Li, C., Li, Y., Lee, Y.J.: Improved baselines with visual instruction tuning.
    In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
    Recognition. pp. 26296–26306 (2024)
18. Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., Lee, Y.J.: Visual instruction tuning. Advances in Neural
    Information Processing Systems 36 (2024)
19. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G.,
    Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al.: Learning transferable visual models from
    natural language supervision. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
    pp. 8748–8763. PMLR (2021)
20. Tang, Y., Bi, J., Xu, S., Song, L., Liang, S., Wang, T., Zhang, D., An, J., Lin, J.,
    Zhu, R., Vosoughi, A., Huang, C., Zhang, Z., Liu, P., Feng, M., Zheng, F., Zhang,
    J., Luo, P., Luo, J., Xu, C.: Video understanding with large language models: A
    survey. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology (2025)
21. Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.A., Lacroix, T.,
    Rozieère, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F., et al.: LLaMA: Open and eﬃcient
    foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 (2023)
22. Touvron, H., Martin, L., Stone, K., Albert, P., Almahairi, A., Babaei, Y., Bash-
    lykov, N., Batra, S., Bhargava, P., Bhosale, S., et al.: Llama 2: Open foundation
    and ﬁne-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 (2023)
23. Wu, B., Li, Y., Fang, M., Song, Z., Zhang, Z., Wei, Y., Chen, L.: Founda-
    tions and recent trends in multimodal mobile agents: A survey. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2411.02006 (2024)
24. Wu, Z., Han, C., Ding, Z., Weng, Z., Liu, Z., Yao, S., Yu, T., Kong, L.: OS-
    Copilot: Towards generalist computer agents with self-improvement. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2402.07456 (2024)
25. Xie, J., Chen, Z., Zhang, R., Wan, X., Li, G.: Large multimodal agents: A survey.
    arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15116 (2024)
26. Xie, T., Zhang, D., Chen, J., Li, X., Zhao, S., Cao, R., Hua, T.J., Cheng, Z., Shin,
    D., Lei, F., Liu, Y., Xu, Y., Zhou, S., Savarese, S., Xiong, C., Zhong, V., Yu, T.:
    Osworld: Benchmarking multimodal agents for open-ended tasks in real computer
    environments (2024)
27. Xie, T., Zhou, F., Cheng, Z., Shi, P., Weng, L., Liu, Y., Hua, T.J., Zhao, J., Liu,
    Q., Liu, C., Liu, L.Z., Xu, Y., Su, H., Shin, D., Xiong, C., Yu, T.: OpenAgents:
    An open platform for language agents in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10634
    (2023)
28. Yang, J., Jimenez, C.E., Wettig, A., Lieret, K., Yao, S., Narasimhan, K.R., Press,
    O.: SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineer-
    ing. In: The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
    Systems (2024)
29. Yang, Z., Chen, G., Li, X., Wang, W., Yang, Y.: DoraemonGPT: Toward under-
    standing dynamic scenes with large language models (exempliﬁed as a video agent).
    In: Proc. of 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (2024)
30. Yao, S., Chen, H., Yang, J., Narasimhan, K.: WebShop: Towards scalable real-
    world web interaction with grounded language agents. In: Advances in Neural
    Information Processing Systems. vol. 35, pp. 20744–20757 (2022)
31. Yao, S., Shinn, N., Razavi, P., Narasimhan, K.: τ -bench: A benchmark for tool-
    agent-user interaction in real-world domains (2024)
32. Zhou, S., Xu, F.F., Zhu, H., Zhou, X., Lo, R., Sridhar, A., Cheng, X., Bisk,
    Y., Fried, D., Alon, U., et al.: Webarena: A realistic web environment for build-
    ing autonomous agents. In: International Conference on Learning Representations
    (ICLR) (2024)
16       J. Takahashi et al.

A     Dataset

A.1     Field categories

FieldWorkArena includes videos from three diﬀerent ﬁeld categories: factory,
warehouse, and retail. Figure 3–6 show sample images of each ﬁeld category.




              Fig. 3. Factory                      Fig. 4. Warehouse




      Fig. 5. Retail(convenience store)        Fig. 6. Retail(supermarket)




B     Example Queries

Below are examples of queries to enter into the publicly available FieldWorkArena
Task. The tasks are divided into three main categories: “Perception”, “Decision
making”, and “Combination”. Perception and Decision making tasks are divided
into multiple sub-tasks.


B.1    Perception tasks

Extract documents

 – Please extract and list the items related to “glove wearing methods” in this
   PDF ﬁle.
 – In this PDF ﬁle, please extract the notes on “cargo on pallet.”?
 – Read this store manual. What are the business hours for April 28, 2025?
        FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks      17

Abstract from images
 – Are the workers wearing aprons in this image?
 – Does this image show any workers with both hands full?
 – Is there anyone in this image who is not wearing PPE? PPE here means a
   yellow or orange safety vest.

Abstract from videos
 – In this video, is the operator using the electric screwdriver with the green
   label to tighten the 4 screws properly?
 – In this video, please tell us whether the customer has used “Smartphone”,
   before or after handling the target product.

Spatial from images
 – How far is the cart in the right-hand aisle from the person walking in the
   left-hand aisle in this image?
 – What is the distance between a woman wearing a yellow vest and a black
   shirt and black forklift?
 – Is the distance between the blue cart and the person walking down the center
   of the aisle in this image less than 1.0 meters?

Spatialtemporal from videos
 – How many times did the distance between a moving forklift and a worker
   fall below the 2 m threshold?
 – In this video, what is the minimum distance between the worker on the right
   side of the screen and the cart pullednother worker nearby?
 – Is the minimum distance between the AGV being pushed by a worker and
   the worker walking through the aisle on the left in this video less than 1
   meter?

Temporal from videos
 – What is the start time and what is the end time of CoﬀeeMaker Cleaning?
 – Detect the start and end times of the solder tank cleaning cycle.
 – In this video, at what time does the customer dropped the target product.
   The time must be output from the time of the movie itself.

B.2   Decision making tasks
Multiple image video analyses
 – How many violations were there regarding “the operator uses a check mask
   to inspect the product”?.
 – How many incidents were there regarding “distance between the worker and
   the nearest equipment less than 0.5 meters”?.
18     J. Takahashi et al.

safety and incident report
 – If there were violations regarding “the operator is using the electric screw-
   driver with the green label to tighten the 4 screws properly”, create a new
   issue for each violations with a value of “Electric screwdriver with a green
   label” for ﬁeld “Short description”, a value of ﬁlename for ﬁeld “Filename”, a
   value of “violation” for ﬁeld “Category” and a value that must be numbered
   sequentially from 1110 if there are multiple incidents for ﬁeld “ID”.
 – If there were incidents regarding “Workers with both hand full”, create a
   new issue for each incidents with a value of “Workers with both hand full”
   for ﬁeld “Short description”, a value of ﬁlename for ﬁeld “Filename”, a value
   of “incident” for ﬁeld “Category” and a value that must be numbered se-
   quentially from 0000 if there are multiple incidents for ﬁeld “ID”.

B.3   Combination tasks
 – Analyze the provided image and procedure document to identify any devia-
   tions from the speciﬁed glove usage procedure. The image depicts a worker
   performing a task, and the procedure document details the required glove
   type and usage. The goal is to generate a JSON report detailing any in-
   stances where the worker deviates from the speciﬁed glove usage procedure.
   This task integrates ﬁndings from this analysis with the results of a previous
   task. Procedure Step Veriﬁcation: For each step in the procedure document,
   identify its start and end times within the video clip using the video’s times-
   tamp. Flag any missing steps as deviations. Procedure Adherence Check:
   Verify that the worker performs each step according to the procedure doc-
   ument. Flag any deviations as violations. This includes missing steps (iden-
   tiﬁed in Step 1) and any other discrepancies. Pay particular attention to
   the correct use of tools as speciﬁed in the procedure document. Incident Re-
   port Generation: Generate a JSON report detailing all identiﬁed violations.
   The report should begin with the total number of violations. Each violation
   should be represented by a JSON object with the following ﬁelds: "ID": A
   sequentially numbered ID starting from 1100. "Short description": A concise
   description of the violation (e.g., "Incorrect gloves used", "Gloves not worn").
   If the violation concerns the type of glove speciﬁed in the procedure docu-
   ment, use "Wearing gloves as speciﬁed in the procedure document" for this
   ﬁeld. "Description": A detailed description of the violation, including the
   speciﬁed glove type from the procedure document, a statement indicating
   the lack of proper glove usage in the image, the image ﬁlename, and relevant
   information from previous tasks (referencing task IDs where appropriate).
   "Category": "violation", "Image ﬁlename": The name of the image ﬁle.
 – Analyze the provided image to identify instances where workers are not wear-
   ing the required PPE (Personal Protective Equipment). The required PPE
   is deﬁned as a yellow or orange safety vest. PPE Violation Detection and
   Reporting: Analyze the image to identify instances where any worker is not
   wearing a yellow or orange safety vest. For each violation, describe the loca-
   tion of the worker within the image (e.g., "Worker in the lower-left corner").
         FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks         19

   Generate a JSON report. This report will integrate ﬁndings from this analy-
   sis and the previous task, avoiding duplicate reporting. Each violation will be
   represented by a JSON object with the following ﬁelds: "ID": A sequentially
   numbered ID starting from 1060. This sequence continues from the highest
   ID in the previous task’s results. If the previous task reported violations, the
   next sequential ID will be used. "Short description": "Person without PPE"
   "Description": A detailed description of the violation, including the location
   of the worker within the image (e.g., "Worker in the lower-left corner is not
   wearing a safety vest"). "Category": "violation", "Image ﬁlename": The name
   of the input image ﬁle.

B.4   Example of system prompt
“TASK_QUERY” and “INPUT_DATA” within the template represent the query
and input data for the task, respectively.


# Instructions

Review the instructions from the user and all other information
 to find the best possible next action to accomplish your goal.
Your answer will be interpreted and executed by a program,
 make sure to follow the formatting instructions.

# Goal

Give the answer with not report_infeasible
 but send_msg_to_user action.
$TASK_QUERY$
Data is stored in
$INPUT_DATA$

# Analyzed Results

$INPUT_DATA$

# Action Space

4 different types of actions are available.

noop(wait_ms: float = 1000)
    Description: Do nothing, and optionally wait for
     the given time (in milliseconds).
    Examples:
        noop()
20    J. Takahashi et al.

        noop(500)

send_msg_to_user(text: str)
    Description: Sends a message to the user.
    Examples:
        send_msg_to_user(’Based on the results of my search,
         the city was built in 1751.’)

analyze_video(video_path: str, query: str)
    Description: Specifies the video file to analyze.
    Examples:
        analyze_video(’sample.mp4’,
         ’How many people in this video?’)

analyze_image(image_path: str, query: str)
    Description: Specifies the image file to analyze.
    Examples:
        analyze_image(’sample.jpg’,
         ’How many people in this image?’)

Only a single action can be provided at once. Example:
send_msg_to_user(’Based on the results of my search,
 the city was built in 1751.’)


Here are examples of actions with chain-of-thought reasoning:

I now need to click on the Submit button to send the form.
 I will use the click action on the button, which has bid 12.
‘‘‘click("12")‘‘‘

I found the information requested by the user,
 I will send it to the chat.
‘‘‘send_msg_to_user("The price for a 15\" laptop is 1499 USD.")‘‘‘

I need to analyze the image provided by the user to find out
 how many workers.
‘‘‘analyze_scene_image("scene1.jpg",
 "Count the number of workers in the image.")‘‘‘

# Next action

You will now think step by step and produce your next best action.
 Reflect on your past actions, any resulting error message,
  and the current state of the page before deciding on your next action.
       FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks   21

You MUST answer with a single action.
The action MUST use the format defined above.
22      J. Takahashi et al.

C    Evaluation Examples
The following shows examples of task evaluations on FieldWorkArena. Each task
deﬁnes the following items:

Input: Indicates the document, video, or image to be input
Query: Indicates the query to be input
Answer: The response returned by the MLLM
GroundTruth: The predeﬁned correct answer
Score: The matching score (0.0 − −1.0)



                          Table 6. Part of PDF documents

···
4 Forklift Work
- In the workshop, a walking path is deﬁned and a line is drawn.
- During the work, only persons concerned are prohibited from entering.
- Never place a person on the claw or counterweight of a forklift.
- Forklifts have poor visibility ahead of them, so they should pay suﬃcient attention to
the front, back, left, and right, and at the same time, when the load is large, they
should carry out the following.
- driving back (Installation of back buzzer and use of fog lamp)
- Guidance by a guide shall be carried out as necessary.
- Speed limits shall be established, indicated and observed.
- Cargoes placed on pallets should be loaded safely and securely. If there is a risk of cargo
collapsing, safe measures should be taken, such as wrapping the cargoes.
- When driving on the road, use a pallet, skid, etc., or mark the tip of a fork.
···




Input PDF document (Table 6)

Query In this PDF ﬁle, please extract the notes on “cargo on pallet.”

Answer Cargo placed on pallets should be loaded safely and securely. If there
is a risk of cargo collapsing, safe measures should be taken, such as wrapping
the cargo with a headband.

Ground Truth he document mentions that cargoes placed on pallets should
be loaded safely and securely. If there is a risk of cargo collapsing, safe measures
should be taken, such as wrapping the cargoes.

Score 1.0
        FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks    23

                       Table 7. Part of text documents

              ···
              Virtual Store Manual

              1. Business Hours

              Weekdays: 08:00 - 20:00
              Weekends and Holidays: 08:00 - 21:00
              Holidays are based on the general Japanese calendar.

              2. Employee Tasks
              ···




Input Text document (Table 7)


Query Read this store manual. What are the business hours for April 28, 2025?


Answer The business hours for April 28, 2025, are from 08:00 to 20:00.


Ground Truth Business hours are 08:00 to 20:00.


Score 1.0
24     J. Takahashi et al.




                       Fig. 7. ID:2.3.0011 part of documents




Input Image (Figure 7)


Query Are the workers wearing aprons in this image?


Answer I am unable to identify or describe people in images, including whether
workers are wearing aprons. If you have any other questions or need assistance
with something else, feel free to ask!


Ground Truth Yes.

Score 0.0
        FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks   25




                             Fig. 8. Input image




Input Image (Figure 8)


Query Does this image show any workers with both hands full?


Answer Yes, the person in the orange shirt has both hands full because they
are lifting an empty box with both hands.


Ground Truth Yes, the image shows a worker on the left with both hands full,
holding a box.


Score 1.0
26     J. Takahashi et al.




                             Fig. 9. Input video




Input Video (Figure 9)


Query In this video, what is the start time and what is the end time of Cof-
feeMaker Cleaning. The start and end times must be output from the time of
the movie itself.


Answer The speciﬁed motion start and end times are from 00:00:10 to 00:02:36.


Ground Truth The ’CoﬀeeMaker Cleaning’ process starts at 00:00:12 and ends
at 00:02:35.


Score 0.95
         FieldWorkArena: Agentic AI Benchmark for Real Field Work Tasks         27




        (a) Video 1                (b) Video 2                 (c) Video 3

                               Fig. 10. Input videos




Input Three videos (Figure 10)


Query If there were violations regarding “the operator is using the electric
screwdriver with the green label to tighten the 4 screws properly”, create a new
issue for each violations with a value of “Electric screwdriver with a green label”
for ﬁeld “Short description”, a value of ﬁlename for ﬁeld “Filename”, a value of
“violation” for ﬁeld “Category” and a value that must be numbered sequentially
from 1110 if there are multiple incidents for ﬁeld “ID”


Answer "message": "All analyzed results show compliance with the instruction
that the operator is using the electric screwdriver with the green label to tighten
the 4 screws properly. No violations were observed, therefore no issues were
created.", "status": "compliance"


Ground Truth "message": "No violations regarding the use of the electric
screwdriver with the green label to tighten the 4 screws properly were found
in the provided videos."


Score 1.0
