                                        Prometheus: Towards Long-Horizon Codebase Navigation
                                        for Repository-Level Problem Solving
                                        YUE PAN∗ , University College London, United Kingdom
                                        ZIMIN CHEN∗ , Sana Labs, Sweden
                                        SIYU LU, Uppsala University, Sweden
                                        ZHAOYANG CHU, University College London, United Kingdom
                                        XIANG LI, University College London, United Kingdom




arXiv:2507.19942v2 [cs.SE] 7 Feb 2026
                                        HAN LI, Nanjing University, China
                                        YANG FENG, Nanjing University, China
                                        CLAIRE LE GOUES, Carnegie Mellon University, United States
                                        FEDERICA SARRO, University College London, United Kingdom
                                        MARTIN MONPERRUS, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
                                        HE YE† , University College London, United Kingdom
                                        Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in automating software engineering tasks,
                                        spurring the emergence of coding agents that scaffold LLMs with external tools to resolve repository-level
                                        problems. However, existing agents still struggle to navigate large-scale codebases, as the “Needle-in-a-Haystack”
                                        problem persists even with million-token context windows, where relevant evidence is often overwhelmed
                                        by large volumes of irrelevant code and documentation. Prior codebase navigation approaches, including
                                        embedding-based retrieval, file-system exploration, and graph-based retrieval, address parts of this challenge
                                        but fail to capture the temporal continuity of agent reasoning, rendering agents stateless and causing repeated
                                        repository traversals that hinder scalable planning and reasoning.
                                           To address these limitations, we present Prometheus, a memory-centric coding agent framework for
                                        long-horizon codebase navigation. Prometheus represents the repository as a unified knowledge graph
                                        to encode semantic dependencies and employs a context engine augmented with working memory that
                                        retains and reuses previously explored contexts to ensure continuity across reasoning steps. Built upon
                                        this engine, Prometheus integrates memory-enhanced navigation into a multi-agent system for automated
                                        issue resolution, encompassing issue classification, bug reproduction, patch generation, and verification.
                                        Comprehensive experiments are conducted on two widely used issue resolution benchmarks, i.e., SWE-bench
                                        Verified and SWE-PolyBench Verified. Powered by GPT-5, Prometheus achieves state-of-the-art performance
                                        with 74.4% and 33.8% resolution rates on the two benchmarks, ranking Top-6 and Top-1 among open-source
                                        agent systems, respectively. Our data and code are available at https://github.com/EuniAI/Prometheus.
                                        ∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. Email: he.ye@ucl.ac.uk.

                                        Authors’ Contact Information: Yue Pan∗ , University College London, London, United Kingdom, jack.pan.23@ucl.ac.uk;
                                        Zimin Chen∗ , Sana Labs, Stockholm, Sweden, zimin@sanalabs.com; Siyu Lu, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, siyu.lu.
                                        6562@student.uu.se; Zhaoyang Chu, University College London, London, United Kingdom, zhaoyang.chu.25@ucl.ac.uk;
                                        Xiang Li, University College London, London, United Kingdom, x.li.25@ucl.ac.uk; Han Li, Nanjing University, Nanjing,
                                        China, 231220161@smail.nju.edu.cn; Yang Feng, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, Fengyang@nju.edu.cn; Claire Le
                                        Goues, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, United States, clegoues@cs.cmu.edu; Federica Sarro, University College
                                        London, London, United Kingdom, f.sarro@ucl.ac.uk; Martin Monperrus, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm,
                                        Sweden, monperrus@kth.se; He Ye† , University College London, London, United Kingdom, he.ye@ucl.ac.uk.

                                        Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
                                        provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
                                        full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
                                        Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
                                        prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
                                        © 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
                                        ACM 2994-970X/2026/1-ART1
                                        https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn


                                                                                    Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
   Yue Pan∗ , Zimin Chen∗ , Siyu Lu, Zhaoyang Chu, Xiang Li, Han Li, Yang Feng, Claire Le Goues, Federica Sarro, Martin
1:2                                                                                            Monperrus, and He Ye†

CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Software creation and management.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Agentic Issues Resolution, Repository-level Context Retrieval, Memory
Enhanced Context Retrieval

ACM Reference Format:
Yue Pan∗ , Zimin Chen∗ , Siyu Lu, Zhaoyang Chu, Xiang Li, Han Li, Yang Feng, Claire Le Goues, Federica
Sarro, Martin Monperrus, and He Ye† . 2026. Prometheus: Towards Long-Horizon Codebase Navigation
for Repository-Level Problem Solving. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 1, 1, Article 1 (January 2026), 21 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn


1   Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong capabilities in automating software
engineering tasks, including code generation [15, 16, 21], code summarization [34, 36], and program
repair [25, 47, 48, 52]. Driven by this progress, coding agents have emerged as autonomous
systems that scaffold LLMs with external tools to accomplish complex, repository-level tasks
in real development environments [17, 29], as exemplified by SWE-agent [44], AutoCodeRover [53],
and OpenHands [38].
   Despite substantial progress, existing coding agents still struggle to navigate large-scale codebases
that comprise millions of lines of code and intricate dependency relationships. While recent LLMs
have dramatically expanded their context windows to millions of tokens and beyond [5, 12, 33],
these models still face the “Needle-in-a-Haystack” challenge [13, 23]. Specifically, task-relevant
context evidence is overwhelmed by large volumes of irrelevant content, leading to inaccurate
retrieval and degraded reasoning. Here, context refers to code and accompanying documentation
relevant to issue resolution. As a result, effective codebase navigation for retrieving relevant
context remains crucial for enabling long-horizon reasoning and decision-making throughout
repository-level workflows.
Existing Approaches and Limitations. A straightforward navigation approach for coding agents
is to apply embedding-based semantic retrieval, as illustrated in Figure 1 (a), which encodes code
chunks into embeddings and ranks them by their cosine similarity to the query embedding [6, 31,
39, 50]. While enabling efficient navigation without step-by-step exploration, this approach relies
heavily on chunking and embedding quality; irrelevant or noisy retrieval results can mislead the
agent and degrade subsequent reasoning. Another line of work adopts file-system navigation, as
illustrated in Figure 1 (b), which grounds context retrieval within the codebase by executing shell
commands (e.g., ls, find, and grep) [4, 6, 26, 38] or interacting through specialized interfaces [40,
44]. However, this method lacks a global view of the repository architecture, resulting in a
fragmented understanding of the codebase that impairs long-horizon reasoning and planning.
More importantly, both approaches are limited in handling the intricate semantic dependencies
within the codebase, which are essential for repository-level problem solving.
   Recently, structure-aware navigation has emerged as a promising alternative for coding agents [9,
27, 35, 42, 53], as shown in Figure 1 (c), which models the repository as a graph, where nodes
represent code entities (e.g., files, classes, and functions) and edges capture their dependencies (e.g.,
syntax trees, control flows, and data flows). By explicitly encoding the hierarchical structure of the
repository, these agents achieve powerful multi-hop reasoning and deep context retrieval across
complex codebases. While these agents effectively capture the spatial topology of the codebase,
they fail to model the temporal history of their own exploration. They operate essentially as
stateless functions, lacking persistent memory of previously explored code. As a result, agents
repeatedly traverse the same regions of the repository, incurring substantial computational overhead.

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
Prometheus                                                                                                                                                                                                          1:3
Motivation

             (a) Embedding-based Semantic Retrieval                    (c) Structure-Aware Navigation
                   (d) Prometheus: Memory-Enhanced Context Retrieval 

        Query                  Embedding Model      Dense Embeddings        over Spatial Topology                                     over Temporal Trajectory
                                                      (Vector Space)
                                                                                                                Retrieved Context                                                            Retrieved Context
         Issue
                                                                                  files
       Description                                                                               classes                                        I found two         I need to inspect
                                                                                                 functions                                         relevant         the codebase to
                                                                                                                                                functions A         review functions
                                                                                                  calls
                                             Cosine 
                                                                                               and B.               B and C.
                                                                                                 imports
                                           Similarity

                                           Detection                                             inherits

                                                                                                                        r             s           r            m             r           m         r         s
                                               Top-K

     Code Chunks                              Ranked

                                              Results                                                           First, I need to             I need to store the            Oh, I’ve already       So I just need
                                                                                                                  inspect the                  contexts about            reviewed function B!      to search the
                         (b) File-System Navigation                                                           codebase with the              functions A and B in         Let me retrieve its      codebase for
                                                                                                              graph retrieval tool.            the memory base.            memory context.          function C.
                                                                                        Multi-Hop Reasoning
         src/                             $ grep -r 'API_KEY' ./src                       & Deep Context                                              Update                  Retrieve
                                                                                              Retrieval
                app/                      ./src/app/utils.py:
                                                       Working 

                  utils.py                key = os.getenv(...)                                                    Memory Base
                  main.py
                                                                                                                            a reasoning step
      Repository                                   Shell Commands
                                                                                    s search tools      m memory tools        r reasoning step
                             Agent                  (ls, find, grep)                                                        multiple steps




                               Fig. 1. An illustration of existing codebase navigation methods for coding agents.


Consequently, current agents remain inadequate for planning, reasoning, and memorizing required
to navigate complex software systems on par with human developers.
Our Work: Long-Horizon Codebase Navigation via Memory. To address this gap, this paper
introduces Prometheus, a memory-centric coding agent framework that models codebase navigation
from a temporal perspective, enabling long-horizon reasoning in repository-level workflows such
as bug fixing, feature implementation, and refactoring. Specifically, Prometheus transforms the
codebase into a unified knowledge graph that captures complex semantic dependencies and serves
as the foundation for context retrieval. Subsequently, Prometheus employs a context engine
augmented with working memory, as illustrated in Figure 1 (d), which automatically retains
and reuses previously explored contexts to maintain continuity across reasoning steps. Finally,
Prometheus integrates the context engine into a multi-agent system for automated issue resolution,
where specialized agents for issue classification, bug reproduction, patch generation, and patch
verification operate sequentially under memory-enhanced navigation.
   We conduct comprehensive experiments to validate the effectiveness of Prometheus using
the state-of-the-art LLM (i.e., GPT-5 [33]) on two widely used issue resolution benchmarks (i.e.,
SWE-bench Verified [17] and SWE-PolyBench Verified [30]). Experimental results demonstrate
that Prometheus achieves leading performance with 74.4% and 33.8% resolution rates on the two
benchmarks, ranking Top-6 and Top-1 among open-sourced agent systems, respectively, at the
time of writing. In particular, Prometheus achieves over 30% balanced resolution rate across Java,
Python, JavaScript, and TypeScript, indicating its strong multilingual generalization and consistent
cross-language performance on SWE-PolyBench Verified. Moreover, we conduct a fine-grained
analysis of context retrieval performance by comparing retrieved contexts against human-annotated
gold standards. Results show that Prometheus significantly outperforms leading agents, such
as Agentless [39], SWE-agent [44], and OpenHands [38], retrieving a higher proportion of gold
contexts at the file, function/class, and span levels under the same GPT-5 backbone. Our ablation
study further demonstrates that the working memory mechanism reduces LLM invocation cost by
45.4% while improving the issue resolution rate by 25%.
Contributions. The primary contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
 • Memory-Enhanced Context Retrieval. We propose a novel context retrieval approach
   augmented with working memory, which models the temporal trajectory of agent navigation.
   This mechanism enables agents to automatically retain and reuse previously explored contexts,
   achieving continuity and coherence in long-horizon reasoning.

                                                                        Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
   Yue Pan∗ , Zimin Chen∗ , Siyu Lu, Zhaoyang Chu, Xiang Li, Han Li, Yang Feng, Claire Le Goues, Federica Sarro, Martin
1:4                                                                                            Monperrus, and He Ye†

                                                                                                                   My

                                                                                                                    Re
                                                                                                                                Context Retrieval Engine & Memory                                                                                                                                                                                       Multi-Agent Orchestration
                        Code Repo to Knowledge Graph


                                                                                                           tests




                                                                                                                    p
                                                                                                                                     requirements.txt




                                                                                           test_task.py               src                                                                                                                                                                                                                         categorize issue                                    verified correct patch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Retrieved Context




                                             My
Repo

                                                                                                          ma                     utils
                                                                                                                                                                                                            FileNode: utils/helpers.py

ASTNode: <function_def>

Lines: L12L48

FileNode: tasks.py

ASTNode: <function_def>




    Code Repo
                                                                                                           in.      tasks.py
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Tools
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    neo4j   docker   git   file



                                tests
                                                           requirements.txt
                                                                                                           p                                            helpers.py


                                                                                                                                                                            iterative context retrieval




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Knowledge Graph
                 test_task.py



                                            src                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Patch Verification Agent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Issue Classification Agent
                                                                                                                   searched sub-graph                                                                                   retrieved context




                                main.py




                                                       utils




                                          tasks.py
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                patch 
proposal



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     bug 
issue
                                                                              helpers.py                                                                                                                                                                          issue description
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Context Retrieval Engine



                                                                                                                                                                                 Context Retrieval Engine




                                                                                                                               Context




                                                                                                                                                                     retrieval                              store                                                                                                                                                                 other issues




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           issue can be 
reproduced




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Patch Generation Agent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bug Reproduction Agent


                                                                                                                                                                                     Working Memory




                                                                                                          Fig. 2. An overview of Prometheus.


• Prometheus: A Novel Issue Resolution Agent. We develop Prometheus, a multi-agent
  system that integrates memory-enhanced navigation into issue resolution workflows. This
  system coordinates specialized agents for issue classification, bug reproduction, patch generation,
  and patch verification, establishing a unified workflow for automated issue resolution at the
  repository level.
• Extensive Evaluation and Analysis. We conduct comprehensive experiments on two widely
  used issue resolution benchmarks (i.e., SWE-bench Verified [17] and SWE-PolyBench Verified [30]),
  demonstrating the superiority of Prometheus over existing agent systems. We further demonstrate
  the superiority of Prometheus in both context retrieval and multilingual adaptability, and
  validate the effectiveness of the working memory mechanism.

2       Methodology
Figure 2 presents an overview of Prometheus, which is composed of three core components:
(A) Repository to Knowledge Graph, which constructs a unified code index representing the
structural and semantic relationships within the target codebase; (B) Memory Enhanced Context
Retrieval, which enables effective identification and reuse of relevant code and documentation to
support reasoning; and (C) Multi-Agent Architectural Design, which coordinates specialized
agents to collaboratively perform issue resolution tasks. The following sections describe each
component in detail.

2.1             Repository to Knowledge Graph
To facilitate semantic understanding and context retrieval across large-scale codebases, we propose
a unified knowledge graph representation that integrates file structures, ASTs, and textual content
into a coherent graph abstraction. As shown in Figure 3, our knowledge graph is built around three
core components: (1) defining a node and edge schema, (2) constructing the graph from source files,
and (3) persisting the graph data in a scalable database.
   Graph Schema. The knowledge graph represents codebases as heterogeneous graphs composed
of three primary node types: ❶ FileNode , ❷ ASTNode , and ❸ TextNode . A FileNode
represents a file or directory with three attributes: a unique node_id, the relative_path from
the repository root, and the basename of the file or directory. It anchors structural links in the
knowledge graph. An ASTNode represents a Tree-sitter syntax node. It includes a unique node_id,
the start_line and end_line indicating its position in the source file, the text of the code it covers
(including comments), and its type, per the Tree-sitter grammar node type. A TextNode represents
a chunk of unstructured textual content in the knowledge graph. Each TextNode is associated

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
Prometheus                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1:5


        Codebase Repo                                                                                                                           Node Details


      https://github.com/MyRepo

      Commit ID: 9c6666
                                                                                               My
Repo

                                                                                                                                                ASTNode
            MyRepo                                                                                                                                                                                         FileNode




                                                                                                             requirements.txt                Represent a tree-sitter node                              Represent a file/dir
           src                                                                 tests


                     main.py    task.py      utils
                                                                                                                                                                                                       node_id: A unique node id.
                                                                                               src                                           node_id: A unique node id.
          tests
                                                                test_task.py
                                                                                                                                                                                                       relative_path: The relative path from the root path.
                     test_task.py         helpers.py                                                                                         start_line: The starting line number.

      requirements.txt                                                           main.py                                                                                                               basename: The basename of the file/dir.
                                                                                                         utils
                                                                                                                                             text: The source code (including comments) of the node.
                                                                                           tasks.py


                                                                                                                                             type: The tree-sitter node type.


                                                                                                                          helpers.py

                                                                                                                                             end_line: The ending line number.                             TextNode




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Represent a String


                                                                                                                                                      HAS_FILE
                                                                                                                                                                            FileNode
                                                                                                                                                                                                        node_id: A unique node id.
                                                                                                                                                      HAS_AST

                                                                                                                                                      HAS_TEXT              ASTNode
                                                     Store to                                                                                                                                           meta_data: The metadata about the string.
                                                                                                                                                      PARENT_OF

                                                                                                                                                                            TextNode
                                                                                                                                                      NEXT_CHUNK                                        text: A string of the text.




                                                         Fig. 3. An overview of our knowledge graph construction for the codebase.


with a unique node_id, descriptive meta_data, and the corresponding text span. TextNodes are
extracted from documentation-oriented file types, including .markdown, .md, .txt, and .rst. The
text is segmented into chunks based on a configurable chunk_size. Depending on the file content
and structure, adaptive splitters are applied using hierarchical separators, including paragraph-level
(\n\n), line-level (\n), word-level (space), and character-level splitting.
   To capture relationships across FileNodes, ASTNodes, and TextNodes, we define five directed
edge types. These relationships are essential for representing the structural, syntactic, and lexical
context necessary for code understanding and issue resolution. The HAS_FILE edge (black) connects
directories to their child files or subdirectories, preserving the repository hierarchy. The HAS_AST
edge (purple) links each file node to the root of its corresponding abstract syntax tree. PARENT_OF
edges (gray) connect AST nodes to reflect syntactic hierarchy within the tree. HAS_TEXT edges
(blue) associate file nodes with their segmented textual content, and NEXT_CHUNK edges (orange)
connect sequential text chunks to maintain document order. Together, these relationships enable
the graph to represent structural, syntactic, and lexical information in an integrated and practical
format, exposing the repository knowledge graph through a set of structured query tools.
   To our knowledge, this work introduces a highly extensible knowledge graph schema that
unifies repository structure, program syntax, and unstructured text. In contrast to prior graph-
based approaches [27] that rely on specialized or task-coupled designs, we adopt a deliberately
minimal yet expressive schema, consisting of only three node types and a small set of well-defined
relations. On SWE-bench Verified [17], we observe an average knowledge graph construction
time of 1.99 seconds per instance over all 500 instances, indicating that the proposed schema is
lightweight enough for practical, large-scale use. This simplicity enables efficient graph construction
and incremental updates as codebases evolve, while preserving sufficient structural and semantic
coverage for repository-level reasoning. Consequently, the resulting knowledge graph provides
a reusable substrate for tasks such as semantic retrieval, long-horizon dependency analysis, and
agent-based code navigation, without requiring task-specific re-engineering.

2.2              Memory-Enhanced Context Retrieval
2.2.1 Context Retrieval Engine. As shown in Figure 4, the Context Retrieval Engine adopts a three-
stage retrieval cycle that incrementally maps a high-level intent expressed in natural language
to structured contextual evidence. As summarized in Algorithm 1, the process begins with Sub-
query Synthesis, where a structured and specific sub-query in natural language is generated with
high-level intent and the current collected context. The sub-query is formulated as a ternary tuple
comprising an essential query, which captures the core information needed, extra requirements,

                                                                                                                                       Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
   Yue Pan∗ , Zimin Chen∗ , Siyu Lu, Zhaoyang Chu, Xiang Li, Han Li, Yang Feng, Claire Le Goues, Federica Sarro, Martin
1:6                                                                                            Monperrus, and He Ye†


                       High-level Intent




                                                         Sub-query Synthesis                                                    Guided Discovery                                                   Iterative Refinement



                                                        Decomposes ambiguous retrieval goals into executable tasks
     Sub-query guiding memory-first protocol with KG traversal           Drill down into deeper architectural layers until threshold met




              Context Retrieval Engine

                                                                                                                       store with embeddings
                                                                                                                                                                                           Semantic Memory Base



                                                                                                                        Top-K 
Result




       Retrieval                           Store    code structures




                                                                                                    Context
                                                                                                                                             ess                                     req                                                          pur




                                                                                                                      essential query                                    extra requirements                                  purpose
                   Working Memory
                                                      code files



                                                                                documents                                                                                   Ternary Query




                                 Fig. 4. An overview of the memory-enhanced context retrieval engine.



which encode retrieval constraints such as prioritizing specific files or truncating oversized artifacts,
and a purpose, which specifies the motivation or objective of the retrieval. Figure 5 provides an
example and illustration for both high-level intent and its corresponding sub-query. For example,
a high-level intent to “locate authentication bugs” can generate a structured query targeting
authentication-related classes, decorators, and their associated call sites.
   Following synthesis, the context engine performs sub-query guided context retrieval and context
organization under a memory-first protocol. As shown in Algorithm 1, the system first retrieves
from the working memory for previously stored context associated with the current sub-query. If
no relevant context is retrieved, the engine exposes the repository knowledge graph through a set
of structured search tools, allowing the LLM to iteratively traverse file-level and AST-level nodes via
multi-hop relations. Guided by the sub-query, the LLM autonomously decides which graph relations
to follow and when to expand or stop traversal. For the set of discovered contexts, the engine
first performs a structural deduplication by cross-referencing their file paths and line-number
intervals (𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡_𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒, 𝑒𝑛𝑑_𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒). These contexts are categorized relative to each other as duplicate,
contained, contains, or separate. For those identified as non-redundant, the LLM then performs an
extraction step to distill the most relevant information. The engine keeps the code’s structure intact
by grouping snippets by their source files and restoring their original order, forming a validated
context. The validated contexts is then stored in memory for future use. This process is repeated
and dynamically updated.

2.2.2 Working Memory. The goal of working memory is to prevent Prometheus from repeated
query and reduce the token cost. As shown in Figure 4, the working memory system in Prometheus
implements a structured and persistent context layer for repository-level evidence. We define a
context unit as a minimal reusable piece of context, represented as a tuple of (code snippet, metadata),
where metadata includes the originating file path and start/end line numbers. Working memory
maintains a set of memory records, each functioning as a logical container that binds a structured
sub-query (as synthesized by the Context Engine) to its corresponding context units. This design
ensures that retrieval is not treated as a monolithic string search; instead, subsequent reasoning
steps can perform fine-grained lookups by aligning their intent with the structured sub-queries
preserved within the memory records. By the definition of agent memory in recent surveys on
agentic memory systems [14], this module is classified as an agent memory component rather

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
Prometheus                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1:7



                                          Issue: Unauthorized Access to /admin Endpoints
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Structured Sub-Query (Ternary Tuple)



      Some administrative routes are missing the @requires_auth decorator, allowing unauthenticated access to sensitive user data. The AuthManager fails to catch these gaps when routes are dynamically generated.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Essential Query                                                                                                                                 Extra Requirements                                                                                                                                                                        Purpose




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Provide the full class definitions and method implementations for AuthManager, UserSession, and any decorators labeled @requires_auth         Focus on production code (ignore /tests folder). If files exceed 500 lines, prioritize the validate_token() and refresh_session() methods.   Identify the specific logic where session tokens are validated against the backend database to find missing check-and-set vulnerabilities.




                                     High Level Intent (Natural Language)




         Find all source code context needed to identify and fix potential authentication bypass bugs in the API gateway.




      Defines the core goal of the issue and guides the Context Retrieval Engine to retrieve only the most relevant context.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A sub-query is iteratively generated by synthesizing the high-level intent with previously issued sub-queries and the accumulated retrieved context to locate precise and actionable context.




                                                                                                                                                                         Fig. 5. An example of high-level intent and sub-query.


than a standard RAG module, because it maintains a persistent and continually updated internal
memory instead of retrieving from a static external corpus.
   Storage. Unlike conventional agentic memory that embeds a single concatenated query into
one vector, Prometheus adopts a Multi-vector Weighted Retrieval design. For each synthesized
sub-query comprising three distinct fields—essential query, extra requirements, and purpose—the
storage pipeline computes semantic embeddings for these fields using a configurable embedding
model API. This process yields a 3-vector representation for each memory record, which is then
persisted in a database. Each vector is stored in a dedicated column, denoted as e𝑒𝑠𝑠 , e𝑟𝑒𝑞 , and
e𝑝𝑢𝑟 , representing the essential query, extra requirement, and purpose of the sub-query, respectively.
These are stored alongside their corresponding text fields for traceability and debugging. These
memory records are linked to their associated context units, and insertion is executed as a single
database transaction (memory record, context unit, and linkage) to ensure referential integrity
under concurrent agent execution.
   Retrieval. During retrieval, the system encodes the structured input query into the same set
of query vectors (q𝑒𝑠𝑠 , q𝑟𝑒𝑞 , q𝑝𝑢𝑟 ). Prior work [18] has shown that aggregating multiple similarity
signals via weighted linear combination is a standard and theoretically well-founded practice in
information retrieval. For a candidate memory record 𝑚, we compute a weighted similarity score
by aggregating cosine similarities across the three vectors:
                                                         𝑠 (𝑚) = 𝑤𝑒𝑠𝑠 · cos(q𝑒𝑠𝑠 , e𝑚                           𝑚                           𝑚
                                                                                    𝑒𝑠𝑠 ) + 𝑤 𝑟𝑒𝑞 · cos(q𝑟𝑒𝑞 , e𝑟𝑒𝑞 ) + 𝑤 𝑝𝑢𝑟 · cos(q𝑝𝑢𝑟 , e𝑝𝑢𝑟 ),

where 𝑤𝑒𝑠𝑠 , 𝑤𝑟𝑒𝑞 , 𝑤 𝑝𝑢𝑟 control the relative importance of each intent component. To accelerate
nearest-neighbor search, we build IVFFlat indexes over the vector columns and perform retrieval
in two stages: (i) run approximate nearest-neighbor (ANN) search independently for each vector
column to obtain top-𝑛 candidates per component; (ii) take the union of candidates and re-rank
them using the aggregated score 𝑠 (𝑚). Finally, we filter results below a similarity threshold and
return the top-𝑘 memory records, whose linked context units are provided as reusable evidence for
downstream reasoning. This multi-vector weighted retrieval improves alignment between query
intent and stored evidence, enhancing precision (by respecting auxiliary constraints) and recall (by
capturing purpose-level signals) compared to single-vector agentic memory baselines.

2.3    Multi-Agent Architectural Design
As shown in Figure 6, the architecture of Prometheus consists of four primary functional agents,
unified by a workflow. The orchestration follows a pipeline from issue classification to verified

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
   Yue Pan∗ , Zimin Chen∗ , Siyu Lu, Zhaoyang Chu, Xiang Li, Han Li, Yang Feng, Claire Le Goues, Federica Sarro, Martin
1:8                                                                                            Monperrus, and He Ye†

 Algorithm 1: Context Retrieval Engine with Single-Query Refinement
  Input: High-level retrieval intent Q, Knowledge Graph G, Working Memory M, maximum
            query number 𝑇max
  Output: Refined contextual evidence set C
  Initialize empty context set C;
  Initialize refinement step counter 𝑡 ← 0;
  // Stage 1: Sub-query Synthesis;
  Synthesize a single structured sub-query 𝑞 = (𝑞𝑒𝑠𝑠 , 𝑞𝑟𝑒𝑞 , 𝑞𝑝𝑢𝑟 ) from Q;
  // 𝑞𝑒𝑠𝑠 : Essential Query; 𝑞𝑟𝑒𝑞 : Extra Requirements; 𝑞𝑝𝑢𝑟 : Purpose;
  while q is not empty and 𝑡 < 𝑇max do
       // Stage 2: Structural Discovery & Context Organization (Memory-First);
       Query context C𝑞 from Working Memory M with sub-query 𝑞;
       if not C𝑞 then
            Traverse Knowledge Graph G guided by 𝑞𝑒𝑠𝑠 and 𝑞𝑟𝑒𝑞 ;
            Extract structural entities (e.g., FileNodes, ASTNodes);
            Group retrieved contexts by source file;
            Sort contexts within each file by (𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡_𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒, 𝑒𝑛𝑑_𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒);
            Persist organized context C𝑞 into M;
      Merge C𝑞 into global context set C;
      // Stage 3: Iterative Context Refinement;
      Refine sub-query 𝑞 by updating (𝑞𝑒𝑠𝑠 , 𝑞𝑟𝑒𝑞 , 𝑞𝑝𝑢𝑟 );
      // e.g., drill down into caller hierarchies or dependency chains;
      𝑡 ← 𝑡 + 1;
   return C


resolution, where the context and retrieved knowledge are shared across the Issue Classification
Agent, Bug Reproduction Agent, Patch Generation Agent, and Patch Verification Agent.
2.3.1 Issue Classification Agent. The Issue Classification Agent serves as the intelligent gateway
of Prometheus, tasked with analyzing and categorizing incoming repository issues into distinct
types, such as bug, feature, or refactoring. By performing this context-aware classification prior
to repair planning, the agent enables the system to route heterogeneous issues to specialized
downstream workflows, ensuring that each problem type is addressed by a tailored resolution
strategy. This architectural choice constitutes a key novelty of our system. Unlike prior automatic
program repair pipelines that are narrowly scoped to bug fixing, our approach explicitly generalizes
issue understanding to reflect real-world software maintenance practices. By moving away from
a uniform bug-fixing paradigm, Prometheus can function as a general-purpose agentic issue
resolution system, capable of handling the diverse mixture of problem types found in modern issue
trackers.
2.3.2 Bug Reproduction Agent. The Bug Reproduction Agent aims to automatically construct
a minimal yet executable reproduction of reported bugs, serving as a concrete and verifiable
foundation for subsequent repair. Given an issue report consisting of the title, description, and
discussion history, the agent first synthesizes a structured reproduction context that captures the
expected failure behavior and relevant environmental assumptions. In real-world issue resolution,
such a reproduction is indispensable, as it transforms ambiguous natural language descriptions into

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
Prometheus                                                                                                                                                                                               1:9


                                                                            Context
                                                                                                                  Verified patch


             Issue Classification Agent                                                                                                                   Patch Verification Agent
                                                                                                                                                                    automated test
                                                       related
         Issue                LLM
                                                       context
                                                                                                                                                                         Test
                                                                                           Git Code Repo
                 categorize
                                                                                                                             output                                              success
                                                                                                                                                                 fail
                                                                 retrieve
                                                                            Knowledge 

                                                                              Graph
                                                                                                                                   iterative


                                                                                                                                     loop

                                                                                                                                                  unverified 
                             verified 

                                                                                                                            (retrieve-analyze

                                                                                                                                                    patch                                   patch
             bugs        features        refactoring                                                                         -generate-test)

                                                                                   Context Retrieval Engine                                                        validated patch

           bug issue




             Issue Reproduction Agent                                                                                                                      Patch Generation Agent
                                                                               retrieval                       store
                                                                 retrieve                                                    retrieve                                                 selection
                         Bug Issue
                                               reproduce
                                                                                                                                                                    proposed 

                                                 context
                                                                                             Memory                                                                     patch

                              docker
                                                                                                                                                                                      candidate
                                                                                                                                                 localized
             plan
                                                                                                                                                                                        patches
                                                                                                                                                 context

                                                                                              other issues
                       reproduce

                          test
      unreproduced bug                 reproduced bug                                       reproduced issue                                                                    LLM
                                                                                                                                                                                            web search
                                                                                            unreproduced issue




                                                Fig. 6. An overview of our multi-agent architecture.



a deterministic test oracle. This design reflects Prometheus’s commitment to evidence-based repair;
by grounding the resolution process in a verifiable reproduction script, the system ensures that
proposed fixes are validated against the actual failure, significantly reducing the risk of regression
or incomplete repair in complex, large-scale repositories.
   To ground reproduction in repository semantics, the agent retrieves issue-relevant code and
documentation context through the context retrieval engine. This retrieved context is then used to
guide the synthesis of reproduction artifacts, including test scripts, driver code, or configuration
changes, depending on the project’s build system and testing conventions (e.g., Maven, npm, or
custom commands). Reproduction is realized through an iterative write–execute–analyze loop. The
agent incrementally modifies the codebase or test suite to introduce reproduction logic, materializes
these changes as explicit patches, and deploys them to the execution environment. Within this
environment, the agent executes synthesized reproduction commands to empirically validate
whether the reported failure can be reliably triggered. Execution results are analyzed by an LLM via
simple few-shot prompting that determines whether the bug has been successfully reproduced. If
reproduction fails, the agent leverages execution logs and diagnostic feedback from prior attempts
to iteratively refine the reproduction procedure. This feedback-driven loop continues until a
reproducible failure is established or a predefined iteration budget is reached.
   By producing executable reproduction tests and verified failure traces, the Bug Reproduction
Agent transforms ambiguous natural-language bug reports into concrete, measurable failure cases.
This not only stabilizes the repair objective but also provides a precise baseline against which
candidate patches can be evaluated in later stages of the pipeline.

2.3.3 Patch Generation Agent. The Patch Generation Agent adapts its orchestration strategy based
on the outcome of the Bug Reproduction Agent. We categorize bugs into two types: verified bugs,
where a reproduction test has successfully triggered the failure, and unverified bugs, where a
deterministic reproduction could not be established, or the issue pertains to feature requests and
refactoring.

                                                                      Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
   Yue Pan∗ , Zimin Chen∗ , Siyu Lu, Zhaoyang Chu, Xiang Li, Han Li, Yang Feng, Claire Le Goues, Federica Sarro, Martin
1:10                                                                                           Monperrus, and He Ye†

   For a verified bug, the agent initiates a targeted retrieval process via the Context Retrieval Engine
to gather localized context. During the subsequent analysis phase, the LLM is equipped with a web
search tool to cross-reference external documentation or similar issues, enabling it to synthesize
a comprehensive bug fix plan. Following this plan, the agent iteratively edits the source code to
generate a candidate patch. If the generated patch does not pass through the Patch Verification
Agent, the Patch Generation Agent re-enters the analysis loop to further refine its fix. This iterative
generation process continues until a plausible patch is produced. In contrast, for an unverified bug,
the agent follows a modified workflow that bypasses test-grounded reasoning. While the initial
context retrieval and planning phases remain consistent, the agent compensates for the lack of
test-based validation by executing the generation process multiple times. This results in a diverse
set of candidate patches, allowing the system to explore multiple potential fix hypotheses through
repeated sampling rather than relying on a single iterative refinement loop.
2.3.4 Patch Verification Agent. The Patch Verification Agent evaluates the correctness and robustness
of candidate patches generated by the Patch Generation Agent.
   For verified bugs, each candidate patch is validated by executing both the reproduction test
and a selected set of regression tests. Candidate regression tests are first retrieved by the Context
Retrieval Engine based on their semantic relevance to the modified code regions. An LLM then
selects a focused subset of these tests that are most likely to be impacted by the patch and thus
informative for validation. A patch is immediately accepted as the final fix once it passes both the
reproduction test and all selected regression tests. Otherwise, the patch is discarded, and control is
returned to the Patch Generation Agent. This generate–verify loop continues until a valid patch is
found or the iteration budget is exhausted.
   For unverified bugs as well as feature or refactoring issues, the agent relies solely on selected
regression tests for validation. All patches that pass regression testing are collected into a verified
patch pool, which is subsequently normalized and deduplicated to remove semantically equivalent
candidates. Normalization canonicalizes patch representations (e.g., formatting and edit ordering),
while deduplication is approximated using structural similarity of code edits. From the remaining
candidates, the most suitable patch is selected via an LLM-based aggregation mechanism and
majority voting. This design follows prior work such as TRAE [11] and Agentless [39], which
employ multi-patch generation and aggregation when executable verification is unavailable. If no
patch passes verification, the same aggregation mechanism is applied over all generated candidates
to ensure graceful degradation and the return of a plausible solution.

3     Experimental Methodology
3.1    Research Questions
      • RQ1 (Effectiveness Comparison): How effectively does Prometheus resolve issues compared
        to related code agents?
      • RQ2 (Analysis of Context Retrieval): What’s the quality of Prometheus’s context retrieval
        compared to prior techniques?
      • RQ3 (Ablation Study of Core Components): How does removing key components of
        Prometheus —namely, working memory, multiple patch selection, bug reproduction agent, and
        regression testing—affect overall issue resolution performance and reliability?

3.2    Experimental Setup
Prometheus is implemented in Python, and uses GPT-5 (temperature 1.0) for generation and
reasoning, and codestral-embed-2505 for subquery embedding in working memory. Experiments
are conducted on an Ubuntu 24.04 server with 32 CPU cores (Intel Xeon E5-2667 v4), 125 GiB RAM.

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
Prometheus                                                                                                       1:11


                       Table 1. Statistics of evaluation benchmarks used in our work.


        Benchmark                   Tasks           Languages                         Task Types

        SWE-bench Verified           500             Python                         Bug Fixing
                                                  Python, Java,                 Bug Fixing, Feature
        SWE-PolyBench Verified       382
                                              JavaScript, TypeScript        Implementation, Refactoring


We utilize Neo4j for Knowledge Graph storage and PostgreSQL for working memory. For context
retrieval, AST nodes are chunked at traversal depth 1, while documentation uses 5,000-token
chunks (500-token overlap). The working memory module filters context using a 0.85 similarity
threshold, retaining the top-5 entries. We generate up to 5 candidate patches per issue, all evaluated
in a uniform environment to ensure reproducibility. Both Bug Reproduction and Patch Verification
Agents operate within isolated Docker containers to ensure environment consistency and security.
For the web search tool, the agent integrates Tavily [1] as its web search tool to obtain up-to-date
documentation and repository-related knowledge when required.
3.2.1 Benchmarks. We evaluate Prometheus through a series of comprehensive experiments
designed to assess its efficacy, stability, and generalization capabilities in automated software
engineering. As shown in Table 1, our evaluation centers on two primary benchmarks: SWE-bench
Verified [17], a human-curated subset of 500 instances from the original SWE-bench characterized
by high-quality problem statements and reliable unit tests for Python-based issue resolution, and
SWE-PolyBench Verified [30], a multi-language benchmark of 382 instances that extends evaluation
beyond bug fixing to include feature implementation and refactoring across 3 additional languages,
such as Java, JavaScript, and TypeScript. Both benchmarks provide only the issue description and
the full repository, without explicit fault localization or additional oracle information. Together,
these benchmarks enable a robust assessment of the agent’s generality and its ability to adapt to
heterogeneous, real-world codebases. Systems are therefore required to reason over repository-level
context, reflecting realistic software maintenance settings.
3.2.2   Methodology.
   Effectiveness Comparison (RQ1). To evaluate the effectiveness of Prometheus, we evaluate it on
two real-world software engineering benchmarks: SWE-bench Verified [17] and SWE-PolyBench
Verified [30].
   We compare Prometheus with several strong baselines reported in prior work and public
leaderboards, namely OpenHands [38] Agentless [39], live-SWE-agent [40], and SWE-agent [44]
on SWE-bench Verified, and Amazon Q Developer Agent [3], Aider [2], SWE-agent [44], and
Agentless [39] on SWE-Polybench. We do not reimplement any baseline systems; instead, we
directly adopt results reported in the corresponding papers or official benchmark leaderboards. We
report the percentage of resolved issues as the primary evaluation metric to assess the effectiveness
of Prometheus under identical benchmark definitions.
   Analysis of Context Retrieval (RQ2). To analyze how the context retrieval mechanism of Prometheus
differs from existing agents, we conduct a trajectory-based comparative analysis focusing on the
quality of retrieved context rather than end-to-end task success.
   We randomly select 100 instances from SWE-bench Verified due to limited resources, and we run
these instances using GPT-5 on Prometheus, Agentless [39], OpenHands [38], and SWE-agent [44].
We selected these agents because they are open-sourced and well-maintained. For each instance, we

                                      Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
   Yue Pan∗ , Zimin Chen∗ , Siyu Lu, Zhaoyang Chu, Xiang Li, Han Li, Yang Feng, Claire Le Goues, Federica Sarro, Martin
1:12                                                                                           Monperrus, and He Ye†

                           Table 2. Prometheus Performance on SWE-bench Verified.

                    Agent                                                          Resolve Rate (%)
                    SWE-Exp                                                              42.0
                    Agentless-1.5 + Claude-3.5 Sonnet (20241022)                         50.8
                    mini-SWE-agent + Gemini 2.5 Pro (2025-05-06)                         53.6
                    mini-SWE-agent + DeepSeek V3.2 Reasoner                              60.0
                    mini-SWE-agent + GPT-5                                               65.0
                    SWE-agent + Claude 4 Sonnet                                          66.6
                    OpenHands + Claude 4 Sonnet                                          70.4
                    Lingxi v1.5 + Kimi K2                                                71.2
                    OpenHands + GPT-5                                                    71.8
                    Prometheus + GPT-5 (Our Work)                                        74.4


use the gold patch provided by the benchmark to construct a gold context. Starting from the files
and code regions modified in the gold patch, we engage six professional developers to manually
trace the relevant functions and dependency-related code required to understand and implement
the fix, yielding a minimal gold context that generates a valid patch. For each agent, we extract all
contextual artifacts retrieved throughout its execution trajectory, including files, functions, and
code spans accessed via search, ranking, or navigation actions, and aggregate them to form the
agent-retrieved context. We then compare the agent-retrieved context against the corresponding
gold context to assess context retrieval accuracy and characterize retrieval behavior across agents.
  Ablation Study of Core Components (RQ3). We consider four core components: working memory,
multiple patch selection, bug reproduction agent, and regression testing. Starting from the full
Prometheus configuration, we create ablated variants by disabling each component independently,
while keeping all other components, model backbones, prompts, and execution settings unchanged.
This controlled setup allows us to isolate the impact of each component on overall system behavior.
Each ablated variant is evaluated under the same benchmark protocols as the full system. We
measure issue resolution performance using the percentage of resolved issues. By comparing
the ablated variants against the full configuration, we quantify how the absence of individual
components affects both effectiveness and reliability in repository-level issue resolution.

4     Experimental Results
4.1    RQ1: Effectiveness Comparison
As shown in Table 2 and Table 3, we compare Prometheus against a diverse set of representative
agents on two widely used benchmarks: SWE-bench Verified [17] and SWE-PolyBench Verified [30].
SWE-bench Verified focuses on single-language, execution-verified bug-fixing tasks, while SWE-
PolyBench evaluates robustness in a more challenging multi-language and multi-task setting.
Together, these benchmarks provide a comprehensive view of effectiveness and generalization.
   On SWE-bench Verified, Prometheus achieves a resolution rate of 74.4%, placing it among
the top-performing systems. It outperforms a wide range of strong baselines, including fully
autonomous agents such as OpenHands [38] with GPT-5 (71.8%) and SWE-agent [44] with Claude
4 Sonnet (66.6%), as well as recent competitive systems such as Lingxi v1.5 [45] + Kimi K2 (71.2%).
Prometheus also consistently surpasses lighter-weight or search-based approaches, including
Agentless-1.5 [39] (50.8%) and multiple mini-SWE-agent variants using Gemini 2.5 Pro (53.6%),
DeepSeek V3.2 Reasoner (60.0%), and GPT-5 (65.0%). These results indicate that the performance

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
Prometheus                                                                                                    1:13


                    Table 3. Prometheus Performance on SWE-PolyBench Verified.

 Agent                                           Overall     Java     Python      JavaScript      TypeScript
                     Part A: Overall and Language-Wise Resolution Rate (%)
 Aider-PB (Mistral-Large)                           8.4       10.1       9.7           5.0              9.0
 AgentlessPB (Sonnet 3.5)                          13.3       17.4      23.0           7.0              6.0
 Aider-PB (Deepseek R1)                            13.9        8.7      18.6           14.0            12.0
 SWE-agent-PB (Sonnet 3.5)                         14.4       18.8      22.1           5.0             12.0
 Aider-PB (Sonnet 3.5)                             16.2       20.3      20.4           11.0            14.0
 Amazon Q Developer Agent (v20240402)              28.8       37.7      35.4           20.0            24.0
 Prometheus + GPT-5 (Our Work)                     33.8       33.3      36.3          30.0             35.0
                       Part B: Task-Wise Resolve Rate of Prometheus (%)
 Bug Fixing                                                                    37.5
 Feature Implementation                                                        18.6
 Refactoring                                                                   30.8

gains of Prometheus cannot be attributed solely to model choice, but rather stem from its system-
level design.
   We further compare the sets of unique resolved instances across Prometheus, OpenHands, and
mini-SWE-agent using the same GPT-5 model. Prometheus resolves the largest number of unique
instances (29), followed by OpenHands (16) and mini-SWE-agent (4). The larger unique region
associated with Prometheus indicates that its performance gains stem not only from common
cases, but also from resolving harder issues. We attribute this advantage to its repository-level
Knowledge Graph and Memory Enhanced Context Retrieval Engine, which supports more reliable
long-horizon reasoning.
   As shown in Table 3, Prometheus attains an overall resolution rate of 33.8% on SWE-PolyBench
Verified, ranking first on this more challenging benchmark. It outperforms other strong baselines,
including Amazon Q Developer Agent [3] (28.8%), and more than doubles the performance of widely
used tools such as Aider-PB [2] with Sonnet 3.5 (16.2%). In particular, Prometheus substantially
surpasses SWE-agent-PB [44] (14.4%) and AgentlessPB [39] (13.3%), demonstrating stronger robustness
in multi-language and multi-task settings. Task-wise analysis further shows that Prometheus
performs best on bug-fixing tasks (37.5%), while also achieving strong results on refactoring (30.8%)
and maintaining competitive performance on feature implementation tasks (18.6%). To the best
of our knowledge, Prometheus is the first work to report task-wise resolution rates on SWE-
Polybench.
   Overall, these results show that Prometheus goes beyond patch generation, exhibiting strong
capabilities in long-horizon issue resolution and repository-level understanding. By integrating
repository-level Knowledge Graph with a Memory Enhanced Context Retrieval Engine, Prometheus
resolves a broader range of issues, including many unsolved by prior agent frameworks. This marks
a clear shift from patch-centric repair toward holistic, program-level reasoning, bringing automated
program repair closer to practical, real-world applicability.

 Answer to RQ1: Prometheus achieves the highest resolution rates on both benchmarks and
 resolves the most unique instances. This advantage extends to harder and multi-language issues,
 indicating stronger generalization than prior agents. These results highlight the effectiveness of
 repository-level knowledge and memory-enhanced retrieval.


                                   Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
   Yue Pan∗ , Zimin Chen∗ , Siyu Lu, Zhaoyang Chu, Xiang Li, Han Li, Yang Feng, Claire Le Goues, Federica Sarro, Martin
1:14                                                                                           Monperrus, and He Ye†

             Table 4. Average context hit rate comparison at file, class/function, and span levels.

             Agent              File Hit Rate↑        Class/Function Hit Rate↑         Span Hit Rate↑
             Agentless                0.802                        0.395                     0.054
             OpenHands                0.876                        0.579                     0.541
             SWE-Agent                0.632                        0.524                     0.482
             Prometheus               0.915                        0.850                     0.807



4.2    RQ2: Analysis of Context Retrieval
We conduct a qualitative analysis of context retrieval quality for representative top-performing
agents on SWE-bench [17], examining their ability to retrieve relevant context at multiple level. As
shown in Table 4, Prometheus consistently outperforms all baselines across file-, symbol-, and
span-level hit rates, indicating a substantially stronger alignment between retrieved context and
the gold patch evidence.
   At the file level, Prometheus achieves a hit rate of 0.915, surpassing OpenHands (0.876) and
Agentless (0.802), suggesting that it more reliably identifies the set of files relevant to the underlying
issue. This advantage becomes more pronounced at finer granularities. At the symbol level,
Prometheus attains a hit rate of 0.850, representing a large margin over all baselines, which
remain below 0.58. This result indicates that Prometheus is markedly more effective at recovering
semantically relevant functions, classes, and variables, rather than relying primarily on coarse
file-level context. The gap widens further at the span level, where Prometheus reaches a hit rate of
0.807, substantially outperforming OpenHands (0.541), SWE-Agent (0.482), and especially Agentless
(0.054). This demonstrates Prometheus ’s superior ability to localize fine-grained code regions
that directly correspond to the modifications made in the gold patches. Such fine-grained retrieval
is critical for downstream patch generation, as precise localization of relevant code spans provides
stronger and less ambiguous evidence for reasoning about bug causes and fixes.
   Overall, these results highlight that Prometheus ’s retrieval mechanism is not only broader
in coverage but also more structurally precise across multiple levels of granularity. By effectively
bridging file-level discovery and span-level localization, Prometheus enables a more comprehensive
and actionable understanding of the program context, which is essential for reliable long-horizon
issue resolution compared to prior agent-based approaches.

 Answer to RQ2: Prometheus consistently retrieves more accurate context across file, symbol,
 and span levels than prior agents. Its advantage is especially pronounced at fine-grained symbol
 and span levels, indicating superior localization of patch-relevant code. This precise retrieval
 provides stronger evidence for downstream reasoning and patch generation.

4.3    RQ3: Ablation Study of Core Components
4.3.1 Ablation Study on Working Memory. To evaluate the efficiency of the working memory
mechanism, we have done an ablation study by removing it. Our results show that incorporating
working memory substantially improves both efficiency and performance. Due to limited resources,
we randomly select 50 instances from SWE-bench Verified [17] and run them in both configurations.
As summarized in Figure 7, Prometheus with working memory achieves a resolution rate of
70.00% while incurring a total inference cost of $200.79 across 50 issues. In contrast, the variant
without working memory resolves only 56.00% of issues and incurs a significantly higher cost of
$367.73. This demonstrates that working memory yields significant resource savings, reducing

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
Prometheus                                                                                                    1:15




                              Fig. 7. Ablation study on working memory.


inference cost by approximately 45.4% ↓, while simultaneously improving the issue resolution
rate by 25.0% ↑. This demonstrates that working memory effectively reduces redundant context
retrieval and excessive token consumption, while stabilizing long-horizon reasoning by preserving
query-relevant context across iterative repair steps. Without working memory, repeated retrieval
and short-horizon context not only increases inference cost but also degrades decision quality.
Case Study: Impact of Working Memory on Retrieval Efficiency. We present a representative
case from SWE-bench Verified to illustrate how working memory improves retrieval efficiency
and stabilizes long-horizon reasoning. The issue requests setting a default value of FILE_UPLOAD
_PERMISSIONS to 0o644, motivated by inconsistent file permissions caused by different upload
handlers and temporary file backends.
   In the configuration without working memory, the agent repeatedly retrieved the same core
files across multiple iterations, including django/core/files/storage.py, django/core/files
/uploadhandler.py, and django/core/files/uploadedfile.py. Because previously retrieved
context was not preserved, each reasoning step re-triggered similar repository-level searches and
re-encoding of identical code regions. As the agent attempted to reconcile interactions between
upload handlers, temporary file creation, and final storage semantics, this repeated retrieval caused
substantial token overhead and context redundancy. Moreover, the lack of persistent memory
led to fragmented reasoning about the permission propagation path, resulting in unstable patch
exploration and significantly increased inference cost.
   When working memory is enabled, the same files are retrieved once and stored as query-relevant
context. Subsequent reasoning steps directly reuse these memory entries rather than re-fetching
identical code from the repository. This allows the agent to maintain a coherent view of how upload
handlers, temporary files, and storage backends jointly affect file permissions. In addition, related
contextual information—such as where permissions are ultimately applied during file saving—is
retained across iterations, enabling more focused retrieval of only genuinely new context. As a
result, the agent converges more quickly to a consistent solution while substantially reducing
redundant token consumption.
4.3.2 Ablation Study on Multiple Patch Selection. To evaluate the contribution of multiple patch
selection, we conduct an ablation experiment by disabling this component. We evaluate this variant
on all 500 instances from SWE-bench Verified [17]. As a result, the overall resolution rate score
drops from 74.4 for the full system to 69.2 without multiple patch selection, corresponding to a
degradation of 7.0% ↓. The results highlight the importance of multi-patch selection. This approach

                                   Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
   Yue Pan∗ , Zimin Chen∗ , Siyu Lu, Zhaoyang Chu, Xiang Li, Han Li, Yang Feng, Claire Le Goues, Federica Sarro, Martin
1:16                                                                                           Monperrus, and He Ye†

                           Table 5. Ablation study of core components of Prometheus.


                    Removed Component                 Resolve Rate (%)         Performance Drop
                    No Component Removed                     74.40                      -
                    Regression Testing                       70.20                   5.6% ↓
                    Multiple Patch Selection                 68.80                   7.0% ↓
                    Bug Reproduction                         64.00                  14.0% ↓



allows the system to evaluate diverse candidates, preventing it from settling on an incorrect solution.
These results suggest that aggregating and selecting among multiple candidate patches substantially
enhances robustness and reliability in agentic issue resolution.

4.3.3 Ablation Study on Bug Reproduction. To assess the impact of the Bug Reproduction Agent, we
perform an ablation study by disabling the reproduction test. We evaluate this variant on the full
SWE-bench Verified benchmark. The resolution rate score decreases from 74.4 with the full system
to 64.0 without bug reproduction, representing a substantial drop of 14.0% ↓. This substantial drop
highlights the importance of explicitly reproducing reported bugs, as reproduction tests provide
a strong execution-based signal for verifying whether a candidate patch truly addresses the root
cause of the issue. Without this signal, the system is more prone to accepting patches that pass
partial validation but fail to resolve the original bug, leading to reduced effectiveness and reliability.

4.3.4 Ablation Study on Regression Testing. To examine the role of regression testing component,
we conduct an ablation study by removing this component from Prometheus and evaluating
candidate patches without executing additional regression tests beyond bug reproduction. We
evaluate this variant on the full SWE-bench Verified benchmark. The resolution rate score decreases
from 74.4 with the full system to 70.2 without regression testing, corresponding to a reduction
of 5.6% ↓. This result demonstrates that regression tests provide an important complementary
verification signal, helping to detect patches that fix the target bug but inadvertently break existing
functionality. Removing regression testing increases the risk of accepting overfitted or brittle
patches, leading to reduced overall reliability despite a smaller performance drop compared to
removing bug reproduction.

    Answer to RQ3: Removing any core component leads to a clear performance drop, with
    bug reproduction having the largest impact. Multiple patch selection and regression testing
    further improve robustness by preventing premature or overfitted patches. Working memory
    significantly reduces cost while improving resolution, highlighting its role in long-horizon
    reasoning.

5     Related Work
5.1     Agentic Issue Resolution
The field of software maintenance is transitioning from traditional Automated Program Repair
(APR) toward comprehensive agentic issue resolution. Historically, APR focused on generating
patches for localized bugs, relying on predefined patterns [22] or heuristics [19, 46] validated against
functional-level test oracles [49]. While effective for well-scoped bugs, these methods struggle with
the complexity of repository-level issues. Recent advancements in LLMs have catalyzed a shift
toward autonomous code agents capable of long-horizon reasoning across multiple components

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
Prometheus                                                                                                     1:17


[17, 41]. Existing coding agents can be categorized into two primary paradigms based on their
orchestration: fully-autonomous agents and workflow-based agents.
   Fully-autonomous Agent. This paradigm utilizes LLMs to dynamically determine execution
workflows, allowing for flexible tool invocation based on the evolving context of a task. SWE-
Agent [44] is a pioneer in this category, introducing the Agent-Computer Interface (ACI) to facilitate
more effective interaction between the agent and the software environment. OpenHands [38]
builds upon the foundation of an ACI similar to SWE-Agent. ClaudeCode [4] further pushes the
boundaries of agency by integrating deep reasoning with a CLI-based execution loop for real-time,
autonomous repository maintenance. Codex [26] represents a significant milestone, demonstrating
sophisticated autonomous problem-solving capabilities across large-scale codebases. Expanding
this autonomy further, Live-SWE-Agent [40] introduces a self-evolving paradigm that allows the
agent to autonomously and continuously refine its own scaffold implementation on-the-fly during
runtime. By evolving from basic tools to complex scaffolds without offline training, it has achieved
state-of-the-art performance on benchmarks such as SWE-bench Verified [17]. While highly flexible,
these fully autonomous agent systems often struggle with non-deterministic execution paths and
significant computational overhead.
   Workflow-based Agent. Workflow-based (or pipeline-based) agents follow a predefined, human-
designed workflow to ensure stability, efficiency, and reproducibility. Agentless [39] is a representative
method that intentionally avoids complex agentic loops, instead following a strict "localization-
generation-validation" sequence. AutoCodeRover [53] and SpecRover [32] enhance this process
by combining spectrum-based fault localization with LLM-guided code search within a structured
pipeline. TRAE [11] and Lingxi [45] also adopt this paradigm, utilizing more sophisticated but fixed
orchestration layers to manage large-scale repository edits. By constraining the agent’s action space
to a structured execution graph, these workflow-based systems mitigate the risks of "hallucinated"
workflows and significantly reduce the search space for software patches.
   Despite their success, existing coding agents—from fully-autonomous loops to workflow-based
pipelines—frequently encounter a "retrieval bottleneck" in large codebases due to a lack of structured
memory and iterative refinement. Unlike prior works that rely on one-off tool invocations, Prometheus
utilizes a special context retrieval mechanism integrated with a multi-vector working memory. By
transitioning from static search to iterative, memory-augmented traversal, our approach ensures
precise evidence collection across complex repository structures.

5.2   Repository-level Context Retrieval
Effective issue resolution in real-world software repositories often requires coherent, repository-
level context, as bugs frequently span multiple files, cross-file dependencies, and multi-layer
abstractions. To address this challenge, recent work has explored repository-level context retrieval as
a core primitive for downstream tasks such as code completion, understanding, and repair. Focusing
on efficiency, REPOFUSE [20] retrieves analogy- and rationale-based context while optimizing
for latency and token usage. Similarly, RepoCoder [51] leverages iterative retrieval to capture
semantically related code chunks across the repository. Beyond raw code, DocPrompting [54]
retrieves documentation-relevant snippets via embedding-based techniques, while LTFix [10]
targets memory errors in C codebases by retrieving typestate-guided usage traces.
   To capture the structural complexity of codebases, recent research has turned to Knowledge
Graphs. RepoGraph [27] models code entities and their interactions as graphs, while KGCompass [43]
further links code with repository artifacts such as issues and pull requests to enable path-based
reasoning. In contrast, Code Graph Model [35] embeds repository-level code graphs directly into
LLMs to support joint semantic and structural reasoning. By formalizing repositories as structured

                                    Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
   Yue Pan∗ , Zimin Chen∗ , Siyu Lu, Zhaoyang Chu, Xiang Li, Han Li, Yang Feng, Claire Le Goues, Federica Sarro, Martin
1:18                                                                                           Monperrus, and He Ye†

semantic networks, knowledge graph-based methods provide a coherent architectural map that
improves contextual integrity for downstream tasks.
   Prometheus features a language-agnostic graph model for repository-scale retrieval across
diverse tasks. While agents such as OpenHands [38] are efficient executors, they often lack deep
contextual reasoning for long-horizon issues. In contrast, Prometheus incorporates a working
memory mechanism to persistently maintain and selectively update salient context during issue
resolution, reducing redundant retrieval and repeated reasoning while improving logical consistency
and computational efficiency.

5.3    Memory for Agents
Recent agent-based systems increasingly incorporate explicit memory mechanisms to support long-
horizon reasoning, contextual consistency, and continual improvement, moving beyond treating
memory as a transient by-product of the context window.
   MemGPT [28] introduces an OS-inspired memory hierarchy that separates a limited working
context from persistent external storage, enabling agents to retain long-term factual information
through explicit read and write operations. Voyager [37] accumulates reusable skills distilled
from successful task trajectories, allowing agents to progressively expand procedural capabilities
without retraining. While these memory mechanisms are primarily studied in agents with other
purposes or tasks, similar ideas have recently been adapted to software issue resolution, where
agents must reason over large codebases and maintain evolving repair context across multiple steps.
EXPEREPAIR [24] and SWE-Exp [8] explicitly model cross-issue repair experience by distilling
reusable repair demonstrations and abstracted problem-solving insights from prior issue-resolution
trajectories, which are dynamically retrieved to guide future repository-level fixes. RepairAgent [7]
maintains a dynamically updated interaction state within a single repair episode, preserving
gathered code context, hypotheses, and tool outputs to support iterative decision making, but does
not persist experience across issues.
   In contrast to these approaches, Prometheus adopts a system-oriented working memory design
tailored to software repositories. Rather than maintaining issue-local interaction traces or retrieving
past trajectories, its working memory explicitly organizes and updates query-relevant repository
artifacts (e.g., files, functions, and tests) and evolving repair states across iterative steps, enabling
semantically grounded context management for long-horizon software engineering tasks.

6     Threats to Validity
   Internal Validity. A potential internal threat lies in whether the observed improvements truly
result from the proposed memory mechanism rather than random factors or implementation
variance. Due to the high computational and API costs of running LLM-based agents, we conduct
each experiment once under strictly controlled settings, using fixed random seeds, identical prompts,
and consistent tool configurations across all baselines. Although this limitation prevents repeated
trials, the performance differences between Prometheus and prior agents are substantial and
consistent across tasks, suggesting that the observed trends are robust.
   External Validity. External validity threats concern the generalizability of our findings to other
repositories, programming languages, and LLM backbones. To mitigate this threat, we evaluate
Prometheus on two representative issue resolution benchmarks, SWE-bench Verified and SWE-
PolyBench Verified, where the latter covers multiple programming languages and diverse repository
structures. Although these benchmarks may not fully capture the scale and complexity of real-world
industrial systems, the consistent performance of Prometheus across both datasets and multiple
programming languages suggests that the findings generalize well, thereby alleviating this threat.

Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
Prometheus                                                                                                            1:19


   Construct Validity. Construct validity concerns whether our evaluation metrics accurately reflect
the capability of long-horizon codebase navigation. We measure issue resolution accuracy using
standardized success criteria defined in SWE-bench and SWE-PolyBench, and further assess context
retrieval precision against human-annotated gold contexts to capture the quality of contextual
reasoning. Although these metrics may not fully represent all qualitative aspects of real-world
software development, their consistency across both task-level and retrieval-level evaluations
provides mutual validation, mitigating this threat.

7   Conclusion
We presented Prometheus, a multi-agent system that shifts the focus of automated software issue
resolution from local patch generation to long-horizon, repository-level software engineering.
By integrating repository-level knowledge graphs with a memory-enhanced retrieval engine,
Prometheus enables deep program understanding and iterative reasoning across complex codebases.
Through the coordination of specialized agents for retrieval, generation, and verification, the
system effectively unifies structural dependencies, historical context, and execution feedback. Our
evaluations on SWE-bench Verified and SWE-PolyBench Verified demonstrate that Prometheus
significantly outperforms existing baselines, particularly in challenging multi-language and multi-
task scenarios. These results underscore that robust automated maintenance requires principled
mechanisms for long-horizon reasoning and repository-level abstraction beyond simple code
generation. Prometheus represents a critical step toward practical, reliable software agents that
align with real-world development workflows.

8   Data Availability
All the experimental data and code used in this paper are available at https://github.com/EuniAI/
Prometheus.

References
 [1] 2024. Tavily: A Search API for LLM Agents. https://www.tavily.com/. Accessed: 2026-01-22.
 [2] Aider-AI. 2024. Aider: AI Pair Programming in Your Terminal. https://github.com/Aider-AI/aider. Accessed: 2026-01-25.
 [3] Amazon Web Services (AWS). 2025. What is Amazon Q Developer? https://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazonq/latest/
     qdeveloper-ug/what-is.html. Accessed: 2026-01-25.
 [4] Anthropic. 2025. Claude Code Technical Report. https://claude.com/product/claude-code. Accessed: 2026-01-30.
 [5] Anthropic. 2025. Introducing Claude Opus 4.5. https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-opus-4-5. Accessed:
     2026-01-30.
 [6] Anysphere. [n. d.]. Cursor. https://cursor.com/. Accessed: 2026-01-30.
 [7] Islem Bouzenia, Premkumar Devanbu, and Michael Pradel. 2024. Repairagent: An autonomous, llm-based agent for
     program repair. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17134 (2024).
 [8] Silin Chen, Shaoxin Lin, Xiaodong Gu, Yuling Shi, Heng Lian, Longfei Yun, Dong Chen, Weiguo Sun, Lin Cao, and
     Qianxiang Wang. 2025. Swe-exp: Experience-driven software issue resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23361 (2025).
 [9] Zhaoling Chen, Robert Tang, Gangda Deng, Fang Wu, Jialong Wu, Zhiwei Jiang, Viktor Prasanna, Arman Cohan,
     and Xingyao Wang. 2025. LocAgent: Graph-Guided LLM Agents for Code Localization. In Proceedings of the 63rd
     Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende,
     Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria,
     8697–8727. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.426
[10] Xiao Cheng, Zhihao Guo, Huan Huo, and Yulei Sui. 2025. Tracing Errors, Constructing Fixes: Repository-Level Memory
     Error Repair via Typestate-Guided Context Retrieval. arXiv:2506.18394 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.18394
[11] Pengfei Gao, Zhao Tian, Xiangxin Meng, Xinchen Wang, Ruida Hu, Yuanan Xiao, Yizhou Liu, Zhao Zhang, Junjie
     Chen, Cuiyun Gao, et al. 2025. Trae agent: An llm-based agent for software engineering with test-time scaling. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2507.23370 (2025).
[12] Google DeepMind. 2025. Gemini 3 Pro. https://deepmind.google/models/gemini/pro/. Accessed: 2026-01-30.
[13] Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Simeng Sun, Samuel Kriman, Shantanu Acharya, Dima Rekesh, Fei Jia, Yang Zhang, and Boris
     Ginsburg. 2024. RULER: What’s the Real Context Size of Your Long-Context Language Models? arXiv preprint


                                           Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
   Yue Pan∗ , Zimin Chen∗ , Siyu Lu, Zhaoyang Chu, Xiang Li, Han Li, Yang Feng, Claire Le Goues, Federica Sarro, Martin
1:20                                                                                           Monperrus, and He Ye†

     arXiv:2404.06654 (2024).
[14] Yuyang Hu, Shichun Liu, Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boyang Liu, Fangyi Zhu, Jiahang Lin, Honglin Guo, Shihan Dou,
     Zhiheng Xi, et al. 2025. Memory in the Age of AI Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13564 (2025).
[15] Juyong Jiang, Fan Wang, Jiasi Shen, Sungju Kim, and Sunghun Kim. 2025. A Survey on Large Language Models for
     Code Generation. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (2025). doi:10.1145/3747588
[16] Xue Jiang, Yihong Dong, Lecheng Wang, Zheng Fang, Qiwei Shang, Ge Li, Zhi Jin, and Wenpin Jiao. 2024. Self-Planning
     Code Generation with Large Language Models. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 33, 7,
     Article 182 (2024), 30 pages.
[17] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R Narasimhan. 2024.
     SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-world Github Issues?. In The Twelfth International Conference on
     Learning Representations.
[18] Omar Khattab and Matei Zaharia. 2020. Colbert: Efficient and effective passage search via contextualized late interaction
     over bert. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in Information
     Retrieval. 39–48.
[19] Claire Le Goues, ThanhVu Nguyen, Stephanie Forrest, and Westley Weimer. 2011. Genprog: A generic method for
     automatic software repair. Ieee transactions on software engineering 38, 1 (2011), 54–72.
[20] Ming Liang, Xiaoheng Xie, Gehao Zhang, Xunjin Zheng, Peng Di, wei jiang, Hongwei Chen, Chengpeng Wang, and
     Gang Fan. 2024. REPOFUSE: Repository-Level Code Completion with Fused Dual Context. arXiv:2402.14323 [cs.SE]
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14323
[21] Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and LINGMING ZHANG. 2023. Is Your Code Generated by ChatGPT
     Really Correct? Rigorous Evaluation of Large Language Models for Code Generation. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (Eds.), Vol. 36. Curran
     Associates, Inc., 21558–21572.
[22] Kui Liu, Anil Koyuncu, Dongsun Kim, and Tegawendé F Bissyandé. 2019. TBar: Revisiting template-based automated
     program repair. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT international symposium on software testing and analysis.
     31–42.
[23] Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024.
     Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational
     Linguistics 12 (2024), 157–173. doi:10.1162/tacl_a_00638
[24] Fangwen Mu, Junjie Wang, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Shoubin Li, and Qing Wang. 2025. EXPEREPAIR: Dual-Memory
     Enhanced LLM-based Repository-Level Program Repair. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10484 (2025).
[25] Ansong Ni, Miltiadis Allamanis, Arman Cohan, Yinlin Deng, Kensen Shi, Charles Sutton, and Pengcheng Yin. 2024.
     NExT: Teaching Large Language Models to Reason about Code Execution. In Proceedings of the 41st International
     Conference on Machine Learning (Vienna, Austria) (ICML’24). JMLR.org, Article 1540, 28 pages.
[26] OpenAI. 2025. Codex Technical Report. https://openai.com/index/introducing-codex/. Accessed: 2025-12-20.
[27] Siru Ouyang, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Zilin Xiao, Zhihan Zhang, Mengzhao Jia, Jiawei Han, Hongming Zhang, and
     Dong Yu. 2024. Repograph: Enhancing ai software engineering with repository-level code graph. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2410.14684 (2024).
[28] Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir_G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph_E Gonzalez. 2023. MemGPT:
     Towards LLMs as Operating Systems. (2023).
[29] Jiayi Pan, Xingyao Wang, Graham Neubig, Navdeep Jaitly, Heng Ji, Alane Suhr, and Yizhe Zhang. 2025. Training
     Software Engineering Agents and Verifiers with SWE-Gym. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine
     Learning.
[30] Muhammad Shihab Rashid, Christian Bock, Yuan Zhuang, Alexander Buchholz, Tim Esler, Simon Valentin, Luca
     Franceschi, Martin Wistuba, Prabhu Teja Sivaprasad, Woo Jung Kim, et al. 2025. SWE-PolyBench: A multi-language
     benchmark for repository level evaluation of coding agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08703 (2025).
[31] Revanth Gangi Reddy, Tarun Suresh, JaeHyeok Doo, Ye Liu, Xuan Phi Nguyen, Yingbo Zhou, Semih Yavuz, Caiming
     Xiong, Heng Ji, and Shafiq Joty. 2025. SweRank: Software Issue Localization with Code Ranking. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2505.07849 (2025).
[32] Haifeng Ruan, Yuntong Zhang, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. Specrover: Code intent extraction via llms. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2408.02232 (2024).
[33] Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaughlin, Aiden Low,
     AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, et al. 2025. OpenAI GPT-5 System Card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03267 (2025).
[34] Weisong Sun, Yun Miao, Yuekang Li, Hongyu Zhang, Chunrong Fang, Yi Liu, Gelei Deng, Yang Liu, and Zhenyu Chen.
     2025. Source Code Summarization in the Era of Large Language Models. In 47th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
     Software Engineering, ICSE 2025, Ottawa, ON, Canada, April 26 - May 6, 2025. IEEE, 1882–1894.



Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
Prometheus                                                                                                           1:21


[35] Hongyuan Tao, Ying Zhang, Zhenhao Tang, Hongen Peng, Xukun Zhu, Bingchang Liu, Yingguang Yang, Ziyin Zhang,
     Zhaogui Xu, Haipeng Zhang, et al. 2025. Code Graph Model (CGM): A Graph-Integrated Large Language Model for
     Repository-Level Software Engineering Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16901 (2025).
[36] Yuvraj Virk, Premkumar Devanbu, and Toufique Ahmed. 2025. Calibration of Large Language Models on Code
     Summarization. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 2, FSE, Article FSE130 (2025), 21 pages.
[37] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar.
     2023. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 (2023).
[38] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li,
     Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff,
     Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin, and et al. 2025. OpenHands: An Open Platform for AI Software Developers
     as Generalist Agents. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore,
     April 24-28, 2025. OpenReview.net.
[39] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Agentless: Demystifying llm-based software
     engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01489 (2024).
[40] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Zhe Wang, Yan Yang, Yuxiang Wei, and Lingming Zhang. 2025. Live-SWE-agent: Can Software
     Engineering Agents Self-Evolve on the Fly? arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.13646 (2025).
[41] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuxiang Wei, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Automated program repair in the era of large pre-trained
     language models. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 1482–1494.
[42] Boyang Yang, Jiadong Ren, Shunfu Jin, Yang Liu, Feng Liu, Bach Le, and Haoye Tian. 2025. Enhancing repository-level
     software repair via repository-aware knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21710 (2025).
[43] Boyang Yang, Jiadong Ren, Shunfu Jin, Yang Liu, Feng Liu, Bach Le, and Haoye Tian. 2025. Enhancing repository-level
     software repair via repository-aware knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21710 (2025).
[44] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Ofir Press.
     2024. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering. In The Thirty-eighth Annual
     Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
[45] Xu Yang, Jiayuan Zhou, Michael Pacheco, Wenhan Zhu, Pengfei He, Shaowei Wang, Kui Liu, and Ruiqi Pan. 2025.
     Lingxi: Repository-Level Issue Resolution Framework Enhanced by Procedural Knowledge Guided Scaling. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2510.11838 (2025).
[46] He Ye, Matias Martinez, Thomas Durieux, and Martin Monperrus. 2021. A comprehensive study of automatic program
     repair on the QuixBugs benchmark. Journal of Systems and Software 171 (2021), 110825. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2020.110825
[47] He Ye, Matias Martinez, Xiapu Luo, Tao Zhang, and Martin Monperrus. 2022. SelfAPR: Self-supervised Program Repair
     with Test Execution Diagnostics. In Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
     Engineering (Rochester, MI, USA) (ASE ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 92,
     13 pages. doi:10.1145/3551349.3556926
[48] He Ye, Matias Martinez, and Martin Monperrus. 2022. Neural program repair with execution-based backpropagation.
     In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania) (ICSE ’22).
     Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1506–1518. doi:10.1145/3510003.3510222
[49] He Ye and Martin Monperrus. 2024. ITER: Iterative Neural Repair for Multi-Location Patches. In Proceedings of
     the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering (Lisbon, Portugal) (ICSE ’24). Association for
     Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 10, 13 pages. doi:10.1145/3597503.3623337
[50] Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jacky Keung, Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen.
     2023. RepoCoder: Repository-Level Code Completion Through Iterative Retrieval and Generation. In Proceedings of
     the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali
     (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Singapore, 2471–2484. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.151
[51] Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jacky Keung, Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen.
     2023. RepoCoder: Repository-Level Code Completion Through Iterative Retrieval and Generation. In Proceedings of
     the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali
     (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Singapore, 2471–2484. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.151
[52] Quanjun Zhang, Chunrong Fang, Yang Xie, YuXiang Ma, Weisong Sun, Yun Yang, and Zhenyu Chen. 2024. A systematic
     literature review on large language models for automated program repair. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01466 (2024).
[53] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. AutoCodeRover: Autonomous Program
     Improvement. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis
     (Vienna, Austria) (ISSTA 2024). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1592–1604.
[54] Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Frank F. Xu, Zhiruo Wang, Zhengbao Jiang, and Graham Neubig. 2023. DocPrompting:
     Generating Code by Retrieving the Docs. arXiv:2207.05987 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05987




                                          Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2026.
