                                         CausalPlan: Empowering Efficient LLM Multi-Agent
                                          Collaboration Through Causality-Driven Planning


                                                    Minh Hoang Nguyen∗, Van Dai Do, Dung Nguyen, Thin Nguyen, Hung Le
                                                                Applied Artificial Intelligence Initiative (A2 I2 )
                                                                              Deakin University
                                                                              Geelong, Australia




arXiv:2508.13721v1 [cs.AI] 19 Aug 2025
                                             {s223669184, s223540177, dung.nguyen, thin.nguyen, thai.le}@deakin.edu.au



                                                                                          Abstract
                                                      Large language model (LLM) agents—especially smaller, open-source mod-
                                                      els—often produce causally invalid actions in collaborative tasks due to their
                                                      reliance on surface-level correlations rather than grounded causal reasoning. This
                                                      limitation undermines their performance in terms of coordination and planning in
                                                      dynamic environments. We address this challenge with CausalPlan, a two-phase
                                                      framework that integrates explicit structural causal reasoning into the LLM plan-
                                                      ning process. At the core of CausalPlan is the Structural Causal Action (SCA)
                                                      model, which learns a causal graph from agent trajectories to capture how prior
                                                      actions and current environment states influence future decisions. This structure is
                                                      then used to guide action selection by assigning causal scores to LLM-generated
                                                      proposals, reweighting them accordingly, or falling back to causally grounded
                                                      alternatives when needed. By embedding this causal knowledge directly into the
                                                      decision loop, CausalPlan constrains planning to intervention-consistent behaviours
                                                      without requiring fine-tuning of the LLM itself. We evaluate CausalPlan on the
                                                      Overcooked-AI benchmark across five multi-agent coordination tasks and four
                                                      LLMs of varying sizes: Gemma-7B, Llama-8B, Qwen-14B, and Llama-70B. Ex-
                                                      perimental results show that CausalPlan consistently reduces invalid actions and
                                                      improves collaboration in both AI-AI and human-AI settings, outperforming strong
                                                      reinforcement learning baselines. Our findings highlight the value of causality-
                                                      driven planning for deploying efficient, interpretable, and generalisable multi-agent
                                                      LLM systems.


                                         1       Introduction
                                         Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant success across various natural lan-
                                         guage processing tasks [1, 38, 10]. Recently, there has been growing interest in leveraging LLMs as
                                         decision-makers, particularly within multi-agent frameworks for executing interactive planning tasks.
                                         Research in this area investigates how multiple LLM agents can collaborate and make decisions,
                                         with notable works including the emergence of human-like behavior [18], integrated pipelines for
                                         cooperative tasks [33], graph-based coordination [23], and human-AI collaboration frameworks [32].
                                         A major challenge in multi-agent learning is promoting effective collaboration (creating a generalized
                                         agent that can collaborate with a wide range of unseen partners) [16, 11]. The ultimate objective is to
                                         develop an agent that can seamlessly interact and cooperate with humans. Two of the most prevalent
                                         approaches to address this are self-play (SP) [28] and population-based training (PBT) [12, 3, 27, 37],
                                         with some approaches combining both techniques [17]. While effective in training environments,
                                         these classic (non-LLMs reinforcement learning (RL)) multi-agent coordination approaches often
                                             ∗
                                                 Corresponding author.


                                         Preprint. Under review.
              (a)                                     (b)
                                                            Pick Up            Pot with            Pot
                                                             Onion             2 Onion            Finish

                                                                         0.0

                                                                       0.6       0.9      0.2       0.9
                                                              0.5                          0.0


                                                             Place               Put
                                                                                                  Fill Dish
                                                            Onion on           Onion in
                                                                                                 with Soup
                                                            Counter              Pot




Figure 1: (a) Evaluation on the Cramped Room layout showing how the number of causally invalid
actions changes with LLM size, averaged over four seeds. The LLM agent plays as Player 1, while
Player 0 is controlled by COLE [17]. CausalPlan significantly reduces the number of invalid moves.
(b) Simplified causal graph discovered by CausalPlan for the same layout. Yellow and red nodes
indicate parent actions and states, respectively, while green nodes denote child actions. “Pick Up
Onion” strongly influences “Put Onion in Pot” (0.6) and “Place Onion on Counter” (0.5), but not
“Fill Dish with Soup” (0). The state “Pot with 2 Onions” strongly drives “Put Onion in Pot” (0.9),
while “Pot Finished” weakly affects it (0.2) but strongly influences “Fill Dish with Soup” (0.9).


struggle to generalize to cases of unseen collaborators. This limitation stems from the fact that
agents are typically overfitted to the specific behaviors and distributions of their training partners,
reducing robustness in open-ended environments [32]. Moreover, these methods also neglect domain
knowledge that could accelerate learning and sample efficiency that could support faster adaptation
and better collaboration.
Large Language Model (LLM)-based agents, trained on vast and diverse datasets containing rich
common-sense and procedural knowledge, have recently emerged as promising tools for multi-agent
planning. Compared to traditional multi-agent learning methods—which often struggle with gen-
eralization, sample inefficiency, and lack of transferable priors [32]—LLMs, especially powerful
closed-source ones like GPT-4 [32], demonstrate impressive performance in collaborative environ-
ments such as Overcooked-AI [3]. However, despite these strengths, a persistent limitation remains:
LLM agents often lack robust causal reasoning [9]. This shortcoming leads to causally invalid plans
that violate physical constraints or temporal dependencies of the environment—for example, placing
an onion into a pot before picking it up, or executing an action absent from the task instructions.
Even large closed-source models like GPT-4 occasionally exhibit such errors, but the problem is
significantly more pronounced in smaller, open-source models due to their limited capacity and
narrower training coverage. Crucially, smaller and open-source LLMs remain highly attractive for
enterprise and resource-constrained settings because of their accessibility, lower deployment costs,
and greater controllability. Yet, their higher incidence of causally invalid actions often undermines
their collaborative performance. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), our evaluation of multiple open-source
LLMs with varying parameter sizes in the Cramped Room task of the Overcooked-AI testing suite [3]
reveals that even large open-source models like Llama-70B still produce a substantial number of
causally invalid actions. These findings underscore a clear gap: to fully unlock the potential of
LLMs—particularly smaller and more deployable ones—in collaborative multi-agent planning, their
causal reasoning capabilities must be significantly enhanced.
Unlike LLMs, humans draw on intergenerational causal knowledge to inform better decision making
- in particular, our ability to plan and choose the next action is deeply grounded in this inherited
understanding of cause and effect, shaped over generations. From the perspective of causality, causal
knowledge refers to understanding how different variables - such as states and the actions of an agent
- influence each other [19]. By modeling these dependencies explicitly, agents can anticipate the
effects of their own and others’ decisions, avoid redundant actions, and better coordinate toward a
shared goal. These causal dependencies are naturally represented by a graph-like structure known as a
causal graph G, which captures the directional relationships between variables—where nodes denote
elements such as actions or states, and edges represent causal influences—and its corresponding
Structural Causal Model (SCM), a formal framework that defines how each variable is generated
from its parent variables in the graph [19] (refer to Figure 1 (b) for an example of the causal graph
discovered by our method). Together, the graph and structural equations enable agents to reason about
interventions and understand the causal dynamics of the system. An SCM can be identified through
causal discovery, which learns both the graph structure—captured by structural parameters—and the


                                                  2
underlying data-generating mechanisms—captured by functional parameters—from observational
data [19, 14, 20]. In contrast, causal inference leverages this learned causal structure to support
downstream decision-making tasks [19]. Building on this foundation, we investigate multi-agent
collaboration with LLM-based agents and pioneer a novel approach that leverages causal knowledge
to enhance planning. We hypothesize that better causality-driven planning will enable more effective
collaborative cooperation. Ultimately, we want to answer the question of: ”How can we equip LLMs
with causal knowledge to enable effective multi-agent collaboration?”.
Overview of CausalPlan. To answer the question, we aim to leverage the dependencies between
both agents’ states and past actions to inform future planning in a collaborative setting. For instance,
before serving a plate of soup (next action), one must first fill the dish with soup (the previous action)
and hold the filled dish (current state). In a multi-agent context, if the partner agent is already holding
a filled dish (current state of the other agent), our agent may instead focus on complementary tasks
rather than duplicating effort. Specifically, our causal graph includes the partner agent’s state (Fig. 2),
enabling reasoning over both agents’ states and actions to coordinate effectively. To model such
causal dependencies, we introduce the Structural Causal Action (SCA) model—an extension of SCM
tailored to capture the causal relationships between previous actions, current states (for both agents),
and future actions. Building on this foundation, we propose CausalPlan, a framework comprising
two key phases inspired by the processes of causal discovery and inference: Causal Action Structure
Learning and Agent Planning with Causal Knowledge. In the first phase, we learn the SCA model by
iteratively optimizing both its generating and structural parameters, drawing on established techniques
for SCM discovery. Once trained, SCA yields a Causal Action Matrix M that encodes how past
actions and current observations of both agents causally influence each possible next action, in the
form of causal scores. In the second phase, we integrate this causal knowledge into planning: at each
step, we query M using the current state and past actions of both our agent and the partner agent. We
address the possibility of causally invalid actions in one of two ways. Causal-Aware Action Planning
adjusts the LLM’s raw action probabilities by re-weighting them with the causal scores from the
matrix, then resamples to choose the next action that is both valid and complementary to the partner’s
role. If there are no valid actions, we fall back to Causal Backup Action, which selects the action
with the highest causal probability. An overview of this two-phase framework is shown in Fig. 2.
We evaluate CausalPlan on the Overcooked-AI benchmark [3] using four open-source
LLMs—Gemma-7B, Llama-8B, Qwen-14B, and Llama-70B—across both AI-AI and human-AI
collaboration settings. Empirical results show that CausalPlan consistently improves planning per-
formance and reduces invalid actions, even for the smallest LLMs without finetuning or training
multi-agents using traditional RL approaches. Our main contributions are:

       • We identify a core failure mode of LLM agents in multi-agent collaboration—generating
         causally invalid plans—and propose causal reasoning as a principled remedy.
       • We introduce CausalPlan, a two-phase framework that integrates causal discovery and
         inference to enhance LLM agent planning and collaboration.
       • We demonstrate, through extensive experiments, that CausalPlan improves performance
         across multiple model sizes and collaboration scenarios, outperforming strong RL baselines.

2   Related Works
Reasoning and planning with LLM agents. The rise of LLMs has enabled applications in both
single and multi-agent settings [31]. A core focus of recent work lies in improving reasoning
and action planning capabilities, which are also central objectives of this paper. The works in a
single agent setting focus on improving reasoning through chain of thought prompting [30, 15],
self-consistency [29], and problem decomposition [39]. LLMs have also been applied to robotic
planning [2], integrated reasoning and acting, and reflection-based learning [26]. Zhu et al. [40] and
Qiao et al. [24] leverage memory of past actions and states to improve planning, though these prior
works focus on single-agent scenarios. In contrast, our work targets multi-agent environments. In
multi-LLM-agent research, Park et al. [18] pioneered human-like interactions where agents remember
and act autonomously. Zhang et al. [33] proposed a fully automated cooperative framework with
perception, communication, and planning, while Cross et al. [6] incorporated Theory of Mind
(ToM). Qian et al. [23] explores scaling up using different collaboration topologies. Zhang et al.
[33] is one of the latest works that examines human-LLM cooperation. Although we address a


                                                    3
similar challenge, our work pioneers the incorporation of causal knowledge in multi-LLM-agent
collaboration.
Zero-shot multi-agent coordination. Zero-shot multi-agent coordination aims to train agents that
can collaborate with unseen partners, human or AI. A classic method is Self-Play (SP) [28, 3], where
agents train by interacting with themselves. While effective, SP often fails to generalize to unfamiliar
partners. Population-Based Training (PBT) [12] promotes learning by diversifying the population
of training agents, but it still suffers from overfitting to seen partners. Recent methods combine SP
and PBT to boost diversity, such as Fictitious Co-Play (FCP) [27] and Maximum Entropy Population
(MEP) [37]. COLE [17] shifts focus to strategic policy selection during training. However, these
methods are generally computationally expensive and lack interpretability. Zhang et al. [32] shows
that LLM-based agents can excel in zero-shot tasks by leveraging rich language knowledge. While
this demonstrates the potential of language-based agents, LLMs tend to lack the ability for causal
reasoning [8]. To address this challenge, we propose a causal learning approach that enhances
coordination for open-sourced LLMs, aiming to balance performance, efficiency, and interpretability.
Causality in decision making. Causal reasoning has gained attention for improving AI decision-
making in both single and multi-agent settings. In single-agent domains, counterfactual-based
methods [21, 22] were used for data augmentation. Corcoll and Vicente [5] use causality to construct
variable hierarchies, Zhang et al. [35] redistributes rewards based on causal impact, and Seitzer
et al. [25], Zhang et al. [34] incorporate causal signals into reward shaping. Peng et al. [20] learns
causal graphs to define hierarchical subgoals, improving efficiency. In multi-agent settings, social
influence is used as a proxy for inter-agent causality, promoting cooperation [13]. Subsequent works
use action influence and reward redistribution to encourage coordinated behaviors [7, 36]. Although
effective, these methods are based on traditional RL frameworks. In contrast, we try to integrate
causal reasoning into LLM-based agents, requiring a different method.


3     Method

3.1   Preliminaries

Markov Decision Process. A two-player Markov Decision Process (MDP) is defined as
(S, {Ai }, P, γ, R), where S is the state space, Ai is the action set for agent i ∈ {1, 2}, P de-
fines the transition dynamics, γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor, and R : S × A is the reward function
where A = A1 × A2 is the joint action space. We assume a factored state space S = S agent × S env ,
where S agent is the state of the agent (both agent 1 and 2) and S env the state of the environment. Let
S = |S| and A = |A| denote the dimensions of S and A, respectively. At each timestep t, each agent
i ∈ {1, 2} observes the current state st = (sagent
                                                t    , senv
                                                        t ) and selects an action according to its policy
  i i                                          1 2
π (at | st ), forming the joint action at = (at , at ). A trajectory is given
                                                                           P by τ = (s1 , a1 , s2 , a2 , . . . ),
and the objective is to maximize the expected cumulative reward, E [ t R(st , at )].
Causality and Structural Causal Model. Causality studies the relationships between variables
and events [19]. The Structural Causal Model (SCM) framework represents causal relationships
in a system, where for a set of variables V = {V1 , . . . , VM }, each variable Vi is defined as Vi :=
fi (PaG (Vi ), εi ), with {f1 , f2 , . . . , fM } being generating functions, PaG (Vi ) the parents of Vi in
the causal graph G, and {ε1 , . . . , εM } noise terms [19]. The directed acyclic graph (DAG) causal
G = {V, E} contains edges eji ∈ E, where eji = 1 indicates that Vj causes Vi , and eji = 0
otherwise [19]. SCMs are often learned from data by modeling the generating functions fi as neural
networks parameterized by generating parameters δ [14, 20, 35], with causal edges eji inferred if the
binary adjacency indicator ηji > γ, where γ is a confidence threshold [14, 20, 35].

3.2   CausalPlan Framework: Structure and Phases

The CausalPlan framework comprises two main phases. In Phase 1, we construct the SCA Model and
derive from it the Causal Action Matrix M. In Phase 2, at each timestep t, we first provide the current
observation st to the LLM agent and prompt it to analyze the observation. Both the observation st
and the resulting analysis are then used as inputs for a second prompt, where the agent is asked
to generate a set of actions (details of this two-prompt process are described in Appx. B.2.1). We,
then, leverage M to modify the agent’s action selection, either through reweighting LLM-generated


                                                       4
                                          Phase 1: Causal Action Structure Learning
                            SCA Modeling
                                                                         ...
                                                                   0.9   ...   0.3        0.3     0.0      0.5
                                                                   0.7                                     0.5
            ....                                                         ...   0.8        0.3     0.6
                                                            ...    ...   ...    ...        ...     ...      ...
                                                                                                                     ...
                          Agent 1's state: hold_onion1
                          Agent 2's state: hold_onion2
                          Environment's state: pot0
                          Previous action: pickup_onion()
                                                      Phase 2: Agent Planning with Causal Knowledge
                                                                                      Causal-Aware Action Planning
        Other      Scenario t:
        Agent      Agent 1 is
                    currently
                   holding an
                     onion,       LLMs
                                                       ✓
                   agent 2 is     Agent
                    currently                                                             Causal Backup Action
                   holding an
                   onion the                           ✗
                     pot is
                     empty
                       ...




Figure 2: Overview of the CausalPlan Framework. The process begins with a dataset B collected
by a behavior policy πβ . In Phase 1 (Causal Action Structure Learning), we train the Structural
Causal Action (SCA) Model by optimizing generating (δ) and structural (η) parameters, yielding
the Causal Action Matrix M, which encodes causal influence from states and past actions to future
actions. In Phase 2 (Agent Planning with Causal Knowledge), an LLM receives scenario t and
proposes candidate actions A′ . If A′ ̸= ∅, Causal-Aware Action Planning adjusts LLM probabilities;
if A′ = ∅, Causal Backup Action selects the most probable past action via M. Black solid arrows
denote causal training; dashed arrows denote LLM inference, and red arrows denote causal knowledge
consultation. The red box represents the causal score extraction for each potential next action, where
the score is computed as the sum of causal contributions from the current state and previous action.


proposals using causal scores in the Causal-Aware Action Planning module, or by reverting to causally
grounded alternatives in the Causal Backup Action module (see Appx. B for the full algorithms).

3.3     Causal Action Structure Learning

3.3.1      Structural Causal Action (SCA) modeling

The goal of this step is to construct an SCA model, our extension of SCM, that captures the causal
graph G, where the previous action at−1 and the current state st are the parent nodes, and the next
action at is the child node. Unlike prior work, which typically focuses on modeling state transitions
or rewards [35, 36], our approach explicitly treats the action as a child node in the causal graph.
This novel formulation allows the agent to reason causally about how past actions and current
states influence future actions, providing a new perspective on decision-making dynamics. First
                                               N
we collect a dataset B = {(skt , akt )}Tt=1 k=1 using a behavior policy πβ . We, then, factorize and
discretely encode the states and actions into binary vectors: st = [st,1 , . . . , st,S ] ∈ {0, 1}S , at =
[at,1 , . . . , at,A ] ∈ {0, 1}A , where each component st,j and at,i is a binary indicator representing
whether a particular state feature or action is active (1) or inactive (0) (refer to Appx. B.1 for details).
The relationships between past states and actions that influence future actions can be represented as:


                                                                  ai = fi (PaG (ai ), εai )                                (1)

for i = (1, 2, . . . , A), where PaG (ai ) denotes the parent nodes for ai in the causal graph G. Inspired
by previous research [14, 20, 35], we define the function fi as a neural network parameterized
by the generating parameter δ. While the causal relationships of each graph are governed by the
structural parameters encoded by binary adjacency indicators ηji . The loss function to optimize these
parameters is: L(δ, η) = Lcausal (δ, η) + Lreg (η). The causal loss function is:


                                                                                  5
                                                 h XA
                                                                                   i
                     Lcausal = E(at−1 ,st ,at )∼B −   log P at,i | st , at−1 ; δ, η .                           (2)
                                                         i=1

A negative-log-prior penalty is imposed on the adjacency indicators to discourage spurious edges and
avoid overfitting to unlikely causal links. Let P (eji = 1) be the prior probability for any edge. Then
                                              X                      
                                 Lreg = − λ       ηji log P eji = 1 ,                                (3)
                                                   i,j


where λ > 0 controls the relative contribution of each penalty term. Including an edge ηji = 1
incurs a cost − log P (eji = 1), so only edges with high prior belief are preferred. In causal inference,
identifiability, referring to the ability to recover causal effects from observed data [19] uniquely,
is crucial for valid causal inferences. In our setting, identifiability guarantees that the true causal
structure and decision policy can be recovered from observed trajectories. We can prove that under
our formulation, identifiability is ensured, as stated in the following proposition:
Proposition 1 (Identifiability). Suppose that the state st and previous action at−1 are observable,
while the next action at is unobservable, and they form a Markov Decision Process (MDP) as
described in Eq. 1. Then, under the global Markov condition and the faithfulness assumption given a
large enough dataset B, the next action at is identifiable, as well as the causal structure characterized
by the binary masks η and the transition dynamics f .

Proof. See Appx. A

Causal Action Matrix construction. We then construct the Causal Action Matrix M using the
learned SCA model. The matrix M ∈ RA×(S+A) encodes the causal score of selecting each action
given the current state and past actions. Each row corresponds to a possible next action, and each
column corresponds to a state or past action feature. Each entry (i, j) of the matrix represents the
probability that there is causal influence from state or action feature j to action i, given by the
                                                                                                 Plearned
structure parameter ηji . Thus, a query M(st , at−1 , a) will return the causal score pc (a) = j∈J ηji
where J = Active(st , at−1 ) ⊆ {1, . . . , S + A} denote the set of column indices corresponding to
the features that are “active” in the current state st and the previous action at−1 (details refer to
Appx. B.2.2). To prevent cycles in the causal graph and ensure DAG property of a standard SCM [19],
we compare the coefficients for the bidirectional relationships in M and set the lower one to 0.

3.4     Agent Planning with Causal Knowledge

During inference, we want to use the causal score from the matrix M to plan for the evaluation
tasks. At time t, the agent is given historical trajectory ht = (s1 , a1 , s2 , a2 , . . . , at−1 , st ). Instead of
directly generating the next action at+1 , we want the agent first to consult the causal relationship
                                                                             ′
given by M.n We sample from         o the LLM a set of actions, called A ⊆ A for the scenario st , which
composes a′1 , a′2 , . . . , a′|A′ | ; this set A′ contains actions that the agent believes to be correct. Each
of these actions will come with a probability of being sampled by the backbone LLM, which we
denote as pa (a′m ). If A′ ̸= ∅ (there are actions in the instruction), we follow the process described
in Sect. 3.4.1 to modify the selection probability based on prior causal knowledge; otherwise, Sect.
3.4.2 to exploit the causal belief (none of the actions follow the instruction).

3.4.1    Causal-Aware Action Planning
Given the sampled actions A′ with their associated probabilities Pa (A′ ), we aim to integrate the causal
scores from the model M. We, first, extract the causal scoresnpc (a′ ) = M(st , at−1 , a′ ), ∀ao  ′
                                                                                                    ∈ A′ ,
(detail is described in Sect. B.2.2) to form the set Pc (A′ ) = pc (a′1 ), pc (a′2 ), . . . , pc (a′|A′ | ) . The
individual final action probabilities are computed as:

                                 pf (a′m ) = γ · pa (a′m ) + (1 − γ) · pc (a′m ),                               (4)


                                                         6
where γ is a hyperparameter. We apply the softmax function to all value of pf (a′m ) to normalize the
probabilities, which allows us to get the final probability set:

                                                                               ′
                            n                                           o    |A |
                                                                             X
                   Pf (A ) = pf (a′1 ), pf (a′2 ), . . . , pf (a′|A′ | ) ,
                         ′
                                                                                    pf (a′m ) = 1    (5)
                                                                             k=1

The sampled action set A′ from the LLM agent may contain redundant actions, so we apply a method
(detailed in Appx. B.2.4) to identify and merge these duplicates by summing their probabilities. This
yields a reduced set A′∗ with updated probabilities Pf∗ . This allows us to sample the next action:
                                          h                                           i
                       at ∼ Categorical p∗f (a′1 ), p∗f (a′2 ), . . . , p∗f (a′|A′∗ | ) .           (6)

3.4.2    Causal Backup Action
In the second case, where A′ = ∅ — indicating that the agent samples actions at ∈         / A — existing
methods often apply soft interventions by prompting the agent to pause and replan [32]. However,
such strategies may fail when the agent persistently hallucinates invalid actions. Inspired by human
behavior under uncertainty, we propose a recovery mechanism that leverages past causality knowledge.
Instead of immediately replanning, the agent retrieves previously executed actions by querying
pc (a) = M(st , at−1 , a), ∀a ∈ A, (detail is described in Sect. B.2.2). This yields a probability
distribution over the instructed action set A: Pc (A) = {pc (a1 ), pc (a2 ), . . . , pc (aA )}. Given the
need to select the most reliable action during recovery based on the agent’s past experiences thereby
avoiding the potential risks of sampling an invalid action, we adopt a greedy strategy given by:

                                            at = arg max Pc (a).                                     (7)
                                                      a∈A


4     Experiments
4.1     Experimental setup

We use the Overcooked-AI environment suite as our testing platform [3]. This suite comprises five
distinct environments: Cramped Room (CR), Asymmetric Advantages (AA), Coordination Ring
(COR), Forced Coordination (FC), and Counter Circuit (CC), each presenting varying levels of
difficulty. In these environments, two agents must collaborate to prepare and serve onion soup.
Their tasks include gathering and placing up to three ingredients into a pot, cooking the soup,
transferring it into a dish, and delivering the final meal (details of environments can be found in
Appx. C.2). Both agents’ actions contribute to a shared final return (successfully delivering the soup
grants a reward of +20), making this environment well-suited for evaluating agent collaboration.
Our experiments aim to demonstrate that the CausalPlan can enhance planning and, thus better
collaboration for various open-sourced LLMs. Specifically, we use gemma-1.1-7b-it (Gemma-
7B), Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct (Llama-8B), Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct-1M (Qwen-14B), and
Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct (Llama-70B) as the backbone LLMs to generate the action. We integrate
these open-sourced LLMs into the ProAgent framework [32] and apply CausalPlan to refine the
planned actions. Additionally, we use Cohere/command-r [4], a 35-billion-parameter model, via
the Cohere API to generate the analysis of the scenario for faster inference in our two-prompt input
structure (refer to Sect. C.1 for details). Notably, the largest model that we used only has 70 billion
parameters, rather small compared to larger GPT models that have been used in ProAgent [32].
In Sect. 4.2, we compare the performance of LLM agents without CausalPlan to their performance
when enhanced with CausalPlan. Our agent is evaluated alongside different AI agents (see next
paragraph), following a common practice established in prior research [17, 32]. In these experiments,
our agents play as Player 1 and the baseline agents as Player 0. An effective agent should demonstrate
strong performance in collaboration with all other baseline agents. We also compare our CausalPlan
agent with Llama-70B backbone against the baseline agents. In Sect. 4.3, we evaluate the performance
of CausalPlan agents when collaborating with human-like agents (collected using Behavior Cloning
proposed in Li et al. [17]). In Sect. 4.4, we evaluate different components of CausalPlan, and in Appx.


                                                         7
Figure 3: Performance of different backbones with and without CausalPlan across various layouts.
In these experiments, we use the LLM agent as Player 1, allowing it to collaborate with all other
baselines (described in Sect. 4.1) for 400 timesteps and report the average of three different seeds.
Details are provided in Appx. C.4.1 Tab. A1.

Table 1: Average performance (mean ± std) of baseline agents and CausalPlan (Ours) across layouts
using Llama-70B. Results are averaged over both player positions and three seeds (400 timesteps
each). Best and second-best results are in bold and underlined, respectively. Detailed performance of
playing as Player 0 or Player 1 is provided in Appx. Tab. A1.
                                       Baseline AI Agents                                 CausalPlan
 Layout                                                                                     (Ours)
                SP             PBT            FCP            MEP             COLE
 CR        162.0 ± 10.0    168.0 ± 5.0    194.0 ± 10.1 178.0 ± 16.1       153.4 ± 12.5    172.7 ± 4.2
 AA        184.0 ± 17.5    168.0 ± 15.4 176.6 ± 15.0      167.3 ± 5.8     185.3 ± 15.1   258.7 ± 16.4
 CC         56.7 ± 9.2     52.0 ± 14.0     63.4 ± 10.5    50.0 ± 16.1      90.6 ± 10.1    112.6 ± 7.6
 COR       120.7 ± 11.0    139.4 ± 10.1    130.7 ± 6.2    160.7 ± 7.2      153.4 ± 4.6    156.6 ± 3.2
 FC         18.0 ± 4.6     40.6 ± 10.3     42.0 ± 7.2      30.4 ± 5.4      44.6 ± 7.0     53.9 ± 14.9



Sect. C.4, we provide additional experiments such as parameter tuning, different data collection
policies πβ , time complexity analysis, and the causal matrix found M.
Baselines. The baselines include traditional RL methods designed for zero-shot human and AI
coordination. These baselines have achieved notable results in the field including SP [28, 3], PBT [12],
FCP [27], MEP [37], COLE [17] (refer to Appx. C.3 for baselines’ details).


4.2   AI player evaluation

Enhancing open-sourced LLM performance using CausalPlan. We evaluate whether CausalPlan
enhances open-sourced LLMs in collaboration tasks, as shown in Fig. 3 and detailed in
Appx. C.4.1 Tab. A1. CausalPlan improves performance across layouts and models, with significant
gains seen in Qwen-14B (29.04%) and Llama-70B (22.42%). In terms of task layouts, the most
substantial improvements were found in the CR (20.83%) and COR (19.13%) settings. Furthermore,
CausalPlan also provided notable benefits for larger LLMs, such as Llama-70B, demonstrating its
potential to enhance performance even at scale. For reference, the last row of Appx. Tab. A1 includes
the results of using GPT-4 as the LLM agent, as reported in the ProAgent article [32]. While we
do not compare our method against this GPT-4 agent, due to the large size gap, we include this to
illustrate how closely our method approaches oracle-level performance.
Comparison with state-of-the-art RL baselines. We assess the performance of our top-performing
agent (Llama-70B backbone) against the set of SOTA baseline RL agents. The results, presented
in Tab. 1, show that our agent consistently ranks among the top performers across different layouts
(highest score in three out of five layouts and ranks second in one additional layout). The most
significant performance gaps between our method and the next best baseline are observed in the AA
layout, showing a 63% advantage. We attribute the underperformance in CR to the simplicity of the
task, which does not demand causal knowledge. These results demonstrate that, when equipped with
CausalPlan, open-source LLM agents can outperform state-of-the-art RL agents across various tasks,
highlighting the effectiveness of integrating causal reasoning into LLM-based agents.


                                                   8
Figure 4: Experiments with a human proxy partner. Results show the mean and variance averaged
over using five different BC policies as the partner (each running for 400 timesteps). "P0" denotes the
controlled AI agent acting as Player 0, and vice versa.

Table 2: Ablation studies were conducted on the CR layout using Llama-8B. "1-Prompt" uses a single
prompt for observation and planning, as in ProAgent; "2-Prompt" uses our modified dual-prompt
method (refer to Appx. B.2.1). "CausalPlan (no CBA)" omits the Causal Backup component.
                                           Baseline AI Agents                          Average
Methods
                         SP          PBT          FCP         MEP          COLE        Results
1-Prompt (ProAgent) 86.7 ± 41.6 66.7 ± 63.4 180.0 ± 20.0 106.7 ± 75.7 113.3 ± 11.5 110.7 ± 12.8
2-Prompt            73.3 ± 30.5 93.3 ± 57.7 180.0 ± 0.0 126.7 ± 11.5 126.7 ± 23.1 121.3 ± 2.3
CausalPlan (no CBA) 113.3 ± 23.1 146.7 ± 46.2 160.0 ± 34.6 133.3 ± 11.5 153.3 ± 23.1 141.3 ± 12.9
CausalPlan (Full)   126.7 ± 30.6 133.3 ± 30.5 160.0 ± 40.0 166.7 ± 41.6 166.7 ± 23.1 150.7 ± 2.3


4.3   Human player evaluation

To evaluate human collaboration, we performed an experiment using human proxy partners, with
the results shown in Fig. 4. In this experiment, our CausalPlan framework utilizes Llama-70B
as the backbone LLM. As shown, our agent (green bars) outperforms all baselines in 8 out of 10
configurations. On average across all layouts, it achieves approximately a 30% improvement over the
LLM agent without CausalPlan (red bars), and outperforms the strongest RL baseline (COLE) by
approximately 32%.

4.4   Impact of CausalPlan components

In this section, we investigate the individual contributions of each component within the CausalPlan
framework and assess their impact on overall performance. First, we compare the use of a single
prompt [32], for both observation analysis and planning against our two-prompt setup, where one
prompt is dedicated to analysis and the other to planning (as described in Sect. 3). This comparison
helps isolate whether performance gains come from the embedded causal knowledge. As shown
in Tab. 2, the performance between the single-prompt and two-prompt configurations is nearly
identical, with only a slight improvement when using our two-prompt. This supports our claim that
improvements primarily arise from causal reasoning. Second, we examine the effect of the Causal
Backup Action module. CausalPlan without the backup action still outperforms the two-prompt
variant by 27%, but falls short of the full framework by 7%. This highlights the significance of the
backup mechanism to avoid scenarios in which the agent fails to select actions as instructed.

5     Conclusion, Limitations, and Impacts Discussion
In this paper, we introduce CausalPlan, a framework designed to integrate causal reasoning into
the planning processes of large language model (LLM) agents, with the goal of enhancing their
performance in collaborative tasks. CausalPlan operates in two main phases. Our experiments show
notable performance gains across various LLM backbones in collaboration settings. Despite these
improvements, the framework still falls short of the performance achieved by larger models on


                                                  9
certain tasks—a limitation we aim to address in future work. Additionally, due to limited access,
we have not yet evaluated the method on larger closed-source LLMs, which represents an important
direction for future research. This work serves as an initial step toward incorporating causal reasoning
into multi-agent planning with language models. While the framework is not currently intended
for deployment in specific applications, it holds the potential to improve the safety, efficiency, and
interpretability of collaborative AI systems.

References
 [1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni
     Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. GPT-4
     Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
 [2] Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David,
     Chelsea Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as I can, not
     as I say: grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
 [3] Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K Ho, Thomas L Griffiths, Sanjit A Seshia, Pieter Abbeel,
     and Anca Dragan. On the utility of learning about humans for human-AI coordination. In
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pages 5174–5185, 2019.
 [4] Cohere. The command R model (details and application). https://docs.cohere.com/v2/
     docs/command-r, 2024. Accessed: 2025-05-12.
 [5] Oriol Corcoll and Raul Vicente. Disentangling causal effects for hierarchical reinforcement
     learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01351, 2020.
 [6] Logan Cross, Violet Xiang, Agam Bhatia, Daniel LK Yamins, and Nick Haber. Hypothetical
     minds: scaffolding theory of mind for multi-agent tasks with large language models. In NeurIPS
     2024 Workshop on Open-World Agents, 2024.
 [7] Xiao Du, Yutong Ye, Pengyu Zhang, Yaning Yang, Mingsong Chen, and Ting Wang. Situation-
     dependent causal influence-based cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceed-
     ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 17362–17370, 2024.
 [8] Chen Gao, Xiaochong Lan, Zhihong Lu, Jinzhu Mao, Jinghua Piao, Huandong Wang, Depeng
     Jin, and Yong Li. S3: Social-network simulation system with large language model-empowered
     agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14984, 2023.
 [9] Jinglong Gao, Xiao Ding, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. Is ChatGPT a good causal reasoner?
     A comprehensive evaluation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
     EMNLP 2023, pages 11111–11126, 2023.
[10] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
     Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-R1: incentivizing reasoning capability in
     LLMs via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
[11] Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Alex Peysakhovich, and Jakob Foerster. "Other-play" for zero-shot
     coordination. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
     pages 4399–4410, 2020.
[12] Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali
     Razavi, Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, Chrisantha Fernando,
     and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Population based training of neural networks. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1711.09846, 2017.
[13] Natasha Jaques, Angeliki Lazaridou, Edward Hughes, Caglar Gulcehre, Pedro Ortega,
     DJ Strouse, Joel Z Leibo, and Nando De Freitas. Social influence as intrinsic motivation
     for multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
     Machine Learning (ICML), pages 3040–3049, 2019.
[14] Nan Rosemary Ke, Olexa Bilaniuk, Anirudh Goyal, Stefan Bauer, Hugo Larochelle, Bernhard
     Schölkopf, Michael C Mozer, Chris Pal, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning neural causal models
     from unknown interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01075, 2019.


                                                  10
[15] Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa.
     Large language models are zero-shot reasoners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems (NeurIPS), pages 22199–22213, 2022.
[16] Shane Legg and Marcus Hutter. Universal intelligence: A definition of machine intelligence.
     Minds and Machines, 17:391–444, 2007.
[17] Yang Li, Shao Zhang, Jichen Sun, Yali Du, Ying Wen, Xinbing Wang, and Wei Pan. Cooperative
     open-ended learning framework for zero-shot coordination. In Proceedings of the International
     Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 20470–20484, 2023.
[18] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
     Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceed-
     ings of the Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pages 1–22,
     2023.
[19] Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[20] Shaohui Peng, Xing Hu, Rui Zhang, Ke Tang, Jiaming Guo, Qi Yi, Ruizhi Chen, Xishan Zhang,
     Zidong Du, Ling Li, Qi Guo, and Yunji Chen. Causality-driven hierarchical structure discovery
     for reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
     pages 20064–20076, 2022.
[21] Silviu Pitis, Elliot Creager, and Animesh Garg. Counterfactual data augmentation using locally
     factored dynamics. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pages
     3976–3990, 2020.
[22] Silviu Pitis, Elliot Creager, Ajay Mandlekar, and Animesh Garg. Mocoda: model-based
     counterfactual data augmentation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
     (NeurIPS), pages 18143–18156, 2022.
[23] Chen Qian, Zihao Xie, Yifei Wang, Wei Liu, Yufan Dang, Zhuoyun Du, Weize Chen, Cheng
     Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Scaling large-language-model-based multi-agent collab-
     oration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07155, 2024.
[24] Shuofei Qiao, Runnan Fang, Ningyu Zhang, Yuqi Zhu, Xiang Chen, Shumin Deng, Yong
     Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen. Agent planning with world knowledge
     model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 37, pages
     114843–114871, 2024.
[25] Maximilian Seitzer, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Georg Martius. Causal influence detection for
     improving efficiency in reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems (NeurIPS), pages 22905–22918, 2021.
[26] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Re-
     flexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pages 8634–8652, 2023.
[27] DJ Strouse, Kevin R McKee, Matt Botvinick, Edward Hughes, and Richard Everett. Collaborat-
     ing with humans without human data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
     (NeurIPS), pages 14502–14515, 2021.
[28] Gerald Tesauro. TD-Gammon, a self-teaching backgammon program, achieves master-level
     play. Neural Computation, 6(2):215–219, 1994.
[29] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
     Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
     models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
     2022.
[30] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H Chi,
     Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
     models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pages 24824–24837,
     2022.


                                                11
[31] Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang,
     Junzhe Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. The rise and potential of large language model
     based agents: A survey. Science China Information Sciences, 68(2):121101, 2025.
[32] Ceyao Zhang, Kaijie Yang, Siyi Hu, Zihao Wang, Guanghe Li, Yihang Sun, Cheng Zhang,
     Zhaowei Zhang, Anji Liu, Song-Chun Zhu, et al. Proagent: building proactive cooperative
     agents with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, pages 17591–17599, 2024.
[33] Hongxin Zhang, Weihua Du, Jiaming Shan, Qinhong Zhou, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum,
     Tianmin Shu, and Chuang Gan. Building cooperative embodied agents modularly with large
     language models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
     (ICLR), 2023.
[34] Peng Zhang, Furui Liu, Zhitang Chen, Jianye Hao, and Jun Wang. Deep reinforcement learning
     with causality-based intrinsic reward, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
     30I4Azqc_oP.
[35] Yudi Zhang, Yali Du, Biwei Huang, Ziyan Wang, Jun Wang, Meng Fang, and Mykola Pech-
     enizkiy. Interpretable reward redistribution in reinforcement learning: a causal approach. In
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pages 20208–20229, 2023.
[36] Yudi Zhang, Yali Du, Biwei Huang, Meng Fang, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. A causality-inspired
     spatial-temporal return decomposition approach for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In
     NeurIPS 2024 Causal Representation Learning Workshop, 2024.
[37] Rui Zhao, Jinming Song, Yufeng Yuan, Haifeng Hu, Yang Gao, Yi Wu, Zhongqian Sun, and
     Wei Yang. Maximum entropy population-based training for zero-shot human-ai coordination.
     In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 6145–6153, 2023.
[38] Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min,
     Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. A survey of large language models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 2023.
[39] Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale
     Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, et al. Least-to-most prompting enables
     complex reasoning in large language models. In Proceedings of the International Conference
     on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
[40] Yuqi Zhu, Shuofei Qiao, Yixin Ou, Shumin Deng, Ningyu Zhang, Shiwei Lyu, Yue Shen,
     Lei Liang, Jinjie Gu, and Huajun Chen. Knowagent: knowledge-augmented planning for
     LLM-based agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03101, 2024.




                                               12
                       Appendix for
CausalPlan: Empowering Efficient LLM Multi-Agent Collaboration
             Through Causality-Driven Planning
A    Identifiability Analysis
Proposition 1 (Identifiability of the causal structure and functions):
Let the dataset consist of sequences of the form:
                                    (st , at−1 , at ),    t = 1, . . . , T,                           (8)

Assume the data comes from a Markov Decision Process (MDP) under the interaction of a fixed
behavior policy πβ . The next action at (a binary vector of size A) is assumed to be generated by a
structural causal model (SCM):

                             ai,t = fi (Pa(ai,t )) + εai,t ,      i = 1, . . . , A,                   (9)

where, the parents Pa(ai,t ) of ai,t are selected from the state st and action at−1 . The noise terms, ε,
are independent of the parents. Under the following assumptions:

      1. Additive noise: The noise terms are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) and do
         not depend on the inputs [3].
      2. Causal sufficiency: All relevant causes are observed (i.e., no hidden confounders) [12].
      3. Faithfulness and global Markov condition: Observed conditional independencies match
         those implied by the graph [7].
      4. Function class expressiveness: Each function fi belongs to a class identifiable under
         additive noise models. In additive noise models, identifiability of causal direction relies on
         the function class having sufficient expressiveness and satisfying certain regularity conditions
         (e.g., nonlinearity, invertibility) [5, 9].
      5. Acyclicity: The causal graph has no cycles (i.e., it is a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)).
      6. Sufficient data: There are enough samples to guarantee reliable estimation.

Then, both the structure of the causal graph and the functions fi can be identified. In particular, the
binary adjacency masks indicating causal edges can be consistently estimated.
Proof sketch:
Step 1: Identifiability using additive noise models. Under the above assumptions, especially additivity
and faithfulness, each causal function fi can be learned uniquely up to Markov equivalence. Prior
work [3] shows that additive noise and independence of noise from inputs imply identifiability of the
direction of causality.
Step 2: Estimating the functions. We approximate each function fi using a weighted basis expansion:

                                           fi (·) ≈ Wi⊤ ϕi (·),                                     (10)

where ϕi (·) ∈ Rd is a nonlinear feature map that transforms the input tuple (·) into a d-dimensional
representation, and Wi ∈ Rd is the corresponding weight vector of function fi . In the simplest case,
ϕi (·) and Wi are predefined basis functions and linear coefficients, respectively. However, in practice,
we often implement fi using a neural network to allow for flexible function approximation. Given an
input tuple (st , at−1 ), the generating function for ai,t can be rewritten as:

                       ai,t = fi (st , at−1 ) + εai,t ≈ Wi⊤ ϕi (st , at−1 ) + εai,t ,               (11)

with noise term εai,t . Suppose we have a dataset comprising N trajectories k with the form given in
Eq. 8. For each trajectory, we define:


                                                     13
                                                                      k 
                           ϕi (sk1 , ak0 )⊤
                                           
                                                                      ai,1
                   Φki =          ..           T ×d                  .. 
                                                                Ai =  .  ∈ R T ,
                                                                 k
                                            ∈R      ,                                          (12)
                                           
                                    .
                            ϕi (skT , akT −1 )⊤                            aki,T

Each row of Φki represents the feature vector for a specific time step, while the corresponding
element in Aki contains the observed action component. We then estimate Wi by minimizing the
ridge-regularized least-squares objective:
                                   N
                                  X                  2            2
                              min       Aki − Φki Wi 2 + λ Wi 2 ,                          (13)
                               Wi
                                    k=1
where λ > 0 controls the regularization strength.
Step 3: Unique closed-form solution proof. We proceed by proving that solving the objective yields a
unique closed-form solution. The objective function above can be compactly written as:
                       N
                     X                  2
           L(Wi ) =       Aki − Φki Wi 2 + λ ∥Wi ∥22 = ∥Ai − Φi Wi ∥22 + λ Wi⊤ Wi .             (14)
                      k=1

First, expand the squared-error term:
  ∥Ai − Φi Wi ∥22 = (Ai − Φi Wi )⊤ (Ai − Φi Wi ) = A⊤         ⊤ ⊤        ⊤ ⊤
                                                    i Ai − 2 Wi Φi Ai + Wi Φi Φi Wi . (15)

Thus,
                  L(Wi ) = A⊤         ⊤ ⊤        ⊤ ⊤             ⊤
                            i Ai − 2 Wi Φi Ai + Wi Φi Φi Wi + λ Wi Wi .                         (16)
Taking the gradient with respect to Wi gives:
                          ∇Wi L(Wi ) = −2 Φ⊤            ⊤
                                                                 
                                              i Ai + 2 Φi Φi + λI Wi .                          (17)
Setting ∇Wi L(Wi ) = 0 yields the normal equation:
                                   Φ⊤                ⊤
                                               
                                     i Φi + λI Wi = Φi Ai .                                     (18)

Since λ > 0, the matrix Φ⊤
                         i Φi + λI is strictly positive-definite and hence invertible. Therefore, the
unique minimizer is:
                                                      −1 ⊤
                                W i = Φ⊤   i Φi + λI      Φi A i .                               (19)

Re-expressing in terms of the individual trajectories,
                                  XN                          N
                                                              X
                        Φ⊤i Φi =     (Φki )⊤ Φki , Φ⊤  i Ai =   (Φki )⊤ Aki ,                   (20)
                                    k=1                          k=1
so equivalently
                                     N
                                    X                           N
                                                             −1 X
                            Wi =          (Φki )⊤ Φki + λI           (Φki )⊤ Aki .              (21)
                                     k=1                       k=1

Because L(Wi ) is strictly convex, it admits a unique closed-form solution. Moreover, given a
sufficiently large dataset, the estimator converges to a good estimate of Wi [16].

Step 3: Recovering the graph structure

To recover the graph structure, we exploit the closed-form solution for Wi derived by minimizing the
regularized quadratic loss in the previous step:
                                                        −1 ⊤
                                   W i = Φ⊤  i Φi + λI     Φi A i .
This expression yields an estimate of the weight vector Wi , which quantifies the linear relationship
between the current state and previous action features and the target component ai,t . The support of
Wi —i.e., the indices of its nonzero entries—identifies which features are informative for predicting
ai,t . Under the faithfulness assumption, this support exactly corresponds to the true parent set of
node i in the underlying causal graph. Thus, one can recover the graph structure by examining which
entries of Wi are significantly nonzero, using thresholding or statistical tests.


                                                    14
Conclusion

Under the usual identifiability conditions, both the graph structure and the functional relationships in
the Structural Causal Action model are uniquely determined. As a result, the causal action matrix
learned by CausalPlan faithfully reflects the true cause–effect relations among states and actions.

B     CausalPlan Details
As described in Sect. 3 and in Fig. 2, the CausalPlan framework involves two phases Causal Action
Structure Learning and Agent Planning with Causal Knowledge. Here, we discuss in detail the two
phases and their components, as well as present algorithms that outline the method.

B.1   Causal Action Structure Learning details

This appendix outlines the procedure used to model and learn the causal relationships between the
previous action at−1 , current state st , and next action at .
Buffer B Collection. The data collection process begins by constructing the buffer B, which is
used to train the SCA model. We collect this data by allowing a pretrained agent to interact with the
environment for N timesteps, with each episode having a horizon of T . These interactions include
both high-level task-oriented actions and low-level movement actions.
To facilitate causal analysis, we apply a preprocessing step in which all low-level movement actions
are relabeled as the most recent preceding high-level action of interest. For example, if the agent
executes pickup_onion, then moves for several steps, and finally performs put_onion_in_pot, all
intermediate movement actions are relabeled as pickup_onion. This yields a simplified sequence:
pickup_onion → pickup_onion → pickup_onion → put_onion_in_pot. This transformation
reduces noise from irrelevant actions and makes it easier to detect meaningful causal edges—such as
from pickup_onion to put_onion_in_pot.
Importantly, we retain the original state observations at each timestep, even after relabeling the
actions. This ensures that we can still study the causal relationship between the immediate state
before an action and the subsequent high-level decision, preserving the integrity of the underlying
state-action dynamics.
SCA Model. To capture these dependencies, we employ the SCA model, which incorporates two key
components: the generative parameters δ and the structural parameters η. The parameters δ define a
set of functions f , each implemented as a neural network. Specifically, for each action feature ai in
Eq. 1, there is a corresponding function fi parameterized by δi (see Appx. C.5 for network details).
As described in Sect. 3.3.1, the model generates the next action at based on the current state and
previous action. The parameters δ govern this generative mapping and are trained using standard
neural network optimization.
In parallel, the structural parameters η encode the causal graph G, where each entry indicates
the presence or absence of a directed edge between action factorizations, using binary adjacency
indicators. During inference, only those factorizations that are parents of the current action feature
ai , according to η, are activated. We implement this by masking out all features not connected to
ai , ensuring that each function fi conditions only on its relevant causal parents, as defined in Eq. 1.
Furthermore, we manually set the diagonal entries ηi→i = 0, since edges from an action factorization
to itself are not allowed in the causal graph. This constraint prevents self-causation among action
nodes, maintaining a valid causal structure. Finally, we apply a sigmoid activation to each entry of η,
producing values in [0, 1] that represent the probability of an edge’s existence
Optimization. Both sets of parameters are jointly optimized during training. The overall loss function
is defined as
                                L(δ, η) = Lcausal (δ, η) + Lreg (η),
where Lcausal encourages accurate prediction of the next action, and Lreg regularizes the structural
parameters to promote sparsity and prevent overfitting. This results in an interpretable and reliable
causal model.
The full training procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1, which alternates between updating the
generative and structural parameters using mini-batches sampled from the buffer B.


                                                  15
Algorithm 1 Iterative Optimization for Structural Causal Action (SCA) Model
                                          N
 1: Input: Dataset B = {(skt , akt )}T t=1 k=1
 2: Initialize structural parameters η and generating parameters δ
 3: Repeat:                            
 4:    1. Sample a mini-batch B = {(akt−1 , skt , akt )t∈T k∈N ⊂ B
 5:    2. Optimize Generating Parameters δ:
 6:       Fix η
 7:       Optimize δ by minimizing the loss Lcausal (δ, η) in Eq. 2
 8:       Update generating parameters δ
 9:    3. Optimize Structural Parameters η:
10:       Fix δ
11:       Optimize η by minimizing the loss L(δ, η) = Lcausal (δ, η) + Lreg (η) in Eq. 2 and Eq. 3
12:    Apply sigmoid to η
13: Output: Optimized parameters δ, η


B.1.1    State and action factorization
We assumed a known factorization of state and action spaces, a common assumption often made
in causal reinforcement learning research [11, 8]. This allows us to encode the states and actions
into binary vectors: st = [st,1 , . . . , st,S ] ∈ {0, 1}S , at = [at,1 , . . . , at,A ] ∈ {0, 1}A , where each
component st,j and at,i is a binary indicator representing whether a particular state feature or action
is active (1) or inactive (0).
For example, given an observation skt of trajectory k at timestep t : “agent 1 is holding an onion,
agent 2 is holding nothing”, this can be encoded into a binary state vector such as:
                                          skt = [1, 0, 0, 1, 0, . . . ],
where each entry corresponds to a specific feature (e.g., “agent 1 is holding onion”, “agent 1 is holding
nothing”, “agent 2 is holding nothing”, etc.), and the 1s indicate which conditions are currently true.
Similarly, an action like “agent 1 places onion in pot” can be encoded into
                                             akt = [0, 1, 0, . . . ],
where each entry corresponds to a specific atomic action in the action space, and the 1 marks the active
action at time t. Note: In our training process, we use only the previous action of the controlling agent.
While it is possible to incorporate the actions of the other agent, doing so increases the complexity of
learning the causal graph and may negatively impact the training performance.
This factorized representation enables us to formulate the causality training as a classification problem,
allowing us to optimize using the negative log-likelihood loss defined in Eq. 2. Refer to Appx. C.5.2
for the factorization features used in our experiments.

B.2     Agent Planning with Causal Knowledge details

This appendix provides additional details on how causal knowledge is integrated into the agent’s
decision-making process during action planning.
LLM prompting process. During inference, we first equip the LLM agents with a knowledge library
that specifies the tasks, rules, and example responses relevant to the game environment. At each time
step, the current observation st is presented to the agent along with a prompt instructing it to analyze
the situation. The agent typically responds with a natural language interpretation highlighting the key
elements of the observation. Both the original observation st and the generated analysis are then fed
into a second prompt, which instructs the agent to produce a set of appropriate next actions A′ . For
further details, refer to Appx. B.2.1.
Causal-Aware Action Planning. When a set of candidate actions A′ is generated during planning,
each action is initially assigned a probability by the LLM model, denoted as Pa (A′ ). To incorporate
causal reasoning, the agent queries the Causal Action Matrix M using the current state st and
previous action at−1 to compute a corresponding set of causal scores Pc (A′ ) (refer to Appx. B.2.2
for details). A weighted combination of the LLM’s probabilities and causal scores is formed using
Eq. 4 and then normalized via the softmax function:


                                                       16
                                                exp(pf (a′m ))
                                              P|A′ |             ,                                   (22)
                                                             ′
                                               j=1 exp(pf (am ))




resulting in the final action distribution Pf (A′ ). Redundant actions are identified and merged according
to the process described in Appx. B.2.4, and the agent samples the next action at+1 from this refined
distribution.
Causal Backup Action. In scenarios where no valid candidate actions are proposed (i.e., A′ = ∅),
mostly due to hallucinations, the agent relies on a causal fallback mechanism. Instead of halting
execution, it queries M using st and at−1 to derive a causal distribution over the original instruction
set A. The agent then selects the action with the highest causal score, effectively leveraging prior
experience to recover from failure.
The complete inference procedure using Causal-Aware Action Planning and Causal Backup Action is
summarized in Algorithm 2.


Algorithm 2 Agent Planning with the Causal Knowledge Algorithm at time step t
 1: Input: Current state st , previous action at−1 , candidate actions A′ , LLM probabilities Pa (A′ ),
    instruction set A, causal matrix M, weighting coefficient γ ∈ [0, 1], Pf (A′ ) = ∅, Pc (A) = ∅
 2: If A′ ̸= ∅ then
 3:    For all a′m ∈ A′
 4:      pc (a′m ) ← M(st , at−1 , a′m )
 5:      pf (a′m ) ← γ · pa (a′m + (1 − γ) · pc (a′m ) (Eq. 4)
 6:      Pf (A′ ) ← pf (a′m )
 7:    End for
 8:    Normalize Pf (A′ ) using softmax in Eq 22
 9:    Apply redundancy check h  (see Appx. B.2.4) to get A′∗ , Pf∗ i
10:   Sample at ∼ Categorical p∗f (a′1 ), p∗f (a′2 ), . . . , p∗f (a′|A′∗ | )
11: Else
12:   For all a ∈ A
13:      pc (a) ← M(st , at−1 , a)
14:      Pc (A) ← pc (a)
15:   End for
16:   at ← arg maxa∈A Pc (a)
17: End If
18: Output: Selected action at




B.2.1        LLM prompt design

Knowledge library. At the beginning of the inference process, we construct a knowledge library for
the LLM agent, following prior work in the field [17, 10]. This library is organized around three key
perspectives: the tasks, the rules, and the in-context examples. This knowledge library is fed into the
LLMs at the initial stage of the inference process before the cooperation task begins. An example of
a knowledge library is provided in Fig. A1.
In our experiments, for simplicity, we utilized the knowledge library provided by Zhang et al. [17],
with slight modifications to accommodate our two-prompt design, as their work uses the same
evaluation environment2 .


      2
          https://github.com/PKU-Alignment/ProAgent (MIT License).


                                                        17
                                                       Knowledge library
    Tasks:
    - You are ...
    - This is a team game played by two players who will ...
    - The team goal is ...
    - You need to ...

    Rules:
    - In this task, the legal actions include: [Action 1], [Action 2], ...
    - Assume the role of an assistant proficient in the task. Your objective is to control Player 0 and cooperate with Player 1, who
    follows a fixed strategy, in order to achieve a high score. You should adhere to the following guidelines:
    - [Rule 1].
    - [Rule 2].
    - ...

    - For each step, you will receive the current scene or current scene with an analysis.
    - If you receive only the current scene, you need to:
       1. Describe the current scene and analyze it.
    - If you receive the current scene and the analysis then you need to:
       2. Plan ONLY ONE best skill for to do right now. Format should be ...

    Examples:
    ###
    Scene 1 Prompt 1: [Environment Scene 1][Player 0 Scene 1] [Player 1 Scene 1].

    Analysis: Both player are [Scene Description]. I believe [Other Analysis].
    ###
    Scene 1 Prompt 2: [Environment Scene 1][Player 0 Scene 1] [Player 1 Scene 1]. Analysis: Both Player are [Scene Description]. I
    believe [Other Analysis].

    Plan: Player 1 should [Scene 1 Action].
    ###
    Scene 90 Prompt 1: [Environment Scene 90][Player 0 Scene 90] [Player 1 Scene 90].

    Analysis: Player 0 and Player 1 are [Scene 90 Description]. I believe [Other Analysis].
    ###
    Scene 2 Prompt 2: [Environment Scene 90][Player 0 Scene 90] [Player 1 Scene 90]. Analysis: Player 0 and Player 1 are [Scene
    90 Description]. I believe [Other Analysis].

    Plan: Player 1 should [Scene 90 Action].
    ###
    ...




                                   Figure A1: An Example of Knowledge Library.


Analysis and planning prompts To facilitate the planning process, we first ground the environment
state into natural language so that it becomes interpretable to the LLM agent, as the raw state
representation is typically not directly understandable by language models. In our experiments, we
adopt the grounding methodology proposed by Zhang et al. [17], since their work uses the same
evaluation environments. For detailed grounding procedures, we refer the reader to their paper. An
example of the final grounded state prompt used as input to the agent at each timestep is highlighted
in red in Fig. A2.
We then apply our two-prompt design to guide the LLM’s behavior using the knowledge library.
Specifically, when the agent is prompted with only the current observation, it is expected to analyze
the scene. When the prompt includes both the observation and the analysis, the agent is expected to
respond with a planned action. Our approach first asks the agent to perform the analysis, then uses
that analysis together with the state prompt as input to generate the final action plan. The analysis is
highlighted in green, while the planned action is highlighted in purple in Fig. A2. We hypothesize that
this two-prompt process provides the agent with a reasoning workflow similar to the chain-of-thought
(CoT) prompting described by Wang et al. [15], while also allowing straightforward access to the
planned action through hard-coded separation. In contrast, including both the analysis and the planned
action in the same response, as done by Zhang et al. [17]—can make it difficult to accurately extract
the planned action, since action names might appear within the analysis. We evaluate the performance
of one-prompt versus two-prompt approaches without causality enhancement through our CausalPlan
in Sect. 4.4 and find that the results are quite similar, with the two-prompt approach showing slightly


                                                                    18
better performance. Although the single-prompt approach is feasible in practice, it complicates
reliably identifying the correct action.

                                             Analysis and planning prompts
    ###
    Scene 1 Prompt 1: Layout: Onion Dispenser 0, Onion Dispenser 1, Dish Dispenser 0, Serving Location 0, Pot 0, Pot 1.
    State: Player 1 holds nothing. Player 0 holds nothing. Kitchen states: Pot 0 is empty. Pot 1 is empty. 3 counters can be visited by
    Player 0. Their states are as follows: No counters have onion. No counters have dish.

    Analysis:
    - The pot is empty, and there are no onions or dishes on the counters.
    - Player 1 needs to deliver an onion and a dish to the counter.
    - The legal actions that player1 can take are pickup(onion) and pickup(dish).
    ###
    Scene 1 Prompt 2: Layout: Onion Dispenser 0, Onion Dispenser 1, Dish Dispenser 0, Serving Location 0, Pot 0, Pot 1.
    State: Player 1 holds nothing. Player 0 holds nothing. Kitchen states: Pot 0 is empty. Pot 1 is empty. 3 counters can be visited by
    Player 0. Their states are as follows: No counters have onion. No counters have dish. Analysis:
    - The pot is empty, and there are no onions or dishes on the counters.
    - Player 1 needs to deliver an onion and a dish to the counter.
    - The legal actions that player1 can take are pickup(onion) and pickup(dish).

    Plan: Player 1 should pickup(onion).
    ###



                            Figure A2: An example of analysis and planning prompts.

B.2.2    Causal knowledge consultation details
To compute the causal score for a candidate action, the agent first maps the action to its corresponding
row in M and identifies which columns are currently active based on features derived from the
current state and previous action. These active features are determined using the procedure outlined
in Appx. B.2.3.
For instance, given that we want to extract the causal scores of an action a, given current state st and
previous action at−1 , we first identify the corresponding index i of the action a within the matrix
row. Let idx : A → {1, . . . , |A|} be the function that maps any action to its row index in M, and
let J = Active(st , at−1 ) ⊆ {1, . . . , S + A} denote the set of column indices corresponding to the
features that are “active” in the current state st and the previous action at−1 .
For a candidate action a, we first compute its row index i = idx(a), then gather the entries of row i
in M at all active columns j ∈ J, thus a query M(st , at−1 , a) will return:
                                                    X
                                          pc (a) =     ηji .                                     (23)
                                                                       j∈J


In other words, pc (a) is the sum of the causal-weight entries in the row for at that correspond to the
features currently active.

B.2.3    Extracting information for causal knowledge consultation
Given the observations grounded in natural language, as explained in Appx. B.2.1, we map them to
a set of predefined state features. For example, from the state prompt shown in Fig. A3 — “Player
1 holds nothing. Player 0 holds nothing. Kitchen states: Pot 0 is empty. Pot 1 has 1 onion. . . ” —
we extract factorized features such as hold_nothing1 (indicating that agent 1 is holding nothing),
hold_nothing2 (agent 2 is holding nothing), pot0_0 (pot 0 is empty), pot1_1 (pot 1 has 1 onion).
This allows us to formulate the state feature factorization st .
In addition, the previous action taken by the agent is also recorded, referring to the last executable
action performed. This allows us to configure the action feature factorization vector at−1 .
Depending on the environment, the number of factorized features can vary widely (see Appx. C.5.2
for the specific factorized features used in each experimental task). While a larger number of features
can produce a more detailed causal graph, this does not necessarily lead to better performance, as
learning such graphs becomes more challenging and requires more data. In our experiments, we


                                                                    19
chose to use high-level state and action factorizations (we ignore low-level movement actions and
only focus on the state of the two agents and the pot) to strike a balance between expressiveness and
learnability.

    ###
    Scene 1 Prompt 1: Layout: Onion Dispenser 0, Onion Dispenser 1, Dish Dispenser 0, Serving Location 0, Pot 0, Pot 1.
    State: Player 1 holds nothing. Player 0 holds nothing. Kitchen states: Pot 0 is empty. Pot 1 has 1 onion. 3 counters can be
    visited by Player 0. Their states are as follows: No counters have onion. No counters have dish.




        Agent 1's state:                  Agent 2's state:               Environment's state:              Environment's state:    Previous action:
        hold_nothing1                     hold_nothing2                        pot0_0                            pot1_1           put_onion_in_pot




                           Figure A3: Information extraction for causal knowledge consultation.


B.2.4      Post-processing to identify redundant actions
During the process of sampling the next actions, the LLM may output the same action in different
formats within the sampled set A′ . To address this, we apply a series of post-processing steps using
standard natural language processing techniques—such as converting text to lowercase, removing
punctuation, and regex matching pre-defined patterns—to identify and merge semantically equivalent
actions. This enables us to accurately aggregate their probabilities in Pf (A′ ). For instance, the same
action put_onion_in_pot can be expressed as put_onion_in_pot(), put_onion_in_pot().,
or put_onion_In_Pot (refer to the associated code for details of this process). After post-processing
all these possible responses, we can calculate the updated value:

        pf (put_onion_in_pot) = pf (put_onion_in_pot())
                                + pf (put_onion_in_pot().) + pf (put_onion_In_Pot)

C       Additional Experiment Details
C.1     Additional implementation details

C.1.1       CausalPlan implementation
As mentioned earlier, we build upon the ProAgent framework [17], retaining all components except
for the planning module, which we replace with our proposed algorithm. Unlike the original ProAgent
implementation that relied on the closed-source GPT-3.5 3 for planning, we instead utilize one of
the following open-source language models, all retrieved from Hugging Face4 : gemma-1.1-7b-it
(Gemma-7B), Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct (Llama-8B), Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct-1M (Qwen-
14B), and Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct (Llama-70B). These models are integrated into the ProAgent
framework to serve as the core planner, with our CausalPlan method applied to refine the generated
actions. Additionally, for the two-prompt input structure, we employ the Cohere/command-r
    3
     We would like to clarify a minor detail in the main manuscript that will be corrected in the revised version.
The ProAgent framework was referred to as using GPT-4, based on the default model loaded in the code. However,
according to the README, the results reported in the paper were actually obtained using gpt-3.5-turbo-0301.
We will update the manuscript accordingly to reflect this.
   4
     https://huggingface.co


                                                                            20
model [2]—a 35-billion-parameter LLM accessed via the Cohere API using the official cohere
Python client5 —to produce scenario analyses for faster inference. For the “Belief Correction”
module, we also substitute GPT-3.5 with the same Cohere model. The "Controller" module in
ProAgent [17]—and in our setup—uses a rule-based best-first search; while effective, performance
could likely be improved with a reinforcement learning-based approach.
Regarding hardware requirements, the Gemma-7B and Llama-8B models each require approximately
10–16 GB of VRAM, Qwen-14B demands around 25–30 GB and multi-GPU support, while Llama-
70B needs over 70 GB VRAM with multi-GPU configuration on NVIDIA h-100 GPUs.
To facilitate easier extraction of action selection probabilities, we slightly modify the prompting
strategy used in the original method. In particular, we separate the reasoning step, based on CoT
prompting, from the action planning step, implementing them as two distinct prompts. The output of
the reasoning prompt is then used as input for the planning prompt. We provide further details of
this process in Appx. B.2.1 and include an empirical study in Appx. C.4.3, demonstrating that this
modification does not contribute to the performance gains, nor does it substantially affect the overall
performance of the backbone.
To avoid the cold-start problem and long interaction times associated with using small LLMs to
collect data into the buffer B, we employ a pre-trained policy based on MEP to interact with the
environment and gather data. Nonetheless, we conduct an experiment (results are in Appx. C.4.3)
demonstrating that even when using a small LLM, specifically Llama-8B, for data collection, our
method still yields improved performance compared to simply using the backbone method.
To access the open-source models


C.2     Environment details

We use the Overcooked-AI environment suite as our testing platform [1]. In Overcooked, two
agents must collaborate to prepare and serve onion soup. Their tasks include gathering and placing
up to three ingredients into a pot, cooking the soup, transferring it into a dish, and delivering the
final meal. Each successful delivery yields a reward of +20, and both agents share the final return,
promoting cooperative behavior. This suite comprises five distinct layouts [1]—Cramped Room (CR),
Asymmetric Advantages (AA), Coordination Ring (COR), Forced Coordination (FC), and Counter
Circuit (CC)—each designed to evaluate different aspects of multi-agent collaboration under varying
levels of complexity and coordination demands:


         • Cramped Room (CR): This environment features a highly constrained layout with narrow
           hallways and tight corridors, forcing agents to navigate around each other constantly.

         • Asymmetric Advantages (AA): In AA, the kitchen layout provides one agent with easier
           access to ingredients and tools, while the other agent is disadvantaged in terms of spatial
           reach.

         • Coordination Ring (COR): COR introduces a ring-like structure in the kitchen, where
           ingredients, cooking stations, and delivery points are spread along a loop.

         • Forced Coordination (FC): FC is designed to enforce interdependence between the agents
           through environment constraints.

         • Counter Circuit (CC): The CC environment includes a set of counters that create a barrier
           between the agents and the task stations.



   5
       https://docs.cohere.com/v2/reference/chat


                                                  21
Figure A4: Overcooked-AI Environments. From left to right: Cramped Room (CR), Asymmetric
Advantages (AA), Coordination Ring (CR), Forced Coordination (FC), and Counter Circuit (CC).


The environment testing suite was collected from the associated GitHub repository6 .

C.3     Baseline details

We compare CausalPlan against several established reinforcement learning (RL) methods specifically
designed for zero-shot human-AI coordination tasks. These baselines have demonstrated strong
performance in prior research and serve as competitive benchmarks in our experiments.

        • SP (Self-Play) [14, 1]: A classical RL approach where agents learn policies by playing
          against themselves, promoting strategic behavior without relying on external partners.
        • PBT (Population-Based Training) [4]: An evolutionary algorithm that optimizes agent
          populations by iteratively mutating and selecting promising policies, facilitating diverse and
          robust coordination strategies.
        • FCP (Fictitious Co-Play) [13]: A method that models coordination by simulating the
          behaviors of various partner types, enabling agents to adapt to unseen collaborators.
        • MEP (Maximum Entropy Population) [18]: This approach promotes diversity within
          agent populations by maximizing entropy, which encourages exploration of varied strategies
          for better coordination.
        • COLE (Cooperative Learning) [6]: An algorithm designed to enhance cooperative behav-
          ior between agents by explicitly learning to predict and adapt to partners’ actions.

These baselines were selected due to their relevance and proven success in multi-agent coordination
scenarios. The pretrained baseline models were obtained from the ProAgent GitHub repository7 .
We also evaluate CausalPlan in collaboration with a human policy collected via behavior learning,
available at the COLE platform8 .

C.4     Additional experiment results

C.4.1    Details of AI player evaluation
Tab. A1 presents a comprehensive comparison of the performance of various backbone LLMs, both
with and without CausalPlan, evaluated across multiple layouts.
Tab. A2 provides an in-depth comparison between baseline agents and our proposed CausalPlan
method using Llama-70B, across different layouts.

C.4.2    Effect of hyperparameter γ
In our framework, the hyperparameter γ in Eq. 10 controls the balance between the agent’s belief
and the causal knowledge. To investigate the effect of varying γ, we conducted an experiment on
two layouts, CR and FC, using Qwen-14B as the backbone LLM. As shown in Fig. A5, the optimal
value for γ lies within the range of 0.5 to 0.7. In both cases, when γ is set to 0.2, indicating a greater
reliance on causal knowledge than on the agent’s own knowledge, or when γ is set to 1, fully trusting
   6
     https://github.com/HumanCompatibleAI/overcooked_ai (MIT License)
   7
     https://github.com/PKU-Alignment/ProAgent (MIT License)
   8
     https://github.com/liyang619/COLE-Platform


                                                   22
Table A1: Performance of different backbones with and without CausalPlan across various layouts
(this is the detailed version of Fig. 3). The reported results, including mean and variance, are obtained
from 3 different seeds, with each seed running for 400 timesteps. In these experiments, we use
the small LLM agent as Player 1, allowing it to collaborate with all other baselines as described in
Sect. 4.1, and report the average and variance of the outcomes. The last column reports the average
improvement across backbones, and the last row reports the average improvement across layouts
in %. The result with the highest improvement is highlighted in bold, while the second highest is
underscored.
                                                                                                              Avg.
                       With                                      Layouts
  Backbones                                                                                                  Improv.
                     CausalPlan       CR             AA            COR             FC            CC            (%)
                         ×        121.3 ± 16.2   88.0 ± 32.7     78.7 ± 8.3    17.3 ± 6.1    73.3 ± 10.1
  Gemma-7B                                                                                                    12.82
                         ✓        141.3 ± 6.1    122.7 ± 12.9   82.7 ± 30.5    17.3 ± 9.2    78.7 ± 14.0
                         ×        110.7 ± 12.8   163.4 ± 3.3    80.0 ± 41.7     9.3 ± 2.3    84.0 ± 20.8
  Llama-8B                                                                                                    13.90
                         ✓        150.7 ± 2.3    182.2 ± 18.3   77.3 ± 14.0    16.0 ± 4.0     90.7 ± 2.3
                         ×        117.3 ± 4.6    224.0 ± 22.6   76.0 ± 17.4    16.0 ± 4.0    48.0 ± 22.6
  Qwen-14B                                                                                                    29.04
                         ✓        162.6 ± 9.2    232.0 ± 31.7   121.3 ± 16.6   17.3 ± 12.8   93.3 ± 22.7
                         ×        144.0 ± 18.3   248.0 ± 22.7   125.3 ± 10.0   34.7 ± 14.0   89.3 ± 32.3
  Llama-70B                                                                                                   22.42
                         ✓        178.7 ± 2.3    266.7 ± 16.7   157.3 ± 2.3    38.7 ± 16.2   112.0 ± 6.9
  Avg. Improv. (%)       –           20.83          18.80          19.13          4.87           9.55          –
  Oracle GPT             –        194.2 ± 10.5   229.8 ± 21.9   183.0 ± 31.7   31.0 ± 33.9   128.5 ± 28.1      –


Table A2: Performance comparison between baseline agents and CausalPlan (Ours) across layouts
using Llama-70B (this is the detailed version of Tab. 1). Results (mean ± variance) are averaged
over 3 seeds (400 timesteps each). The first row per layout corresponds to our agent as Player 0, the
second to Player 1. Best and second-best results are in bold and underlined, respectively.
                                          Baseline AI Agents                                            CausalPlan
 Layout                                                                                                   (Ours)
                     SP           PBT            FCP            MEP                    COLE
                160.0 ± 4.0   165.3 ± 1.7    194.6 ± 10.0 177.3 ± 22.0               164.0 ± 6.9         166.7 ± 6.1
 CR
               164.0 ± 16.0   170.7 ± 8.3    193.3 ± 10.1 178.7 ± 10.1              142.7 ± 18.0         178.7 ± 2.3
               173.3 ± 22.0   185.3 ± 12.8 181.3 ± 14.0      153.3 ± 2.3            197.3 ± 14.0        250.7 ± 16.1
 AA
               194.7 ± 12.9   150.7 ± 18.0 172.0 ± 16.0      181.3 ± 9.2            173.3 ± 16.2        266.7 ± 16.7
               106.7 ± 12.8   138.7 ± 12.2    138.7 ± 2.3    166.7 ± 8.3             154.7 ± 2.3         156.0 ± 4.0
 COR
                134.7 ± 9.2   140.0 ± 8.0    122.7 ± 10.1    154.7 ± 6.1             152.0 ± 6.9         157.3 ± 2.3
                 10.7 ± 4.6   20.0 ± 14.4     57.3 ± 6.1      22.7 ± 4.6             41.3 ± 10.0         69.1 ± 13.6
 FC
                 25.3 ± 4.6    61.3 ± 6.1     26.7 ± 8.3      38.0 ± 6.1             48.0 ± 4.0          38.7 ± 16.1
                62.7 ± 12.2    56.0 ± 8.0     64.0 ± 8.0     33.3 ± 22.0             96.0 ± 4.0          113.3 ± 8.3
 CC
                 50.7 ± 6.1   48.0 ± 20.0     62.7 ± 12.9    66.7 ± 10.1             85.3 ± 16.2         112.0 ± 6.9



the agent, the performance degraded. Refer to Fig. A5 for the experimental results and Tab. A6 for the
γ values used for each LLM agent across different layouts. Due to limited computational resources,
tuning was only performed on layouts where CausalPlan initially underperformed with γ = 0.5. We
believe that further tuning of this hyperparameter would likely lead to improved performance.

C.4.3    Effect of different data collection policy
Tab. A3 presents an ablation study comparing the effects of using different agents—Llama-8B and
MEP—for data collection in buffer B, when interacting with the environment to collect data for 200k
steps. We hypothesize that using MEP for data collection would yield better results, given that it is a
pretrained agent specialized for the task. Nevertheless, even when using data collected by Llama-8B,
incorporating causal knowledge still provides a performance gain compared to not using causal
knowledge at all. The results show that MEP consistently outperforms Llama-8B across all baseline
AI agents, achieving a higher average score of 150.7 (±2.3) compared to 125.3 (±30.7) for Llama-8B.
This underscores the importance of utilizing a stronger agent to generate high-quality training data
for causal reasoning. Importantly, even when using data from Llama-8B, causal knowledge improves


                                                          23
Figure A5: Experiments showing the impact of tuning the hyperparameter γ conducted using Qwen-
14B on CR and FC layouts. The results, including mean and variance, are averaged over three
different seeds. The optimal value of γ typically lies within the range of 0.4-0.8, emphasizing the
importance of balancing between the belief of the LLMs and the prior causal knowledge.

Table A3: Ablation studies on using different agents to collect data for buffer B conducted on CR
layout with Llama-8B as backbone. The results, including mean and variance, are obtained from 3
different seeds. ”Llama-8B” and ”MEP” refer to using Llama-8B or MEP to generate data.

                                        Baseline AI Agents                            Average
        Methods
                                                                                      Results
                      SP          PBT           FCP          MEP         COLE

        Llama-8B 106.7 ± 41.6 86.7 ± 75.1 166.7 ± 41.6 126.7 ± 30.6 140.0 ± 0.0 125.3 ± 30.7

        MEP       126.7 ± 30.6 133.3 ± 30.5 160.0 ± 40.0 166.7 ± 41.6 166.7 ± 23.1 150.7 ± 2.3



performance relative to the absence of causal guidance, where the average score drops to 110.7
(±12.8) as reported in Appx. Tab. A1. We hypothesize that the performance gain observed when
using data from Llama-8B arises from its ability to consult not only the current deterministic action
selection but also similar past scenarios through the incorporation of causal knowledge.

C.4.4    Heatmap of learned causal matrix M analysis
In Fig. A6 and Fig. A7, we present the causal matrices M derived from data collected by MEP and
Llama-8B, respectively. The inference results using these matrices are detailed in Appx. C.4.3. To ob-
tain each matrix, the respective agent interacts with the environment for 200,000 steps to gather data,
followed by training the SCA model for 500,000 steps on the collected dataset. While both matrices
share similarities in many key edges—for example, from empty_hand1 to pickup_onion (edge
weights of 0.9 for MEP and 0.8 for Llama-8B) and from pot_finished to fill_dish_with_soup
(0.9 for MEP and 0.8 for Llama-8B) (see Appx. C.5.2 for feature descriptions)—there are im-
portant differences that likely contribute to performance variations. For instance, the edge from
pickup_onion to put_onion_in_pot has a weight of 0.6 when using MEP-collected data but
is absent (weight 0) with Llama-collected data. Similarly, the transition from deliver_soup to
pickup_onion appears with a weight of 0.7 in the MEP matrix but is missing in the Llama-8B
matrix. These differences highlight how the choice of data collection agent influences the learned
causal structure, which in turn can impact the effectiveness of downstream inference and control.
Additionally, one may observe that both heatmaps contain several edges that are difficult to interpret,
especially those originating from the state of the other agent toward the current action. These edges
may carry meaning for the agent but appear unintelligible to humans, or they may be irrelevant.
However, these unexpected edges have minimal impact on the inference process, provided the LLM
agent does not sample the corresponding actions, thereby eliminating the need to re-calculate the
final associated sampling probabilities. This highlights the importance of the general knowledge
embedded within the LLM agent, which helps partially eliminate irrelevant edges and leaves only
those ambiguities that require causal reasoning. We hypothesize that more advanced causal discovery


                                                  24
techniques could further improve the quality of the learned causal graphs by eliminating spurious
edges. A simpler alternative might involve hyperparameter tuning of a threshold, where edges with
probabilities below this threshold are removed entirely, or collecting more data. We leave these
explorations for future work.

                       em   p
                       ho ty_h
                           ld_ an
                       ho onio d1
                           ld n
                       dis _dish 1
                            h 1
                       po _with
                           t0 _s
                       po
                       po
                       po  t1
                           t2        ou p1
                       po  t3
                           t_
                       go finish
                           al e
                       pic _deli d
                            k ve
                       pu up_o red
                           t_ ni
                       pic onion on
                            k _
                       fill up_d in_p
                           _di ish ot
                       de sh_w
                           liv i
                       pla er_s th_so
                            c ou u
                       pla e_on p p
                            c io
                       em e_dis n_on
                            p h _c
                       ho ty_h _on_ oun
                           ld_ an cou ter
                       ho onio d2 nte
                           ld n            r
                       dis _dish 2
                            h_w 2
                               ith _soup 2
            pickup_onion 0.9 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.2 0.9 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.3 0.5 0.6
        put_onion_in_pot 0.7 0.8 0.3 0.8 0.5 1.0 0.9 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.3 0.9 0.8    0.8
              pickup_dish 0.9 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.8

                                                                                                                 Edge Weight
                                                                                                                0.6
     fill_dish_with_soup 0.4 0.3 0.9 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.0 0.7 0.9 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.5 0.2 0.2
             deliver_soup 0.6 0.5 0.6 1.0 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.0 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.8 0.2 0.7   0.4
place_onion_on_counter 0.7 0.8 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.8 0.6 0.7 0.9 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.6 0.8 0.5      0.2
 place_dish_on_counter 0.6 0.2 0.7 0.8 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.8 0.4 0.0 0.4 0.5 0.7 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.3
                                                                                                                0.0


Figure A6: Heatmap of causal graph edge weights obtained from data collected using MEP in the CR
layout. The plot illustrates the influence of state features (x-axis) on agent actions (y-axis).


                       em   p
                       ho ty_h
                           ld_ an
                       ho onio d1
                           ld n
                       dis _dish 1
                            h 1
                       po _with
                           t0 _s
                       po
                       po
                       po  t1
                           t2        ou p1
                       po  t3
                           t_
                       go finish
                           al e
                       pic _deli d
                            k ve
                       pu up_o red
                           t_ ni
                       pic onion on
                            k _
                       fill up_d in_p
                           _di ish ot
                       de sh_w
                           liv i
                       pla er_s th_so
                            c ou u
                       pla e_on p p
                            c io
                       em e_dis n_on
                            p h _c
                       ho ty_h _on_ oun
                           ld_ an cou ter
                       ho onio d2 nte
                           ld n             r
                       dis _dish 2
                            h_w 2
                               ith _so up 2
            pickup_onion 0.8 0.5 0.8 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.0 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.7 0.5 0.8 0.6 0.8 0.6
        put_onion_in_pot 0.6 0.9 0.7 0.5 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.4 0.9 0.6    0.8
              pickup_dish 0.6 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.9 0.9 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.4 0.0 0.5 0.9 0.7 0.9 0.8

                                                                                                                 Edge Weight
                                                                                                                0.6
     fill_dish_with_soup 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.8 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 1.0 1.0 0.9
             deliver_soup 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.9 0.0 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.5 0.1 0.1   0.4
place_onion_on_counter 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9 1.0 0.7 0.0 0.7 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.0 0.5 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.7      0.2
 place_dish_on_counter 0.7 0.8 1.0 0.4 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.8 0.0 0.5 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.9 0.6 0.5 0.8
                                                                                                                0.0


Figure A7: Heatmap of causal graph edge weights obtained from data collected using the Llama-8B
backbone in the CR layout. The plot illustrates the influence of state features (x-axis) on agent actions
(y-axis).

C.4.5    Time Efficiency Analysis
Learning the causal graph—such as in the CR environment, which involves 21 parent nodes and 7
child nodes—requires approximately 3 hours of training. However, this is a one-time offline process
that can be reused across all backbone models, making its cost negligible in the overall training
pipeline.
The actual runtime during planning varies depending on the backbone model used. Using NVIDIA
h100 GPUs (detailed in Appx. C.1.1, we observe the following runtimes for 400 timesteps:

        • Gemma-7B and Llama-8B: Approximately 5 minutes without CausalPlan, and around 15
          minutes with CausalPlan.
        • Qwen-14B: Roughly 16 minutes without CausalPlan, and 41 minutes with CausalPlan.
        • Llama-70B: About 40 minutes without CausalPlan, and approximately 68 minutes with
          CausalPlan.

These results highlight the additional computational cost introduced by causal reasoning. However,
the overhead remains reasonable given the observed improvements in policy quality.


                                                                25
C.5     Hyperparameters

C.5.1       Causality and LLMs hyperparameters

SCA Model

                             Table A4: Hyperparameters related to SCA Model

        Parameter                   Value     Description
        N                           200,000   Timesteps used to collect data for buffer B.
        T                           400       Horizon of each episode.
        fi network architecture     MLP       Four hidden layers with dimensions 64, 256, 256,
                                              64; ReLU activations; sigmoid output.
        Optimizer                   Adam      Optimization algorithm used to train δ and η.
        Learning rate               3e-4      Step size for gradient updates for δ and η.
        Regularization λ            1e-7      Regularization strength for parameter estimation.
        Iterations                  500,000   Number of training iterations for δ and η.



LLMs Agent (Build on top of ProAgent framework [17]

                               Table A5: Hyperparameters related to LLMs

        Parameter             Value           Description
        Model sizes           Gemma-7B,       Language model sizes and architectures
                              Qwen-14B,
                              Llama-8B,
                              Llama-70B
        Temperature           1.0             Controls randomness; higher values encourage di-
                                              verse samples
        Max new tokens        256             Maximum number of generated tokens per output
        Top-k sampling        50              Number of top tokens considered in sampling
        Top-p sampling        0.9             Nucleus sampling threshold (alternative to top-k)
        Sampling method       Enabled         Sampling is enabled (do_sample=true)
        retrival_method       recent_k        Parameter of ProAgent framework to retrieve re-
                                              cent history dialogue
        K                     1               Parameter of ProAgent framework, the number of
                                              history dialogue (default value is 0 or 1)


γ value in Eq. 4 for each layouts

                    Table A6: γ value in Eq. 4 for each layout and language model

                    Layout     Gemma-7B       Qwen-14B      Llama-8B     Llama-70B
                    CR             0.5           0.5           0.5            0.5
                    AA             0.5           0.5           0.5            0.5
                    COR            0.5           0.5           0.5            0.5
                    FC             0.6           0.7           0.4            0.5
                    CC             0.5           0.5           0.5            0.5



C.5.2       States and actions factorization in each environment

States and actions factorization used in CR layouts are available in Tab. A7 and for other other layouts
are included in Tab. A8.


                                                  26
             Table A7: Factorized States and Actions for CR Layout with Descriptions

 Feature                          Description
 empty_hand1                      Controlling agent is not holding any object
 hold_onion1                      Controlling agent is holding an onion
 hold_dish1                       Controlling agent is holding an empty dish
 dish_with_soup1                  Controlling agent is holding a dish filled with soup
 pot0                             Pot contains 0 onions (empty)
 pot1                             Pot contains 1 onion
 pot2                             Pot contains 2 onions
 pot3                             Pot contains 3 onions (ready to cook)
 pot_finished                     Pot has finished cooking and soup is ready
 goal_delivered                   A soup has been successfully delivered to the goal
 pickup_onion                     Action: controlling agent picks up an onion
 put_onion_in_pot                 Action: controlling agent places an onion into a pot
 pickup_dish                      Action: controlling agent picks up an empty dish
 fill_dish_with_soup              Action: controlling agent fills a dish with soup from a finished pot
 deliver_soup                     Action: controlling agent delivers a soup to the goal
 place_onion_on_counter           Action: controlling agent places an onion on the counter
 place_dish_on_counter            Action: controlling agent places a dish on the counter
 empty_hand2                      Other agent is not holding any object
 hold_onion2                      Other agent is holding an onion
 hold_dish2                       Other agent is holding an empty dish
 dish_with_soup2                  Other agent is holding a dish filled with soup


D    Discussion of broader impacts
This work represents an important foundational step toward integrating causal reasoning into multi-
agent planning with large language models (LLMs). Our causality-driven framework aims to improve
the safety, efficiency, and interpretability of collaborative AI systems by enabling agents to better
understand the consequences of their states and actions. Although primarily exploratory and not
yet intended for real-world deployment, the results demonstrate promising potential for advancing
multi-agent coordination.
At this stage, we do not expect any direct negative societal impacts, as the framework requires further
development and validation before practical use. Nevertheless, as autonomous multi-agent systems
mature, concerns related to fairness, reliability, misuse, and broader ethical implications will become
increasingly important. Addressing these challenges through responsible design, transparency, and
rigorous evaluation will be critical to ensure the safe and trustworthy deployment of such systems in
the future.




                                                  27
          Table A8: Factorized states and actions for other layouts and their descriptions

Feature                          Description
empty_hand1                      Controlling agent is not holding any object
hold_onion1                      Controlling agent is holding an onion
hold_dish1                       Controlling agent is holding an empty dish
dish_with_soup1                  Controlling agent is holding a dish filled with soup
pot0_0                           Pot 0 contains 0 onions (empty)
pot1_0                           Pot 0 contains 1 onion
pot2_0                           Pot 0 contains 2 onions
pot3_0                           Pot 0 contains 3 onions (ready to cook)
pot_finished_0                   Pot 0 has finished cooking and soup is ready
pot0_1                           Pot 1 contains 0 onions (empty)
pot1_1                           Pot 1 contains 1 onion
pot2_1                           Pot 1 contains 2 onions
pot3_1                           Pot 1 contains 3 onions (ready to cook)
pot_finished_1                   Pot 1 has finished cooking and soup is ready
goal_delivered                   A soup has been successfully delivered to the goal
pickup_onion                     Action: controlling agent picks up an onion
put_onion_in_pot                 Action: controlling agent places an onion into a pot
pickup_dish                      Action: controlling agent picks up an empty dish
fill_dish_with_soup              Action: controlling agent fills a dish with soup from a finished pot
deliver_soup                     Action: controlling agent delivers a soup to the goal
place_onion_on_counter           Action: controlling agent places an onion on the counter
place_dish_on_counter            Action: controlling agent places a dish on the counter
empty_hand2                      Other agent is not holding any object
hold_onion2                      Other agent is holding an onion
hold_dish2                       Other agent is holding an empty dish
dish_with_soup2                  Other agent is holding a dish filled with soup




                                                28
References
 [1] Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K Ho, Thomas L Griffiths, Sanjit A Seshia, Pieter Abbeel,
     and Anca Dragan. On the utility of learning about humans for human-AI coordination. In
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pages 5174–5185, 2019.

 [2] Cohere. The command R model (details and application). https://docs.cohere.com/v2/
     docs/command-r, 2024. Accessed: 2025-05-12.

 [3] Patrik O Hoyer, Dominik Janzing, Joris Mooij, Jonas Peters, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Nonlinear
     causal discovery with additive noise models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems (NeurIPS), pages 689–696, 2008.

 [4] Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali
     Razavi, Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, Chrisantha Fernando,
     and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Population based training of neural networks. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1711.09846, 2017.

 [5] Nan Rosemary Ke, Olexa Bilaniuk, Anirudh Goyal, Stefan Bauer, Hugo Larochelle, Bernhard
     Schölkopf, Michael C Mozer, Chris Pal, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning neural causal models
     from unknown interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01075, 2019.

 [6] Yang Li, Shao Zhang, Jichen Sun, Yali Du, Ying Wen, Xinbing Wang, and Wei Pan. Cooperative
     open-ended learning framework for zero-shot coordination. In Proceedings of the International
     Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 20470–20484, 2023.

 [7] Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge University Press, 2009.

 [8] Shaohui Peng, Xing Hu, Rui Zhang, Ke Tang, Jiaming Guo, Qi Yi, Ruizhi Chen, Xishan Zhang,
     Zidong Du, Ling Li, Qi Guo, and Yunji Chen. Causality-driven hierarchical structure discovery
     for reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
     pages 20064–20076, 2022.

 [9] Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schlkopf. Elements of Causal Inference: Founda-
     tions and Learning Algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.

[10] Shuofei Qiao, Runnan Fang, Ningyu Zhang, Yuqi Zhu, Xiang Chen, Shumin Deng, Yong
     Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen. Agent planning with world knowledge
     model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 37, pages
     114843–114871, 2024.

[11] Maximilian Seitzer, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Georg Martius. Causal influence detection for
     improving efficiency in reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems (NeurIPS), pages 22905–22918, 2021.

[12] Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, Prediction, and Search. The
     MIT Press, 2000.

[13] DJ Strouse, Kevin R McKee, Matt Botvinick, Edward Hughes, and Richard Everett. Collaborat-
     ing with humans without human data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
     (NeurIPS), pages 14502–14515, 2021.

[14] Gerald Tesauro. TD-Gammon, a self-teaching backgammon program, achieves master-level
     play. Neural Computation, 6(2):215–219, 1994.

[15] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
     Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
     models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
     2022.

[16] Christopher KI Williams and Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian Processes for Machine
     Learning, volume 2. MIT Press Cambridge, MA, 2006.


                                               29
[17] Ceyao Zhang, Kaijie Yang, Siyi Hu, Zihao Wang, Guanghe Li, Yihang Sun, Cheng Zhang,
     Zhaowei Zhang, Anji Liu, Song-Chun Zhu, et al. Proagent: building proactive cooperative
     agents with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, pages 17591–17599, 2024.
[18] Rui Zhao, Jinming Song, Yufeng Yuan, Haifeng Hu, Yang Gao, Yi Wu, Zhongqian Sun, and
     Wei Yang. Maximum entropy population-based training for zero-shot human-ai coordination.
     In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 6145–6153, 2023.




                                             30
