                                        The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




                                        T HE C OGNITIVE BANDWIDTH B OTTLENECK :
                                        S HIFTING L ONG -H ORIZON AGENT FROM P LANNING
                                        WITH ACTIONS TO P LANNING WITH S CHEMAS

                                         Baixuan Xu1 , Tianshi Zheng1 , Zhaowei Wang1 , Hong Ting TSANG1 ,
                                         Weiqi Wang1 , Tianqing Fang, Yangqiu Song1
                                         1
                                           The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
                                         bxuan@connect.ust.hk, yqsong@cse.ust.hk




arXiv:2510.07091v1 [cs.AI] 8 Oct 2025
                                                                                     A BSTRACT
                                                 Enabling LLMs to effectively operate long-horizon task which requires long-term
                                                 planning and multiple interactions is essential for open-world autonomy. Conven-
                                                 tional methods adopt planning with actions where a executable action list would
                                                 be provided as reference. However, this action representation choice would be
                                                 impractical when the environment action space is combinatorial exploded (e.g.,
                                                 open-ended real world). This naturally leads to a question: As environmental
                                                 action space scales, what is the optimal action representation for long-horizon
                                                 agents? In this paper, we systematically study the effectiveness of two different
                                                 action representations. The first one is conventional planning with actions (PwA)
                                                 which is predominantly adopted for its effectiveness on existing benchmarks. The
                                                 other one is planning with schemas (PwS) which instantiate an action schema into
                                                 action lists (e.g., “move [OBJ] to [OBJ]” → “move apple to desk”) to ensure con-
                                                 cise action space and reliable scalability. This alternative is motivated by its align-
                                                 ment with human cognition and its compliance with environment-imposed action
                                                 format restriction. We propose cognitive bandwidth perspective as a conceptual
                                                 framework to qualitatively understand the differences between these two action
                                                 representations and empirically observe a representation-choice inflection point
                                                 between ALFWorld (∼35 actions) and SciWorld (∼500 actions), which serve as
                                                 evidence of the need for scalable representations. We further conduct controlled
                                                 experiments to study how the location of this inflection point interacts with differ-
                                                 ent model capacities: stronger planning proficiency shifts the inflection rightward,
                                                 whereas better schema instantiation shifts it leftward. Finally, noting the subopti-
                                                 mal performance of PwS agents, we provide an actionable guide for building more
                                                 capable PwS agents for better scalable autonomy.


                                        1   I NTRODUCTION
                                        Humans often make decisions by instantiating abstract action templates into concrete, executable
                                        steps, a process we term planning with schemas (PwS) (Schmidt, 1975). In open-ended, real-world
                                        settings where the action space grows combinatorially, we do not search directly over executable
                                        primitives; instead, we ground a template such as “move [OBJ] to [OBJ]” into a specific action
                                        like “move apple to desk”. This schema-driven mechanism supports generalization from simplified
                                        settings to rich environments with vast or even unbounded action spaces. With recent advances in the
                                        planning capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025;
                                        Bai et al., 2025), numerous LLM-based autonomous agents have been proposed to tackle long-
                                        horizon problems. For example, an agent tasked with characterizing an unknown substance must
                                        decompose a high-level goal into a coherent sequence: acquire the sample, prepare the apparatus,
                                        run the experiments, and synthesize a conclusion. Methodologies such as fine-tuning (Xi et al.,
                                        2025; Zhang et al., 2025; Shinn et al., 2023) and advanced prompting (Zhao et al., 2024a; Wang
                                        et al., 2024) enable these agents to execute plans over multiple interactions more effectively.
                                        However, different from human cognition, most existing agents are designed for planning with
                                        actions (PwA), where the environment provides a list of executable actions from which the agent


                                                                                           1
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




selects one at each step. While effective in many benchmarks, this paradigm faces a scaling chal-
lenge: in complicated environments, the action list becomes intractably long or even innumerable
(e.g., open-ended real scenarios). This overload not only strains the context window but, more criti-
cally, creates a decision-making bottleneck. This leads to a foundational question: As environmental
action space scales, what is the optimal action representation for long-horizon agents?
To answer this question, we compare two competing paradigms. The first is the conventional PwA
approach, which dominates current research and performs well in existing evaluation setups. The
second is our proposed alternative, planning with schemas (PwS), which has been comparatively
underexplored. Another motivation for this alternative choice, aside from the cognitive perspective,
is that interactive environments typically require actions in a structured format. Free-form generation
often violates this constraints, whereas schema-based planning treats action selection as instantiat-
ing vetted templates, producing interface-conformant outputs that scale more reliably. We systemat-
ically compare these paradigms across varying action-space sizes and seek to understand the drivers
of the representation-choice inflection point where the optimal action representation switches.
To formalize the trade-offs between paradigms, we introduce the Cognitive Bandwidth Perspec-
tive: a given LLM possesses a fixed cognitive bandwidth, which PwA and PwS allocate differ-
ently. This is a conceptual scaffold for reasoning about load allocation rather than a quantitative
probe of model capacity. Under PwA, the model bears a heavy Environment Understanding (EU)
burden to interpret noisy observations and parse long action lists while under PwS, this burden shifts
to Schema Instantiation (SI), which demands reasoning to ground templates into valid actions.
Our experiments across four environments of increasing action space scale, TextCraft, WebShop,
ALFWorld, and SciWorld,validate the existence of performance inflection. We observe a critical
representation-choice inflection point: in low-to-medium action spaces (ALFWorld∼35 actions),
PwA outperforms PwS by 33.4% on average, as SI overhead dominates. However, in environments
with lengthy action spaces (SciWorld∼500 actions), this trend inverts. PwS achieves an 8.1% av-
erage advantage as EU load becomes prohibitive. Thus, the optimal action representation is not
universal. PwA suffers from action space scaling and PwS being convincing for scalability.
To further investigate the mechanisms driving this inflection, we design cognitive-load stress tests
that incrementally inject distractor actions into the action list. This perturbation enlarges and adds
noise to the action space, increasing EU burden without altering task semantics, helping us to study
the dynamic of inflection point regarding different models. We find that the location of the inflection
point for specific model is affected by two factors: (i) the model’s agentic proficiency—its ability
to perform agentic planning, proxied by PwA success on ALFWorld without distractors; and (ii)
its schema-instantiation capability, the efficiency with which templates are grounded, evidenced
by PwS success. Our results support that Models with strong agentic proficiency degrade more
slowly as the list grows, shifting the inflection rightward whereas models with strong SI profi-
ciency (e.g., >25% under schemas) incur lower SI overhead, shifting the inflection leftward.
Finally, by recognizing how the inflection point varies with model capability and that PwA is con-
strained by intractably long action lists, we offer empirically grounded guidance for strengthening
PwS and moving the inflection left. Examining contemporary reasoning formats and post-training
recipes, we observe that (i) extending reasoning depth, as in large reasoning models, is gener-
ally helpful but not decisive for PwS when SI remains the bottleneck, and (ii) post-training that
emphasizes multi-turn tool use reduces SI load and shifts the inflection point left.
Our contributions are threefold:

       • We systematically study the optimal action representation problem under environmental
         action-space scaling and propose Cognitive Bandwidth Perspective to provide a conceptual
         framework for understanding trade-off between different action representations.

       • A representation-choice inflection point is discovered empirically, providing evidence for
         the scaling limitations of conventional planning with actions (PwA) and motivates the adop-
         tion of planning with schemas (PwS) for more scalable action representation.

       • We design cognitive load stress test to understand the interplay between model capacity
         and inflection point and thereby provide insightful recommendations for developing more
         capable schema-based agents which could be more reliable to action-space scaling.


                                                  2
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




                                             Spectrum of Environment Complexity
     LOW                                                                                                                                           HIGH




                                                                                   Inflection Point
           TextCraft               WebShop                     ALFWorld                               SciWorld                 Agent in the Wild


             Simple Env                        Median Complexity                                                   High Complexity
                                          Action List > Action Schema                                        Action Schema > Action List


                                                          Cognitive BandWidth

         Action List                                Workflow of Different Paradigms                                             Action List
     [ Move apple 1 to desk 2,   Environment Understanding (EU)               Schema Instantiation (SI)                          Cognitive Load
     Fill bottle 1 with juice,
    Take orange 1 from desk 1,        <History Interaction>
             Look,...]            New Observation: You are in a             Instantiation: [Move apple 1 to
                                   house with desk1, apple1...              desk 1, Move apple 1 to desk 2,
                                                                                        look...]                                 EU           PL DM
        • Intuitive                 Actions: [Action/Schema]                                                           (Long Context Pressure)
        • Lengthy


       Action Schema
                                          Planning (PL)                         Decision Making (DM)                           Action Schema
     [ Move [OBJ] to [OBJ],
                                                                                                                                  Cognitive Load
     Fill [OBJ] with juice,
     Take [OBJ] from [OBJ],
            Look,...]              Thought: To accomplish ...,
                                                                                              Action: Look
                                          I need to ...
                                                                                                                          EU    PL         SI      DM
        • Scalable
                                                                                                                                 (Difficult for LLMs)
        • Challenging
                                          Grounded Action Workflow               Action Schema Workflow




Figure 1: The relationship between environment complexity and agent paradigm effectiveness. In
simple environments, Grounded Actions suffice. As complexity grows past an “inflection point”,
the Action Schema paradigm becomes superior by shifting the cognitive load from processing long
action lists (high EU load) to a challenging but scalable Schema Instantiation (SI) step.


These findings establish an alternative perspective for scaling autonomous agents to increasingly
complex real-world environments. We will make our code open-sourced to foster future research.



2     R ELATED W ORK

LLM-based agents Prior work on constructing LLM-based agents can be broadly classified into
following categories. 1. Prompting and In-Context Learning. These methods leverage instruc-
tions to steer LLM behavior, leading to improved task performance via explicit long reasoning (Yao
et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022), self-reflection to learn from previous errors (Renze & Guven, 2024;
Shinn et al., 2023), long-term planning to organize action sequence (Nayak et al., 2024; Prasad
et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2023), role-playing to incentivizing LLM’s reasoning with personas (Xu
et al., 2024), and multi-agent debate to spur agent’s collective intelligence (Xu et al., 2025a; Du
et al., 2024). This group as methods are simple but effective, exhibiting great transferability across
domains. 2. Training Methods. These approaches adapt the model’s parameters using supervised
fine-tuning (Yuan et al., 2025; Qiao et al., 2024; Xi et al., 2024) where a explicit “golden trajectory”
is provided for agent to immitate or reinforcement learning (Jin et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025b;
Fang et al., 2025) where the agent learn by getting reward from the environment, gradually optimize
its own policy. While often achieving high performance on specific benchmarks, this paradigm is
resource-intensive and the resulting models prune to PwA paradigm, facing scaling challenge.
LLMs in Long Context. While current LLMs exhibit extraordinary capability on short-context
problems, they falter on tasks requiring synthesis of information across long historical context in
either text modality (Zhang et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2025) or multimodality setup (Wang et al., 2025a;
Maharana et al., 2024). One research direction involves multi-agent frameworks (Liu et al., 2025;
Zhao et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2025a) multiple agents work collaboratively. Another approach is to
memorize critical information via either reinforcement learning (Zhou et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2025)
or constructing information database (Chhikara et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025b; Li et al., 2025b), where
a external memory is provided to assist agent reasoning.


                                                                        3
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




3     M ETHODS AND C OGNITIVE BANDWIDTH P ERSPECTIVE

Understanding bottlenecks in multi-turn model–environment interaction is nontrivial. To provide a
systematic perspective of analyzing long-horizon agents, we introduce the Cognitive Bandwidth Per-
spective, a conceptual framework that qualitatively decomposes agent workflows into distinct stages
to diagnose performance limits. This section details our methodology for deriving action schemas
from action lists and formalizes Cognitive Bandwidth Perspective for following investigations.


3.1   D ERIVATION OF ACTION R EPRESENTATIONS

Executable Action List. For ALFWorld and SciWorld, the executable action list is obtained directly
from the environment at each timestep, following standard practice. For WebShop, which does not
natively provide such a list, we generate it by parsing the observation to extract all currently clickable
elements. Finally, for the inherently schema-based TextCraft environment, we choose to only study
the schema-based paradigm due to the relatively low difficulty of the environment, evidenced by
satisfying performance over various LLMs.
Abstract Action Schema Derivation. For TextCraft and WebShop, the action schemas (e.g., craft
[num] [ITEM], click [BUTTON]) are intrinsic to the environments’ design and were used directly.
For ALFWorld and SciWorld, we derive the Table 1: The correlation between action space size
schemas by abstracting the complete grounded and environment complexity. Larger action space
action lists provided by their environments. indicates more complex environment.
Specifically, we replace all object arguments in
the actions with a generic [OBJ] token and col- Environment        TextCraft WebShop ALFWorld SciWorld

lect the set of unique resulting templates. We Action List Length      -      3∼10    30∼40   400∼600
provide the grounded action list size and the Schema List Length      ∼3        2       11       26
length of action schemas in Table 1. The com-
prehensive list of the action schemas used in our experiments is available in Appendix A.


3.2   C OGNITIVE BANDWIDTH P ERSPECTIVE : A C ONCEPTUAL A NALYTIC F RAMEWORK

To investigate the reasoning obstacles for long-horizon agents under different paradigms, we intro-
duce Cognitive Bandwidth Perspective as a conceptual analytic framework for diagnosing how
cognitive load is distributed across stages. This perspective posits that an LLM agent’s performance
is fundamentally constrained by its intrinsic processing capacity (e.g., cognitive bandwidth), which
must be sufficient to handle the cumulative computational demand of a task (e.g., cumulative cog-
nitive load). Accordingly, we use the framework as a qualitative lens to guide experimental design
and interpretation, rather than as a quantitative metric of model’s processing capacity.
Cognitive Bandwidth. We first define Cognitive Bandwidth (B) as a fundamental, latent property
of a given pre-trained LLM (M). It represents the model’s total capacity to hold and manipulate
information, maintain causal chains, and execute instructions within a single, coherent operational
context. We posit that B(M) is a fixed quantity for a particular LLM.
Cognitive Load. Next, we define Cognitive Load (L) as the computational demand a specific stage
of a task imposes on the LLM. To analyze this, we need to decompose an long-horizon agent’s
workflow into discrete stages. We identify two primary workflows:

       • Action-Based Agent: An iterative loop of Environment Understanding (EU) → Plan-
         ning (PL) → Decision Making (DM).
       • Schema-Based Agent: A sequence of EU → PL → Schema Instantiation (SI) → DM.

The most cognitive expensive stages are bolded respectively for different paradigms. All the stages
will contribute to the total cognitive load and the cumulative cognitiveP
                                                                        load (LC ) is the sum of the
loads of all stages in the workflow which could be expressed as LC =      Lstage .
Shifting the Cognitive Burden. The central insight of our perspective lies in how different agents
based on distinct LLMs distribute this cognitive load.


                                                    4
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




For action-based agents, the load is heavily concentrated in the Environment Understanding
(EU) stage. Faced with a long, noisy context and an exhaustive list of possible actions, the agent
must solve a ”needle-in-a-haystack” problem, which severely impairs subsequent reasoning.
Conversely, schema-based agents transfer this burden to the Schema Instantiation (SI) stage.
While this stage demands sophisticated semantic reasoning to ground abstract schemas into valid,
executable actions, it benefits from a cleaner, more structured context provided by clean schema list.
Crucially, we posit that the load of a specific stage (Lstage ) is malleable. While an agent’s total
bandwidth (B) is fixed, targeted training on tool-use or planning tasks can reduce the cognitive load
of corresponding stages, thereby increasing the agent’s overall task-completion capacity.
The Failure Condition. Putting it all together, the perspective predicts a task failure when the
cumulative cognitive load surpasses the model’s cognitive bandwidth:
                                                 X
                             Failure ⇐⇒ LC =         Lstage > B(M)

This framework allows us to conceptualize agent failure not as a random event, but as a predictable
outcome of the interaction between a model’s intrinsic limits and a task’s architectural demands.

4     E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS
This section presents our experimental setup, reports results across four environments spanning
a range of action space complexities, where we observe a representation-choice inflection point
and conducts a behavioral efficiency analysis across multiple LLMs to characterize the behavior
differences between the two action representations.

4.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Environments. Our evaluation testbed comprises TextCraft (Prasad et al., 2024), WebShop (Yao
et al., 2022), ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021), and SciWorld (Wang et al., 2022). This selection
is motivated by the progressively increasing action space complexity across these environments, as
measured by the growing size of their grounded action lists and the number of action schemas.
Evaluation Paradigm. Following the methodology of Yuan et al. (2025), we evaluate agent per-
formance on 100 tasks sampled from each environment. At each decision-making step, the agent is
provided with the complete interaction history for reference and planning. The action information,
either the grounded action list or schemas, is appended to the environment observation, but only
when the set of available actions differs from the previous step, thus ensuring context efficiency.
Based on preliminary observations that trajectories rarely succeed beyond 30 steps, we manually set
this as the maximum interaction round for any given episode. For our evaluation metric, we adhere
to the standard metrics established in the original benchmark papers: success rate for ALFWorld and
average reward for all other tasks. Details of environments and interaction protocols are presented
in Appendix B and information regarding selected models are provided in Appendix C.

4.2   I DENTIFYING THE R EPRESENTATION P ERFORMANCE I NFLECTION P OINT

Our cross-environmental analysis, presented in table 2, substantiates the principle that the selection
of the action representation ought to be conditioned on the action space complexity of the task en-
vironment. Particularly, we identify a clear, non-monotonic performance curve as we traverse the
complexity spectrum. In environments of low-to-moderate complexity (e.g. WebShop, ALFWorld),
where the action space remains manageable, explicitly enumerating executable actions is superior.
This approach bypasses the cognitive overhead of schema instantiation and benefit from a clean and
concise environment observation, directly boosting performance. However, this advantage erodes
and ultimately reverses in the high-complexity regime of SciWorld. Here, the combinatorial ex-
plosion of possible actions makes an exhaustive action list not only computationally expensive but
also detrimental to performance. The action space size and context history can cumulatively exceed
the model’s context window and introduce overwhelming distracting noise. In this scenario, the
abstraction afforded by a concise set of action schemas becomes essential, enabling the agent to
reason effectively over an otherwise intractable decision space. This trade-off pinpoints a critical


                                                  5
      The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




                                              Table 2: Model performance on environments of different action-space complexity.
                                                                                   TextCraft                             WebShop                                 ALFWorld                              SciWorld
                                                  Model
                                                                         Actions    Schema        Delta     Actions         Schema       Delta        Actions         Schema      Delta    Actions        Schema         Delta

                                                                                                                 Large Language Models

                              Qwen2.5-7B                                     -         26.0           -          22.0         28.5           6.5          49.0         27.0       -22.0       8.0            8.2             0.2
                              Qwen3-235B-A22B                                -         95.0           -          23.0         27.4           4.4          58.0         5.0        -53.0      43.3            62.2            18.9
                              Llama-4-Scout                                  -         65.0           -          17.2         23.3           6.1          27.0         12.0       -15.0      26.9            41.4            14.5
                              DeepSeek-V3                                    -         59.0           -          24.7         13.3       -11.4            50.0         7.0        -43.0      22.0            25.5            3.5
                              Kimi-K2                                        -         83.0           -          31.6         27.2           -4.4         69.0         35.0       -34.0      40.7            52.9            12.2
                              Minimax-01                                     -         15.0           -          13.2         10.0           -3.2         29.0         6.0        -23.0      19.3            28.7            9.4

                              GPT-4.1-mini                                   -         96.0           -          20.3         14.6           -5.7         44.0         12.0       -32.0      46.0            44.8            -1.2
                              GPT-4.1                                        -         100.0          -          27.1         23.9           -3.2         61.0         16.0       -45.0      43.3            62.2            18.9
                              Gemini-2.0-flash                               -         76.0           -          26.8         17.3           -9.5         40.0         1.0        -39.0      34.5            38.9            4.4

                                                                                                                 Large Reasoning Models

                              DeepSeek-R1                                    -         97.0           -          36.7         36.0           -0.7         65.0         14.0       -51.0      48.4            46.9            -1.5
                              Seed-OSS-36B                                   -         96.0           -          2.0          0.0            -2.0         48.0         25.0       -23.0      49.5            67.4            17.9
                              Qwen3-235B-A22BThinking                        -         96.0           -          39.7         20.0       -19.7            47.0         23.0       -24.0      47.7            67.3            19.6
                              LongCat                                        -         94.0           -          20.3         27.6           7.3          61.0         41.0       -20.0      41.1            47.8            6.7

                              GPT5-mini                                      -         88.0           -          11.7         24.7       13.0             19.0         0.0        -19.0      36.0            20.5         -15.5
                              Gemini-2.5-Flash                               -         88.0           -          18.0         15.0           -3.0         40.0         8.0        -32.0      57.2            69.1            11.9
                              Claude-4.0-Sonnet                              -         98.0           -          64.0         64.0           0.0          87.0         27.0       -60.0      60.2            69.1            8.9


                                                                                 Exploration Efficiency Comparison over Paradigms                                                                         Action-Based Error
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Schema-Based Error
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Schema > Action




Large Language Models
                                                    Alfworld - Invalid                            Sciworld - Invalid                                 Alfworld - Repetitive                           Sciworld - Repetitive
                                      0.35
                                      0.30




                         Error Rate
                                      0.25
                                      0.20
                                      0.15
                                      0.10
                                      0.05
                                      0.00
                                         dpsk      i-K2    T4.1        .0
                                                                      h2                dpsk     i-K2       .1
                                                                                                           T4           .0
                                                                                                                       h2                dpsk        i-K2        .1
                                                                                                                                                                 T4     h2
                                                                                                                                                                            .0             dpsk       i-K2     T4  .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         h2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .0
                                                  Kim     GP      las                           Kim       GP       las                              Kim      GP        las                          Kim      GP         las
                                                                 nif                                             nif                                                  nif                                           nif
                                                               mi                                              mi                                                 mi                                                mi
                                                            Ge                                              Ge                                                   Ge                                              Ge




Large Reasoning Models
                                                   Alfworld - Invalid                            Sciworld - Invalid                                 Alfworld - Repetitive                           Sciworld - Repetitive
                                      0.35
                                      0.30




                         Error Rate
                                      0.25
                                      0.20
                                      0.15
                                      0.10
                                      0.05
                                      0.00
                                             .5     R1       t
                                                            Ca    SS                       .5     R1         t
                                                                                                            Ca     SS                        .5       R1          t
                                                                                                                                                                 Ca    SS                    .5       R1        Ca  t   SS
                                      lash2        ek     Lo         -36 B             lash2     ek       Lo          -36 B            lash2         ek     Lo            -36 B           lash2      ek      Lo            -36 B
                                              ep            ng                                 ep           ng                                     ep         ng                                  ep           ng
                            mi                  se                -O               mi            se               -O                 mi              se               -O             mi             se                  -O
                              nif            De              Se
                                                                 ed                  nif   De                Se
                                                                                                                 ed                    nif     De                  ed
                                                                                                                                                                  Se                   nif    De                    ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Se
                     Ge                                                           Ge                                              Ge                                               Ge


      Figure 2: Comparison of agent behaviors in ALFWorld and SciWorld, two environments situated on
      either side of the observed complexity inflection point.


      representation-choice inflection point in task action space size, situated between ALFWorld
      and SciWorld. Below this choice inflection point, planning with actions is optimal; above it,
      planning with schemas is paramount for effective and scalable reasoning.

      4.3                                PARADIGM B EHAVIORAL C OMPARISON VIA E XPLORATION E FFICIENCY

      To understand the underlying reasons for the performance shift at the inflection point, we dissect
      agent behavior by quantifying the agent exploration efficiency, following Zhang et al. (2025). we
      quantify two critical failure modes: (1) Invalid Actions, where an agent generates syntactically mal-
      formed commands, and (2) Repetitive Actions, defined as redundant steps that fail to advance the
      task. We systematically compare the planning with actions and planning with schemas paradigms by
      measuring the prevalence of these failures in agent trajectories across the ALFWorld and SciWorld


                                                                                                                              6
        The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




                                                                              Model Performance Degradation under Cognitive Load Attack
                                                                                                                   LLMs                                                                            LRMs
                                                            0.8
                                                                               MiniMax-01                                                    Llama-4                                          Gemini-2.5-Flash


Limited Agentic Proficiency
                                                                                          Performance                                                  Performance                                          Performance
                                                            0.7                           Schema Baseline (0.06)                                       Schema Baseline (0.12)                               Schema Baseline (0.08)
                                                                                          Linear Trend                                                 Linear Trend                                         Linear Trend
                                                            0.6




           and
                                                            0.5

                                             Score
                                                            0.4
                                                            0.3



 Poor Schema Instantiation
                                                            0.2
                                                            0.1
                                                            0.0 Drop: -0.18                                               Drop: -0.24                                           Drop: -0.12

                                                            0.8
                                                                                GPT-4.1                                                DeepSeek-V3-0324                                      DeepSeek-R1-0528




 Robust Agentic Proficiency Robust Agentic Proficiency
                                                                                          Performance                                                  Performance                                          Performance
                                                            0.7                           Schema Baseline (0.16)                                       Schema Baseline (0.07)                               Schema Baseline (0.14)
                                                                                          Linear Trend                                                 Linear Trend                                         Linear Trend
                                                            0.6
                                                            0.5

                                             Score
                                                            0.4
                                                            0.3




             and                         and
                                                            0.2
                                                            0.1
                                                            0.0 Drop: -0.10                                               Drop: -0.21                                           Drop: -0.16

                                                            0.8
                                                                               Qwen2.5-7b                                                Kimi-K2-0711                                     LongCat-Flash-Chat
                                                                                          Performance                                                  Performance                                          Performance




Effective Schema Instantiation Poor Schema Instantiation
                                                            0.7                           Schema Baseline (0.27)                                       Schema Baseline (0.45)                               Schema Baseline (0.41)
                                                                                          Linear Trend                                                 Linear Trend                                         Linear Trend
                                                            0.6
                                                            0.5

                                             Score
                                                            0.4
                                                            0.3
                                                            0.2
                                                            0.1
                                                            0.0 Drop: -0.42                                               Drop: -0.27                                           Drop: -0.29
                                                                5         6     7     8            9         10           5        6         7     8            9         10    5        6        7     8            9         10
                                                                                                                     Action Space Size (log scale)
        Figure 3: Effect of action-space size and environment complexity on success rate. In low-
        complexity settings (e.g., baseline ALFWorld), planning with actions (PwA) outperforms planning
        with schemas (PwS). As the action list expands with distractors, PwA performance declines and can
        be overtaken by PwS for sufficiently capable models, revealing the representation inflection point.



        environments over various models. The results reveal a clear dynamic that explains the perfor-
        mance trade-off. In the moderate-complexity environment of ALFWorld, the planning with actions
        paradigm is unequivocally superior, yielding significantly lower invalid and repetitive action rates.
        This suggests that when the action space is manageable, the cognitive cost of schema instantiation
        (LSI ) is an unnecessary burden that leads to frequent reasoning errors and wasteful exploration.
        Conversely, in the high-complexity setting of SciWorld, this dynamic is inverted. Here, the cognitive
        burden shifts from schema instantiation to processing an overwhelmingly large grounded action list
        (LEU ). For most models, the schema-based paradigm becomes more effective. This finding demon-
        strates that schemas provide a superior mechanism for managing extreme combinatorial complexity.
        By focusing the agent’s reasoning on a tractable set of 26 templates instead of an intractable list of
        hundreds of actions, schemas enable more efficient decision-making, corroborating the transfer from
        planning with actions to planning with schemas when the environmental complexity scales. The tra-
        jectory analysis is done via rule-based filtering and Kimi-K2, details are shown in Appendix D.


         5                                                 D ETERMINANTS OF THE R EPRESENTATION I NFLECTION P OINT

        To probe the dynamic of this inflection point regarding different model capabilities, we meticulously
        design cognitive load stress test experiments over various LLMs by increasingly inject invalid ac-
        tions into executable action list to escalate the EU load imposed on LLMs to qualitatively discover
        how model capabilities influence the position of the inflection point.We conduct the experiment in
        ALFWorld, the environment close to the action space complexity of the inflection point.


                                                                                                                                         7
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




Starting from the native action space (approximately 32 valid actions), we progressively augment
the candidate list by injecting synthetically generated distractor actions until the prompt contains
1,024 actions in total. Distractors are syntactically plausible yet non-executable or task-irrelevant,
so they cannot complete the task. This preserves task semantics and ensures that any performance
degradation arises from screening a longer, noisier action list rather than from altered task structure.
Noisy action examples are provided in Appendix E. We intentionally exceed SciWorld’s grounded
action-list length (∼500 actions) because SciWorld’s actions are largely executable and semantically
similar, hence intrinsically more confusable, whereas our distractors, by design, are easier to dismiss.
Using only 500 distractors would therefore under-approximate the EU burden; increasing the list to
1,024 compensates for their lower confusability and better approximates the effective EU load of
high-complexity settings. Although distractors should in principle be filtered out, our hypothesis is
that the sheer volume of candidates induces a “needle-in-a-haystack” burden on EU.
As shown in Figure 3, success rate declines monotonically as the action list grows. This trend is
consistent with the Cognitive Bandwidth Perspective: enlarging the action space increases EU load,
which in turn degrades PwA performance even when distractors are non-executable. The result
strengthens the interpretation that the representation-choice inflection point could be driven by EU
overload in PwA rather than by changes in task semantics.
However, beyond performance degradation of individual models, model’s performance gap between
paradigm differences exhibit different dynamics, where some models still perform superior with ex-
haustive actions while others underperform schema-based agents when the action space size is huge.
Based on our observation, we manually categorize models across two axes. (i) Model’s agentic pro-
ficiency—represented by it’s performance under PwA. Specifically, a model without noisy actions
perform better than 50% success rate in ALFWorld is considered as proficient. (ii) Model’s schema
instantiation capability—models under PwS score above 25% could be considered as effective, con-
sidering most of the models exhibit limited schema induction ability. According to our classification,
contemporary models could be categorized in to three kinds, representing different mechanisms of
model capability driving the representation-choice inflection point leftward or rightward.
Category 1: Limited agentic proficiency and poor schema instantiation capability. Models in
this category, exhibit markedly low performance on ALFWorld under both the action-based and
schema-based paradigms. Their performance also demonstrates a lack of robustness when subjected
to cognitive load test. This dual failure indicates a fundamental deficiency in capabilities required for
long-horizon tasks. These models struggle with the entire agentic pipeline, from understanding the
environment and formulating a plan to inducing a task schema and making decisions. Consequently,
every stage of a long-horizon task imposes a substantial cognitive burden. The failure condition is
met as the LC from all cognitive components overwhelms the model’s capacity as follows:
                              LC = LEU + LPL + LSI + LDM > B(M)
With this deficency in handling long-horizon tasks and consequently high cognitive load by each
stage of the task, these models rarely benefit from PwS; the inflection point shifts rightward,
making PwA the preferable representation across a wider complexity range.
Category 2: Robust agentic proficiency and poor schema instantiation capability. This cat-
egory includes models that demonstrate strong performance in the action-based paradigm but fail
significantly in the schema-based paradigm. Even under the most intensive cognitive load test, their
action-based performance remains superior, highlighting their robust agentic proficiency for long-
horizon planning. The significant disparity in performance between the two paradigms points to a
fragile or underdeveloped schema instantiation capability. For these models, navigating and under-
standing fuzzy or complex environments does not impose a prohibitive cognitive load. However, the
process of identifying interactable objects, combining them with approriate schemas, and instanti-
ating that schema into an executable actions becomes an insurmountable challenge. This focused
bottleneck leads to failure, where the cognitive load is dominated by the schema-related processes:
                                     LC ≈ LSI + LDM > B(M)

Given robust agentic proficiency but poor schema instantiation capability, the inflection point
also shifts rightward. An explicit executable action list remains optimal up to higher complexities.
Category 3: Robust agentic proficiency and effective schema instantiation capability. Mod-
els in this final category possess both robust agentic decision-making abilities and effective schema


                                                   8
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




induction mechanisms. They achieve strong performance in the action-based paradigm and demon-
strate notable efficacy when planning with schemas. A key characteristic of these models is their
response to escalating cognitive load. As the cognitive load attack intensifies, the performance of
the action-based agents gradually degrades, to the point where the schema-based agents may outper-
form them. This suggests that the cognitive load associated with schema instantiation is comparable
to that of understanding a noisy environment from raw inputs. These models can handle either load
most of the time, indicating a mature and balanced set of agentic capabilities. Task failure is only met
occasionally and is not systemic. The failure condition is therefore met under specific circumstances
where one of these components becomes particularly demanding:
                             LC ≈ LSI + LDM or LEU + LDM > B(M)
With balanced capabilities, the inflection point shifts leftward: PwS becomes favorable earlier
as complexity scales for these family of models.

6    W HAT M AKES C APABLE AGENTS P LANNING WITH S CHEMA

With the inflection point tied to model capability and PwA limited by intractably long action lists,
we focus on improving PwS to shift the inflection left and make schema-based planning broadly
viable. Below, we outline empirically supported arguments that could serve as a actionable insight
towards building more capable schema-based agents.
Long Reasoning: Beneficial, but Not Critical While models with enhanced long-reasoning capa-
bilities generally exhibit improved task performance, this advantage does not directly translate to
a greater aptitude for schema instantiation. Consequently, when the task mandates planning with
schemas, the performance gains are marginal. This finding suggests that although a greater reason-
ing depth could expand an LLM’s cognitive bandwidth, this enhancement is insufficient to overcome
the core deficiency. If the fundamental capability for schema instantiation is lacking, this bottleneck
will persist and lead to task failure. Thus, we conclude that long-reasoning capability, while
generally advantageous, is not the decisive factor in mastering PwS.
The key recipe: post-training for multi-turn tool use We argue that the training methodology of
an LLM plays the critical role. Specifically, a specialized post-training paradigm can reduce the cog-
nitive load imposed by schema instantiation, enabling the model to operate effectively when plan-
ning with schemas. For LLMs like Kimi-K2 (Bai et al., 2025) and LongCat (MeituanLongCatTeam
et al., 2025), training that incorporates heavy agentic reinforcement learning with multi-turn tool-use
data appears to distinguish them from other contemporary models. Particularly, Kimi-K2 manually
collects more than 3000 MCP tools from web repositories and synthetically generate more than
20000 tools across diverse domains. Following that, a lot of agents are assigned with different set of
tools to generate task and trajectories of different difficulties for further tool-use post training needs.
Similar training procedures are also found in the technical report of Longcat. Their outstanding
performance on complicated tool-use benchmarks like τ -bench (Yao et al., 2024), τ 2 -bench (Barres
et al., 2025), and ACEBench (Chen et al., 2025) further validate this. Since these multi-turn tool-
use resources require the model to fill in particular parameters for a tool to be executed to obtain
further results. We posit that this skill, learned from populating structured tool calls, can be seam-
lessly transferred to the long-horizon task of schema instantiation, thereby reducing the cognitive
load required at this stage. Hence, we contend that enhancing LLMs through post-training with
multi-turn, tool-use-focused agentic training is a fundamental and impactful direction for the
future development of agents under PwS.

7    C ONCLUSION

We systematically investigated the optimal action representation for long-horizon agents as environ-
mental action space scales, focusing on two action representations, PwA and PwS. To understand
the differences between conventional PwA and our proposed alternative PwS, we introduce the Cog-
nitive Bandwidth Perspective, which decomposes agent workflows into distinct stages. Framed as
a qualitative lens rather than a measurable construct, this perspective helps explain when and why
PwS scales better. Empirically, across four environments of increasing action-space size, we ob-
serve an inflection point between ALFWorld (∼35 actions) and SciWorld (∼500 actions). Below


                                                    9
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




this regime, PwA is preferable because SI overhead dominates; above it, PwS is superior as the EU
burden of parsing long, noisy action lists becomes prohibitive, indicating that the optimal repre-
sentation is contingent on scale and that PwS offers better asymptotic scalability, becoming better
action representation for real world autonomy. We perform cognitive-load stress test by injecting
distractors into ALFWorld to probe mechanism and observe that the inflection location shifts with
two capability axes. Only models with effective SI shift the inflection leftward, making PwS viable
over a broader complexity range. Based on our experiment results and the training technique of var-
ious models, we provide actionable insights for shifting the inflection leftward and enables scalable
agents: post-training that emphasizes multi-turn tool could be essential.

E THICS S TATEMENT
We affirm our commitment to the ICLR Code of Ethics. Our research does not involve human
subjects or the collection of new personally identifiable information. We uses only public, text-based
simulators (TextCraft, WebShop, ALFWorld, SciWorld) and off-the-shelf models for inference-only
evaluation. All the prompts used in this study are appended in the appendix and no harmful content is
involved. We emphasize that the Cognitive Bandwidth Perspective is a qualitative lens and simulator
results may not transfer to open-world deployment; any real-world use requires additional alignment,
monitoring, and access control.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
All LLM evaluations in this work were conducted via public APIs, specifically using the Open-
Router platforms, with the total experimental cost estimated at 5,000 USD. Details regarding model
selection are illustrated in Appendix C. We provide all prompt templates and system implementa-
tions in Appendix to facilitate full reproducibility of our experiments. All code and data will be
publicly released to foster future research.

R EFERENCES
Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Jo-
  han Schalkwyk, Andrew M. Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, David Silver, Slav Petrov, Melvin
  Johnson, Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, Amelia Glaese, Jilin Chen, Emily Pitler, Tim-
  othy P. Lillicrap, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, James Molloy, Michael Isard, Paul Ronald
  Barham, Tom Hennigan, Benjamin Lee, Fabio Viola, Malcolm Reynolds, Yuanzhong Xu, Ryan
  Doherty, Eli Collins, Clemens Meyer, Eliza Rutherford, Erica Moreira, Kareem Ayoub, Megha
  Goel, George Tucker, Enrique Piqueras, Maxim Krikun, Iain Barr, Nikolay Savinov, Ivo Dani-
  helka, Becca Roelofs, Anaı̈s White, Anders Andreassen, Tamara von Glehn, Lakshman Yagati,
  Mehran Kazemi, Lucas Gonzalez, Misha Khalman, Jakub Sygnowski, and et al. Gemini: A fam-
  ily of highly capable multimodal models. CoRR, abs/2312.11805, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.
  2312.11805. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2312.11805.
Yifan Bai, Yiping Bao, Guanduo Chen, Jiahao Chen, Ningxin Chen, Ruijue Chen, Yanru Chen,
  Yuankun Chen, Yutian Chen, Zhuofu Chen, Jialei Cui, Hao Ding, Mengnan Dong, Angang Du,
  Chenzhuang Du, Dikang Du, Yulun Du, Yu Fan, Yichen Feng, Kelin Fu, Bofei Gao, Hongcheng
  Gao, Peizhong Gao, Tong Gao, Xinran Gu, Longyu Guan, Haiqing Guo, Jianhang Guo, Hao
  Hu, Xiaoru Hao, Tianhong He, Weiran He, Wenyang He, Chao Hong, Yangyang Hu, Zhenxing
  Hu, Weixiao Huang, Zhiqi Huang, Zihao Huang, Tao Jiang, Zhejun Jiang, Xinyi Jin, Yongsheng
  Kang, Guokun Lai, Cheng Li, Fang Li, Haoyang Li, Ming Li, Wentao Li, Yanhao Li, Yiwei
  Li, Zhaowei Li, Zheming Li, Hongzhan Lin, Xiaohan Lin, Zongyu Lin, Chengyin Liu, Chenyu
  Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Jingyuan Liu, Junqi Liu, Liang Liu, Shaowei Liu, T. Y. Liu, Tianwei Liu,
  Weizhou Liu, Yangyang Liu, Yibo Liu, Yiping Liu, Yue Liu, Zhengying Liu, Enzhe Lu, Lijun Lu,
  Shengling Ma, Xinyu Ma, Yingwei Ma, Shaoguang Mao, Jie Mei, Xin Men, Yibo Miao, Siyuan
  Pan, Yebo Peng, Ruoyu Qin, Bowen Qu, Zeyu Shang, Lidong Shi, Shengyuan Shi, Feifan Song,
  Jianlin Su, Zhengyuan Su, Xinjie Sun, Flood Sung, Heyi Tang, Jiawen Tao, Qifeng Teng, Chensi
  Wang, Dinglu Wang, Feng Wang, and Haiming Wang. Kimi K2: open agentic intelligence.
  CoRR, abs/2507.20534, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2507.20534. URL https://doi.org/
  10.48550/arXiv.2507.20534.


                                                 10
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




Victor Barres, Honghua Dong, Soham Ray, Xujie Si, and Karthik Narasimhan. τ 2 -bench: Evaluat-
  ing conversational agents in a dual-control environment. CoRR, abs/2506.07982, 2025. doi: 10.
  48550/ARXIV.2506.07982. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.07982.

Chen Chen, Xinlong Hao, Weiwen Liu, Xu Huang, Xingshan Zeng, Shuai Yu, Dexun Li, Shuai
  Wang, Weinan Gan, Yuefeng Huang, Wulong Liu, Xinzhi Wang, Defu Lian, Baoqun Yin,
  Yasheng Wang, and Wu Liu. Acebench: Who wins the match point in tool learning? CoRR,
  abs/2501.12851, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2501.12851. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2501.12851.

Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. Mem0: Build-
  ing production-ready AI agents with scalable long-term memory. CoRR, abs/2504.19413, 2025.
  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2504.19413. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.
  19413.

DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Cheng-
  gang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang,
  Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting
  Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang, Haowei Zhang, Honghui
  Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Li, Hui Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian Liang, Jianzhong Guo, Ji-
  aqi Ni, Jiashi Li, Jiawei Wang, Jin Chen, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong
  Li, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong, Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean
  Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li,
  Miaojun Wang, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian,
  Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang, Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao Zhu, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du,
  R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu
  Zhang, Ruyi Chen, S. S. Li, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaoqing Wu,
  Shengfeng Ye, Shirong Ma, Shiyu Wang, Shuang Zhou, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting
  Pan, T. Wang, Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun, W. L. Xiao, and Wangding Zeng. Deepseek-
  v3 technical report. CoRR, abs/2412.19437, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2412.19437. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.19437.

DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu,
  Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaokang Zhang, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F. Wu,
  Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Zhuoshu Li, Ziyi Gao, Aixin Liu, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao
  Wu, Bei Feng, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan,
  Damai Dai, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao,
  Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang, Honghui Ding,
  Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Qu, Hui Li, Jianzhong Guo, Jiashi Li, Jiawei Wang, Jingchang
  Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, J. L. Cai, Jiaqi Ni, Jian Liang, Jin Chen, Kai
  Dong, Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang,
  Liang Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang,
  Minghui Tang, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peng Zhang,
  Qiancheng Wang, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang,
  R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruyi Chen, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shengfeng Ye,
  Shiyu Wang, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, and S. S. Li. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing
  reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2501.12948, 2025. doi: 10.
  48550/ARXIV.2501.12948. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2501.12948.

Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving
  factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. In Forty-first Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024. Open-
  Review.net, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=zj7YuTE4t8.

Tianqing Fang, Zhisong Zhang, Xiaoyang Wang, Rui Wang, Can Qin, Yuxuan Wan, Jun-Yu Ma,
  Ce Zhang, Jiaqi Chen, Xiyun Li, Hongming Zhang, Haitao Mi, and Dong Yu. Cognitive kernel-
  pro: A framework for deep research agents and agent foundation models training. CoRR,
  abs/2508.00414, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2508.00414. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2508.00414.


                                              11
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and Jiawei Han. Search-
  r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. CoRR,
  abs/2503.09516, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2503.09516. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2503.09516.
Weizhen Li, Jianbo Lin, Zhuosong Jiang, Jingyi Cao, Xinpeng Liu, Jiayu Zhang, Zhenqiang Huang,
 Qianben Chen, Weichen Sun, Qiexiang Wang, Hongxuan Lu, Tianrui Qin, Chenghao Zhu, Yi Yao,
 Shuying Fan, Xiaowan Li, Tiannan Wang, Pai Liu, King Zhu, He Zhu, Dingfeng Shi, Piaohong
 Wang, Yeyi Guan, Xiangru Tang, Minghao Liu, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, Jian Yang, Jiaheng Liu,
 Ge Zhang, and Wangchunshu Zhou. Chain-of-agents: End-to-end agent foundation models via
 multi-agent distillation and agentic RL. CoRR, abs/2508.13167, 2025a. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.
 2508.13167. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2508.13167.
Zhiyu Li, Shichao Song, Chenyang Xi, Hanyu Wang, Chen Tang, Simin Niu, Ding Chen, Ji-
  awei Yang, Chunyu Li, Qingchen Yu, Jihao Zhao, Yezhaohui Wang, Peng Liu, Zehao Lin,
  Pengyuan Wang, Jiahao Huo, Tianyi Chen, Kai Chen, Kehang Li, Zhen Tao, Junpeng Ren,
  Huayi Lai, Hao Wu, Bo Tang, Zhenren Wang, Zhaoxin Fan, Ningyu Zhang, Linfeng Zhang,
  Junchi Yan, Mingchuan Yang, Tong Xu, Wei Xu, Huajun Chen, Haofeng Wang, Hongkang
  Yang, Wentao Zhang, Zhi-Qin John Xu, Siheng Chen, and Feiyu Xiong. Memos: A memory
  OS for AI system. CoRR, abs/2507.03724, 2025b. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2507.03724. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.03724.
Zijun Liu, Zhennan Wan, Peng Li, Ming Yan, Ji Zhang, Fei Huang, and Yang Liu. Scaling ex-
  ternal knowledge input beyond context windows of llms via multi-agent collaboration. CoRR,
  abs/2505.21471, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2505.21471. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2505.21471.
Adyasha Maharana, Dong-Ho Lee, Sergey Tulyakov, Mohit Bansal, Francesco Barbieri, and Yuwei
  Fang. Evaluating very long-term conversational memory of LLM agents. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre
  Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2024, Bangkok, Thailand, August
  11-16, 2024, pp. 13851–13870. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. doi: 10.18653/
  V1/2024.ACL-LONG.747. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.
  747.
MeituanLongCatTeam, Bayan, Bei Li, Bingye Lei, Bo Wang, Bolin Rong, Chao Wang, Chao
 Zhang, Chen Gao, Chen Zhang, Cheng Sun, Chengcheng Han, Chenguang Xi, Chi Zhang, Chong
 Peng, Chuan Qin, Chuyu Zhang, Cong Chen, Congkui Wang, Dan Ma, Daoru Pan, Defei Bu,
 Dengchang Zhao, Deyang Kong, Dishan Liu, Feiye Huo, Fengcun Li, Fubao Zhang, Gan Dong,
 Gang Liu, Gang Xu, Ge Li, Guoqiang Tan, Guoyuan Lin, Haihang Jing, Haomin Fu, Haonan Yan,
 Haoxing Wen, Haozhe Zhao, Hong Liu, Hongmei Shi, Hongyan Hao, Hongyin Tang, Huantian
 Lv, Hui Su, Jiacheng Li, Jiahao Liu, Jiahuan Li, Jiajun Yang, Jiaming Wang, Jian Yang, Jian-
 chao Tan, Jiaqi Sun, Jiaqi Zhang, Jiawei Fu, Jiawei Yang, Jiaxi Hu, Jiayu Qin, Jingang Wang,
 Jiyuan He, Jun Kuang, Junhui Mei, Kai Liang, Ke He, Kefeng Zhang, Keheng Wang, Keqing He,
 Liang Gao, Liang Shi, Lianhui Ma, Lin Qiu, Lingbin Kong, Lingtong Si, Linkun Lyu, Linsen
 Guo, Liqi Yang, Lizhi Yan, Mai Xia, Man Gao, Manyuan Zhang, Meng Zhou, Mengxia Shen,
 Mingxiang Tuo, Mingyang Zhu, Peiguang Li, Peng Pei, Peng Zhao, Pengcheng Jia, Pingwei Sun,
 Qi Gu, Qianyun Li, Qingyuan Li, Qiong Huang, Qiyuan Duan, Ran Meng, Rongxiang Weng,
 Ruichen Shao, Rumei Li, Shizhe Wu, Shuai Liang, Shuo Wang, Suogui Dang, Tao Fang, Tao
 Li, Tefeng Chen, Tianhao Bai, Tianhao Zhou, Tingwen Xie, Wei He, Wei Huang, Wei Liu, Wei
 Shi, Wei Wang, Wei Wu, Weikang Zhao, Wen Zan, Wenjie Shi, Xi Nan, Xi Su, Xiang Li, Xi-
 ang Mei, Xiangyang Ji, Xiangyu Xi, Xiangzhou Huang, Xianpeng Li, Xiao Fu, Xiao Liu, Xiao
 Wei, Xiaodong Cai, Xiaolong Chen, Xiaoqing Liu, Xiaotong Li, Xiaowei Shi, Xiaoyu Li, Xili
 Wang, Xin Chen, Xing Hu, Xingyu Miao, Xinyan He, Xuemiao Zhang, Xueyuan Hao, Xuezhi
 Cao, Xunliang Cai, Xurui Yang, Yan Feng, Yang Bai, Yang Chen, Yang Yang, Yaqi Huo, Yerui
 Sun, Yifan Lu, Yifan Zhang, Yipeng Zang, Yitao Zhai, Yiyang Li, Yongjing Yin, Yongkang Lv,
 Yongwei Zhou, Yu Yang, Yuchen Xie, Yueqing Sun, Yuewen Zheng, Yuhua Wei, Yulei Qian, Yun-
 fan Liang, Yunfang Tai, Yunke Zhao, Zeyang Yu, Zhao Zhang, Zhaohua Yang, Zhenchao Zhang,
 Zhikang Xia, Zhiye Zou, Zhizhao Zeng, Zhongda Su, Zhuofan Chen, Zijian Zhang, Ziwen Wang,
 Zixu Jiang, Zizhe Zhao, Zongyu Wang, and Zunhai Su. Longcat-flash technical report, 2025.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.01322.


                                              12
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




MiniMax, Aonian Li, Bangwei Gong, Bo Yang, Boji Shan, Chang Liu, Cheng Zhu, Chunhao
 Zhang, Congchao Guo, Da Chen, Dong Li, Enwei Jiao, Gengxin Li, Guojun Zhang, Haohai Sun,
 Houze Dong, Jiadai Zhu, Jiaqi Zhuang, Jiayuan Song, Jin Zhu, Jingtao Han, Jingyang Li, Jun-
 bin Xie, Junhao Xu, Junjie Yan, Kaishun Zhang, Kecheng Xiao, Kexi Kang, Le Han, Leyang
 Wang, Lianfei Yu, Liheng Feng, Lin Zheng, Linbo Chai, Long Xing, Meizhi Ju, Mingyuan
 Chi, Mozhi Zhang, Peikai Huang, Pengcheng Niu, Pengfei Li, Pengyu Zhao, Qi Yang, Qidi
 Xu, Qiexiang Wang, Qin Wang, Qiuhui Li, Ruitao Leng, Shengmin Shi, Shuqi Yu, Sichen Li,
 Songquan Zhu, Tao Huang, Tianrun Liang, Weigao Sun, Weixuan Sun, Weiyu Cheng, Wenkai
 Li, Xiangjun Song, Xiao Su, Xiaodong Han, Xinjie Zhang, Xinzhu Hou, Xu Min, Xun Zou,
 Xuyang Shen, Yan Gong, Yingjie Zhu, Yipeng Zhou, Yiran Zhong, Yongyi Hu, Yuanxiang
 Fan, Yue Yu, Yufeng Yang, Yuhao Li, Yunan Huang, Yunji Li, Yunpeng Huang, Yunzhi Xu,
 Yuxin Mao, Zehan Li, Zekang Li, Zewei Tao, Zewen Ying, Zhaoyang Cong, Zhen Qin, Zhen-
 hua Fan, Zhihang Yu, Zhuo Jiang, and Zijia Wu. Minimax-01: Scaling foundation models with
 lightning attention. CoRR, abs/2501.08313, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2501.08313. URL
 https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2501.08313.

Siddharth Nayak, Adelmo Morrison Orozco, Marina Ten Have, Jackson Zhang, Vittal Thiru-
  malai, Darren Chen, Aditya Kapoor, Eric Robinson, Karthik Gopalakrishnan, James Har-
  rison, Anuj Mahajan, Brian Ichter, and Hamsa Balakrishnan. Long-horizon planning for
  multi-agent robots in partially observable environments. In Amir Globersons, Lester Mackey,
  Danielle Belgrave, Angela Fan, Ulrich Paquet, Jakub M. Tomczak, and Cheng Zhang (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 -
  15, 2024, 2024. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/
  7d6e85e88495104442af94c98e899659-Abstract-Conference.html.

OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report. CoRR, abs/2303.08774, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2303.08774.
  URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774.

Archiki Prasad, Alexander Koller, Mareike Hartmann, Peter Clark, Ashish Sabharwal, Mo-
  hit Bansal, and Tushar Khot. Adapt: As-needed decomposition and planning with lan-
  guage models. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gómez-Adorno, and Steven Bethard (eds.), Find-
  ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024, Mexico City, Mexico,
  June 16-21, 2024, pp. 4226–4252. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. doi:
  10.18653/V1/2024.FINDINGS-NAACL.264. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/
  2024.findings-naacl.264.

Shuofei Qiao, Runnan Fang, Ningyu Zhang, Yuqi Zhu, Xiang Chen, Shumin Deng,
  Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen. Agent planning with world
  knowledge model.      In Amir Globersons, Lester Mackey, Danielle Belgrave, Angela
  Fan, Ulrich Paquet, Jakub M. Tomczak, and Cheng Zhang (eds.), Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15,
  2024, 2024. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/
  d032263772946dd5026e7f3cd22bce5b-Abstract-Conference.html.

Matthew Renze and Erhan Guven. Self-reflection in LLM agents: Effects on problem-solving per-
 formance. CoRR, abs/2405.06682, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2405.06682. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.06682.

Richard A. Schmidt. A schema theory of discrete motor skill learning. Psychological Review, 82
  (4):225–260, 1975. doi: 10.1037/h0076770.

Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Re-
  flexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Alice Oh, Tristan Nau-
  mann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16,
  2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  1b44b878bb782e6954cd888628510e90-Abstract-Conference.html.


                                             13
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew J.
 Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In
 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria,
 May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
 0IOX0YcCdTn.
Yifan Song, Da Yin, Xiang Yue, Jie Huang, Sujian Li, and Bill Yuchen Lin. Trial and error:
  Exploration-based trajectory optimization of LLM agents. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and
  Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2024, Bangkok, Thailand, August 11-16,
  2024, pp. 7584–7600. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. doi: 10.18653/V1/2024.
  ACL-LONG.409. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.409.
Haotian Sun, Yuchen Zhuang, Lingkai Kong, Bo Dai, and Chao Zhang.         Adaplanner:
  Adaptive planning from feedback with language models.     In Alice Oh, Tristan Nau-
  mann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16,
  2023, 2023. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  b5c8c1c117618267944b2617add0a766-Abstract-Conference.html.
Ruoyao Wang, Peter A. Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. Scienceworld:
  Is your agent smarter than a 5th grader? In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
  ing, EMNLP 2022, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 7-11, 2022, pp. 11279–11298.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022. doi: 10.18653/V1/2022.EMNLP-MAIN.775.
  URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.775.
Zhaowei Wang, Wenhao Yu, Xiyu Ren, Jipeng Zhang, Yu Zhao, Rohit Saxena, Liang Cheng,
  Ginny Y. Wong, Simon See, Pasquale Minervini, Yangqiu Song, and Mark Steedman. Mmlong-
  bench: Benchmarking long-context vision-language models effectively and thoroughly. CoRR,
  abs/2505.10610, 2025a. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2505.10610. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2505.10610.
Zihan Wang, Kangrui Wang, Qineng Wang, Pingyue Zhang, Linjie Li, Zhengyuan Yang, Xing Jin,
  Kefan Yu, Minh Nhat Nguyen, Licheng Liu, Eli Gottlieb, Yiping Lu, Kyunghyun Cho, Jiajun
  Wu, Li Fei-Fei, Lijuan Wang, Yejin Choi, and Manling Li. RAGEN: understanding self-evolution
  in LLM agents via multi-turn reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2504.20073, 2025b. doi: 10.
  48550/ARXIV.2504.20073. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.20073.
Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. Agent workflow memory.
  CoRR, abs/2409.07429, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2409.07429. URL https://doi.org/
  10.48550/arXiv.2409.07429.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - De-
  cember 9, 2022, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/
  hash/9d5609613524ecf4f15af0f7b31abca4-Abstract-Conference.html.
Di Wu, Hongwei Wang, Wenhao Yu, Yuwei Zhang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Dong Yu. Longmemeval:
  Benchmarking chat assistants on long-term interactive memory. In The Thirteenth International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=pZiyCaVuti.
Zhiheng Xi, Yiwen Ding, Wenxiang Chen, Boyang Hong, Honglin Guo, Junzhe Wang, Ding-
  wen Yang, Chenyang Liao, Xin Guo, Wei He, Songyang Gao, Lu Chen, Rui Zheng, Yicheng
  Zou, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing Huang, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang.
  Agentgym: Evolving large language model-based agents across diverse environments. CoRR,


                                              14
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




  abs/2406.04151, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2406.04151. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2406.04151.
Zhiheng Xi, Yiwen Ding, Wenxiang Chen, Boyang Hong, Honglin Guo, Junzhe Wang, Xin Guo,
  Dingwen Yang, Chenyang Liao, Wei He, Songyang Gao, Lu Chen, Rui Zheng, Yicheng Zou,
  Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing Huang, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Agent-
  gym: Evaluating and training large language model-based agents across diverse environments. In
  Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
  1: Long Papers), ACL 2025, Vienna, Austria, July 27 - August 1, 2025, pp. 27914–27961. Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics, 2025. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.
  acl-long.1355/.
Baixuan Xu, Weiqi Wang, Haochen Shi, Wenxuan Ding, Huihao Jing, Tianqing Fang, Jiaxin Bai,
  Xin Liu, Changlong Yu, Zheng Li, Chen Luo, Qingyu Yin, Bing Yin, Long Chen, and Yangqiu
  Song. MIND: multimodal shopping intention distillation from large vision-language models
  for e-commerce purchase understanding. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung
  Chen (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, EMNLP 2024, Miami, FL, USA, November 12-16, 2024, pp. 7800–7815. Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics, 2024. doi: 10.18653/V1/2024.EMNLP-MAIN.446. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.446.
Baixuan Xu, Chunyang Li, Weiqi Wang, Wei Fan, Tianshi Zheng, Haochen Shi, Tao Fan, Yangqiu
  Song, and Qiang Yang. Towards multi-agent reasoning systems for collaborative expertise del-
  egation: An exploratory design study. CoRR, abs/2505.07313, 2025a. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.
  2505.07313. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.07313.
Wujiang Xu, Zujie Liang, Kai Mei, Hang Gao, Juntao Tan, and Yongfeng Zhang. A-MEM: agentic
 memory for LLM agents. CoRR, abs/2502.12110, 2025b. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2502.12110.
 URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2502.12110.
An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li,
  Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin
  Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang,
  Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tingyu
  Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong
  Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 technical report. CoRR, abs/2412.15115,
  2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2412.15115. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
  2412.15115.
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang
  Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu,
  Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin
  Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang,
  Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui
  Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang
  Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yinger
  Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan
  Qiu. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scal-
  able real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mo-
  hamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9,
  2022, 2022. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
  82ad13ec01f9fe44c01cb91814fd7b8c-Abstract-Conference.html.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan
  Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenRe-
  view.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X.


                                              15
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. τ -bench: A benchmark for
  tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. CoRR, abs/2406.12045, 2024. doi: 10.48550/
  ARXIV.2406.12045. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.12045.
Hongli Yu, Tinghong Chen, Jiangtao Feng, Jiangjie Chen, Weinan Dai, Qiying Yu, Ya-Qin Zhang,
  Wei-Ying Ma, Jingjing Liu, Mingxuan Wang, and Hao Zhou. Memagent: Reshaping long-context
  LLM with multi-conv rl-based memory agent. CoRR, abs/2507.02259, 2025. doi: 10.48550/
  ARXIV.2507.02259. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.02259.
Siyu Yuan, Zehui Chen, Zhiheng Xi, Junjie Ye, Zhengyin Du, and Jiecao Chen. Agent-r: Training
  language model agents to reflect via iterative self-training. CoRR, abs/2501.11425, 2025. doi: 10.
  48550/ARXIV.2501.11425. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2501.11425.
Xinrong Zhang, Yingfa Chen, Shengding Hu, Zihang Xu, Junhao Chen, Moo Khai Hao, Xu Han,
  Zhen Leng Thai, Shuo Wang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. ınftybench: Extending long
  context evaluation beyond 100k tokens. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2024, Bangkok, Thailand, August 11-16, 2024, pp. 15262–15277.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. doi: 10.18653/V1/2024.ACL-LONG.814. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.814.
Zijing Zhang, Ziyang Chen, Mingxiao Li, Zhaopeng Tu, and Xiaolong Li. RLVMR: reinforce-
  ment learning with verifiable meta-reasoning rewards for robust long-horizon agents. CoRR,
  abs/2507.22844, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2507.22844. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2507.22844.
Haiteng Zhao, Chang Ma, Guoyin Wang, Jing Su, Lingpeng Kong, Jingjing Xu, Zhi-Hong Deng,
  and Hongxia Yang. Empowering large language model agents through action learning. CoRR,
  abs/2402.15809, 2024a. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2402.15809. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2402.15809.
Jun Zhao, Can Zu, Hao Xu, Yi Lu, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, and Xuanjing Huang.
  Longagent: Scaling language models to 128k context through multi-agent collaboration. CoRR,
  abs/2402.11550, 2024b. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2402.11550. URL https://doi.org/10.
  48550/arXiv.2402.11550.
Zijian Zhou, Ao Qu, Zhaoxuan Wu, Sunghwan Kim, Alok Prakash, Daniela Rus, Jinhua Zhao,
  Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Paul Pu Liang. MEM1: learning to synergize memory and reasoning
  for efficient long-horizon agents. CoRR, abs/2506.15841, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2506.
  15841. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.15841.




                                                16
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




A PPENDIX

A     ACTION S CHEMA L ISTS FOR D IFFERENT E NVIRONMENTS

A.1   A LF W ORLD

    Action Schema List for ALFWorld
    Alfworld_Template = [
    ‘‘close [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘cool [OBJ] with [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘heat [OBJ] with [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘examine [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘go to [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘inventory’’,
    ‘‘look’’,
    ‘‘open [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘put [OBJ] in/on [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘take [OBJ] from [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘clean [OBJ] with [OBJ]’’,
    ]



A.2   S CI W ORLD

    Action Schema List for SciWorld
    Sciworld_Template = [
    ‘‘open [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘close [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘activate [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘deactivate [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘connect [OBJ] to [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘disconnect [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘use [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘use [OBJ] on [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘look around’’,
    ‘‘look at [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘look in [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘read [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘move [OBJ] to [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘pick up [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘put down [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘pour [OBJ] into [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘dunk [OBJ] into [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘mix [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘go to [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘eat [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘flush [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘focus on [OBJ]’’,
    ‘‘wait’’,
    ‘‘wait1’’,
    ‘‘task’’,
    ‘‘inventory’’
    ]




B     E VALUATION E NVIRONMENTS AND E XPERIMENT P ROTOCOLS

Our experiments are conducted on a suite of four environments, selected to represent a progression
of increasing complexity. The environments are modified from AgentGym (Xi et al., 2025).
Textcraft (Prasad et al., 2024): TextCraft is a text-only simulation environment designed to evaluate
an agent’s capacity for compositional reasoning and planning. Agents are tasked with crafting a
specific target item by issuing text commands, with tasks requiring a variable number of steps to
complete. The action space is restricted to three commands: craft, get, and inventory, forcing the
agent to learn the hierarchical structure of crafting recipes.
Webshop (Yao et al., 2022): WebShop is an interactive, simulated e-commerce environment de-
signed to evaluate an agent’s ability to act on compositional, natural language instructions. Given


                                                 17
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




a detailed product description, the agent must navigate the website, search for products, and select
an item that satisfies as many specified attributes as possible. The agent’s action space consists of
searching with free-form text and clicking buttons on the webpage. A final reward is calculated
based on the degree of match between the purchased item and the user’s initial instruction
ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2021): ALFWorld is a simulated household environment designed to
benchmark an agent’s ability to execute high-level tasks. Success in this environment requires the
agent to perform multi-step reasoning, navigate and explore various rooms, and interact with objects.
The action space supports a range of commands, including object manipulation and navigation. The
environment provides deterministic feedback on the outcome of each action based on a predefined
logical framework that governs the world state.
SciWorld (Wang et al., 2022): ScienceWorld is an interactive text-based benchmark created to
evaluate an agent’s scientific reasoning capabilities. The environment features a diverse set of 30
task types derived from a standard elementary science curriculum, such as correctly using measure-
ment instruments or conducting simple mechanics experiments. Following each action executed by
the agent, the environment simulator provides an updated observation, describing the effects and
changes within the simulated world.
Experiment Protocols. The prompts for interacting with environment API are fully aligned with
AgentGym (Xi et al., 2025) with minimal modification from self-deployed models to model API
calling.



C    M ODEL SELECTION

Our study conducts analyses across two distinct classes of models: general-purpose large language
models and specialized large reasoning models. For the LLM category, we select a suite of state-
of-the-art models representing a spectrum of scales and architectures: Qwen2.5-7B (Yang et al.,
2024), DeepSeek-V3 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2024), Kimi-K2 (Bai et al., 2025), GPT-4.1, Claude
and so on. This selection is curated to capture performance trends across models with varying
parameter counts. For the LRM category, we chose DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025) and
Longcat (MeituanLongCatTeam et al., 2025), as they are prominent examples of recent models
specifically engineered for complex tasks.
Full list of selected models are provided below.


    Large Language Models without Long Reasoning Capability

    Opensourced: Qwen2.5-7B (Yang et al., 2024)
    Qwen3-235B-A22B-NonThinking (Yang et al., 2025)
    Llama4-Scout
    DeepSeek-V3 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2024)
    Kimi-K2 (Bai et al., 2025)
    Minimax-01 (MiniMax et al., 2025)
    Proprietary
    GPT-4.1-mini
    GPT-4.1
    Gemini-2.0-flash (Anil et al., 2023)




    Large Reasoning Models

    Opensourced: DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025)
    Seed-OSS-36B
    Qwen3-235B-A22B-Thinking
    LongCat (MeituanLongCatTeam et al., 2025)
    Proprietary
    GPT5-mini
    Gemini-2.5-Flash
    Claude-4.0-Sonnet




                                                   18
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




D     T RAJECTORY A NALYSIS P ROMPT
D.1   ACTION A NALYSIS FOR R EPETITIVE ACTIONS

This analysis is conducted based on the analysis result of Kimi-K2, a powerful LLMs with 1T
parameters effectively trained for agentic tasks.
    System Prompt For Action Analysis

    ACTION_ANALYSIS_SYS_PROMPT = You are an expert trajectory analyst.
    Your task is to identify repetitive/meaningless actions in an agent’s interaction history.

    **Input:**
    - A trajectory dictionary mapping integer step indices to interaction strings.
    Each interaction string has the format:
      "Human: <observation>\n Agent: <thought and action>"

    **Definition of Repetitive Action:**
    - **Meaningless repeated actions** that don’t advance the task
    - Must meet these criteria:
      1. The action is identical or functionally equivalent to a previous action
      2. The action occurs after the environment has provided negative feedback
      3. The action doesn’t yield new information or state change
      4. The action doesn’t contribute to task progression
    - Examples:
      - Repeatedly opening the same empty drawer after being told it’s empty
      - Moving between the same locations without purpose
      - Checking inventory multiple times without new items
      - Retrying an action immediately after failure feedback

    **Task:**
    - Analyze the trajectory and identify step indices for repetitive actions
    - Output a JSON dictionary with exactly one key:
      - "repetitive_action": sorted list of step indices with repetitive actions

    **Output Rules:**
    - Only include step indices where the action clearly meets the criteria
    - Sort indices in ascending order
    - If no instances are found, return an empty list
    - Output must be valid JSON with no additional text

    **Output Schema:**
    {
      "repetitive_action": [<int>, <int>, ...]
    }

    **Analysis Guidelines:**
    1. Focus on patterns:
       - Look for repeated action patterns, not necessarily consecutive
       - Consider actions that are functionally equivalent
       (e.g., "open cabinet 1" and "open cabinet1")
       - Pay attention to environment feedback (e.g., "nothing happens", "still empty")

    2. Be practical:
       - Include actions that show clear lack of progress
       - Ignore repetitions that are part of necessary sequences
       - Consider the context of the task

    3. Key indicators:
       - Environment feedback indicating no change
       - Agent thoughts showing frustration or confusion
       - Actions that could be optimized (e.g., moving between same locations)

    **Example:**
    Input:
    {
      "0": "Human: Kitchen with cabinet\n Agent: Open cabinet",
      "1": "Human: Cabinet is empty\n Agent: Close cabinet",
      "2": "Human: Cabinet closed\n Agent: Open cabinet",
      "3": "Human: Cabinet still empty\n Agent: Open cabinet",
      "4": "Human: Cabinet remains empty\n Agent: Look for key",
      "5": "Human: Key on counter\n Agent: Take key",
      "6": "Human: Key taken\n Agent: Open cabinet with key",
      "7": "Human: Cabinet opens\n Agent: Take microwave",
      "8": "Human: Microwave taken\n Agent: Put microwave in fridge",
      "9": "Human: Microwave doesn’t fit\n Agent: Put microwave in fridge",
      "10": "Human: Still doesn’t fit\n Agent: Try putting microwave in fridge"




                                                 19
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




    }

    Output:
    {
      "repetitive_action": [2, 3, 9, 10]
    }

    Explanation:
    - Step 2: Repetitive (reopening cabinet after knowing it’s empty)
    - Step 3: Repetitive (consecutive identical action after known empty)
    - Step 9: Repetitive (retrying after failure feedback)
    - Step 10: Repetitive (functionally equivalent retry after failure)
    - Step 6: Not repetitive (new context with key)



    System Prompt For Action Analysis

    ACTION_ANALYSIS_USER_PROMPT = Analyze the following trajectory
    and identify invalid actions and repetitive actions.

    Trajectory:
    {trajectory}

    Return JSON output exactly as specified.



D.2      ACTION A NALYSIS FOR I NVALID ACTIONS

The analysis for invalid actions is conducted via on rule-based filtering. Specifically, we count
invalid action frequency by detecting the signature response from the environment API which in-
dicates invalid. For example, “nothing happens.” for API response in ALFWorld and “No known
action matches that input.”

E       N OISY ACTION L IST FOR C OGNITIVE L OAD ATTACK
In this section, we demonstrate some schema-aligned simplified examples on the distractors to be
injected into ALFWorld action list.
    Invalid OBJ Noisy Actions

    ALFWorld_Distractors = [
        "open portal",
        "open mirror",
        "open book",
        "open map",
        "open pyramid",
        "open record",
        "open portrait",
        "open vehicle",
        "open council",
        "open grove",
        "open ship",
        "open library",
        "close portal",
        "close mirror",
        "close book",
        "close map",
        "close pyramid",
        "close record",
        "close portrait",
        "close vehicle",
        "close council",
        "examine feather",
        "examine crystal",
        "examine mane",
        "examine stone",
        "examine sensor",
        "examine rune",
        "examine balloon",
        "examine charm",
        "examine star",




                                               20
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




       "examine wing",
       "examine mirror",
       "examine book",
       "examine map",
       "examine record",
       "examine portrait",
       "examine pyramid",
       "examine vehicle",
       "examine council",
       "examine grove",
       "examine library",
       "examine ship",
       "examine algorithm",

       # go to
       "go to grove",
       "go to portal",
       "go to plane",
       "go to realm",
       "go to world",
       "go to border",
       "go to library",
       "go to garden",
       "go to council",
       "go to ocean",

       # put [OBJ] in/on [OBJ]
       "put feather in pyramid",
       "put crystal in library",
       "put book on portrait",
       "put map on council",
       "put charm in vehicle",
       "put mirror on pyramid",
       "put stone in grove",
       "put mane on portrait",
       "put star on garden",
       "put wing on council",
       "put record in library",
       "put form on portrait",
       "put song in library",
       "put algorithm in library",
       "put tree in garden",

       # take [OBJ] from [OBJ]
       "take book from library",
       "take map from council",
       "take feather from pyramid",
       "take crystal from garden",
       "take charm from vehicle",
       "take mirror from portrait",
       "take stone from grove",
       "take wing from council",
       "take record from library",
       "take star from world",

       # clean [OBJ] with [OBJ]
       "clean mirror with feather",
       "clean pyramid with feather",
       "clean portrait with mane",
       "clean book with charm",
       "clean record with feather",
       "clean council with cloth",
       "clean library with cloth",
       "clean vehicle with feather",
       "clean grove with cloth",

       # heat [OBJ] with [OBJ]
       "heat book with incense",
       "heat crystal with incense",
       "heat stone with incense",
       "heat mirror with incense",
       "heat record with incense",
       "heat pyramid with incense",

       # cool [OBJ] with [OBJ]
       "cool crystal with wave",
       "cool book with radiation",
       "cool mirror with wave",
       "cool stone with radiation",




                                       21
The Cognitive Bandwidth Bottleneck




         "cool pyramid with wave",
         "cool portrait with radiation",

         # extra plain variants
         "open council",
         "close council",
         "examine message",
         "examine pattern",
         "examine aura",
         "examine vision",
         "examine orb",
         "examine fabric",
         "examine machine",
         "examine tree",
         "examine path",
         "examine portrait",
         "examine riddle",
         "examine math",
         "examine wave",
         "go to territory",
         "go to library",
         "go to realm",
         "put book in library",
         "put map in library",
         "put song in library",
         "put form in library",
         "put algorithm on council",
         "put feather on portrait",
         "put crystal on council",
         "take charm from portrait",
         "take balloon from garden",
         "take stone from council",
         "take vision from library",
         "take song from library",
         "clean portrait with feather",
         "clean book with mane",
         "clean pyramid with charm",
    ]




F    L ONG H ORIZON TASK F ORMULATION
Formally, an agent in an interactive environment could be modeled as decision-making under partial
observation. Following existing works (Yuan et al., 2025; Song et al., 2024), these tasks could be for-
mulated as Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) which could be expressed
in form of (U , S, A, O, T , R). To be detailed, the U stands for the task description and the relevant
requirements. S is the state space, A represents the action space of the agent, and O is the observa-
tion space. T stands for the transition function where T : S × A → S and T is determined by the
interactive environment. R represents the reward function R : S × A → [0, 1] which indicates the
final reward of the agents movements. Since our experiments are natural language based, U, S, A
and O are all in natural language form. At each timestamp t, the trajectory history is denoted as:
                               τt = (u, a1 , o1 , . . . , at , ot ) ∼ πθ (τt |u)                   (1)
where ai ∈ A, oi ∈ O stand for the action and the observation after the action at is executed at
timestamp t. The probability of agent with parameter θ generating τ would be:
                                            n
                                            Y
                              πθ (τ |u) =         πθ (aj |i, a1 , o1 , . . . , oj−1 )              (2)
                                            j=1

where n is the trajectory length. Finally, a final reward r is computed, with 1 indicating success of
the task, 0 stands for the failure of the task and other values for partial completion of the task.

G       T HE U SE OF L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
In this paper, the LLMs serves as a writing assistant to help polish the content.




                                                       22
