                                         S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




                                         S KY RL-AGENT:    E FFICIENT RL T RAINING                                                                                                                                            FOR
                                         M ULTI - TURN LLM AGENT
                                                                                                                       †                                                       †                                   †
                                          Shiyi Cao§∗ , Dacheng Li§∗ , Fangzhou Zhao§ , Shuo Yuan§ , Sumanth R Hegde¶ ,
                                                         †                †
                                          Connor Chen§ , Charlie Ruan§ , Tyler Griggs§ , Shu Liu§ , Eric Tang¶ , Richard Liaw¶ ,
                                          Philipp Moritz¶ , Matei Zaharia§ , Joseph E. Gonzalez§ , Ion Stoica§
                                          NovaSky AI, § UC Berkeley, ¶ Anyscale
                                                           GitHub: https://github.com/NovaSky-AI/SkyRL
                                                           HuggingFace: https://huggingface.co/NovaSky-AI/SA-SWE-32B




arXiv:2511.16108v1 [cs.AI] 20 Nov 2025
                                                                                                               A BSTRACT
                                                                     We introduce S KY RL-AGENT, a framework for efficient, multi-turn, long-horizon
                                                                     agent training and evaluation. It provides efficient asynchronous dispatching,
                                                                     lightweight tool integration, and flexible backend interoperability, enabling seam-
                                                                     less use with existing RL frameworks such as SkyRL-train, VeRL, and Tinker.
                                                                     Using S KY RL-AGENT, we train SA-SWE-32B, a SWE agent trained from
                                                                     Qwen3-32B (24.4% Pass@1) purely with RL. We introduce two key components:
                                                                     an optimized asynchronous pipeline dispatcher that achieves a 1.55× speedup
                                                                     over naive asynchronous batching, and a tool-enhanced training recipe leveraging
                                                                     an AST-based search tool to facilitate code navigation, boost rollout Pass@K, and
                                                                     improve training efficiency. Together, these optimizations enable SA-SWE-32B to
                                                                     reach 39.4% Pass@1 on SWE-Bench Verified1 with more than 2× cost reduction
                                                                     than prior models reaching similar performance. Despite being trained solely on
                                                                     SWE tasks, SA-SWE-32B generalizes effectively to other agentic tasks, includ-
                                                                     ing Terminal-Bench, BrowseComp-Plus, and WebArena. We further demonstrate
                                                                     S KY RL-AGENT ’s extensibility through case studies on deep research, computer
                                                                     use, and memory agents, each trained using a different training backend.

                                                     0.50
                                                                                   SA-SWE-32B              DeepSWE-stage1
                                                     0.45                                                  SA-SWE-32B       40




                                                                                                                             None-resolved count
                                                     0.40                                                                                                                              Async Batch (Bounded)           Async Pipeline
                                                     0.35                                                                   32
                                          Reward
                                                                                                                                                                         100
                                                     0.30
                                                                                                                                                                          80



                                                                                                                                                   GPU Utilization (%)
                                                     0.25                                                                   24
                                                     0.20
                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                     0.15                                                                   16
                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                            25                                                                                    1.55× speedup
                                                                                                                                                                          20


                                           Avg. # search
                                                           4.0

                                                                                                                             Avg. # turns
                                                           3.5                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                            20                                                     0     1000     2000     3000        4000     5000
                                                           3.0                                                                                                                                       Time (s)
                                                                 0      40    80    120   160   0   40    80   120    160
                                                                         Training steps              Training steps                                 (b) GPU utilization during generation
                                                                                                                                                    for Async Pipeline and Async Batch
                                          (a) Training metrics for SA-SWE-32B and baselines. We                                                     (Bounded). Evaluated under batch size 64
                                          use the checkpoint at step 125 for final evaluation. Curves                                               and 8 rollouts (512 total) with 2×8 H100
                                          for DeepSWE are taken from their wandb logs.                                                              GPUs for SA-SWE-32B training.

                                         Figure 1: Training dynamics and system performance for SA-SWE-32B. (a) compares training
                                         metrics across ablations; (b) shows GPU utilization comparison between asynchronous dispatch-
                                         ing strategies.

                                               ∗
                                             Co-lead the project. † Main Contributors.
                                                1
                                             Evaluated using a simplified ReAct loop with only the file-editor and bash tools, under 40k context length
                                         and 100 max steps.


                                                                                                                        1
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




1   I NTRODUCTION

Recent progress in post-training techniques, especially reinforcement learning from verifiable re-
wards (RLVR) (Guo et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2025; Wen et al., 2025), has spurred a growing effort
to move beyond single-turn language model optimization toward the training of multi-turn, long-
horizon, tool-augmented agents (Jin et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2017; Gao et al., 2025; Li et al.,
2025b;c; Luo et al., 2025b; Cao et al., 2025). These agents are capable of performing complex,
multi-step reasoning and acting across diverse environments such as code repositories, browsers, or
operating systems. As tasks become increasingly interactive and open-ended, training such agents
efficiently and reliably has emerged as a major challenge for both the reinforcement learning (RL)
and systems communities.
Recent RL training frameworks such as SkyRL-train (Griggs et al., 2025), AReaL (Fu et al., 2025),
VeRL (Sheng et al., 2025), and SLIME (Zhu et al., 2025) focus on improving the systems effi-
ciency of large-scale reinforcement learning for language models. These frameworks manage device
placement and data flow across heterogeneous clusters, coordinate efficient weight synchronization
between inference and training engines, and employ diverse parallelization strategies (e.g., tensor,
data, and pipeline parallelism) together with asynchronous or hybrid execution plans to maximize
hardware utilization. Tinker (Lab, 2025) builds on this ecosystem by offering modular APIs for
fine-tuning and sampling, allowing users to experiment with customized training algorithms and
data pipelines while abstracting away the complexity of distributed execution.
Unfortunately, what is still missing is a modular and performant agentic rollout orchestration layer
that can generate, schedule, and evaluate multi-turn agent trajectories at scale. In practice, re-
searchers and practitioners are forced to build ad-hoc solutions for coordinating asynchronous roll-
outs, managing environment and agent states, and integrating to existing training frameworks. Such
fragmented setups result in inefficiencies, brittle execution, and debugging challenges, especially
given the inherent instability and fragility of RL training.
Specifically, the framework should satisfy the following key properties to enable efficient, scalable,
and extensible agent training:

      1. Flexible tool and task integration. LLM-based agents rely on a wide range of tools
         to complete tasks, including stateless utilities (e.g, python interpreters), environment-
         modifying tools (e.g., file editors), and agent-state-modifying operations (e.g., summa-
         rization and history truncation), each with distinct runtime requirements. The framework
         should allow new tasks and tools to be integrated easily with minimum modifications to the
         main agent loop.
      2. Efficient rollout scheduling. To achieve high hardware utilization and minimize latency,
         the framework should support fine-grained scheduling rather than treating each rollout as
         a monolithic job. Intra-rollout scheduling breaks a rollout into stages (e.g., initialization,
         LLM generation, reward computation) and schedules these stages independently, enabling
         their heterogeneous CPU- and GPU-bound operations to overlap with stages from other
         rollouts. Inter-rollout scheduling determines the global dispatch order and prioritization
         of rollouts so that workloads across CPU and GPU remain balanced over time, prevent-
         ing hardware idling and reducing overall makespan. Together, these mechanisms improve
         heterogeneous resource utilization and overall generation throughput.
      3. Training-backend agnostic. Developers should be able to specify the agent design, tool
         execution logic, and training backend independently. Decoupling these components allows
         a single agent implementation to run unmodified across different frameworks, to flexibly
         leverage their unique capabilities and seamlessly transition between local deployments and
         API-based services.

S KY RL-AGENT builds on these observations by introducing an efficient execution framework for
heterogeneous agent tasks. It consists of three key components: (1) a tool-centric task interface
that supports dynamic registration of user-defined tools, instruction builders, and verifiers for dif-
ferent tasks, enabling seamless integration of new tasks and tools with minimal code changes; (2)
a fine-grained asynchronous dispatcher abstraction that provides a unified interface for designing
scheduling policies for a batch of multi-stage rollout jobs; and (3) a backend bridge that connects


                                                  2
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




to RL training systems such as Tinker, VeRL, and SkyRL-train for advantage estimation and policy
optimization.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of S KY RL-AGENT, we use it to train SA-SWE-32B, a software-
engineering agent derived from Qwen3-32B (24.4% Pass@1), using pure RL on 4.5K instances
from R2E-Gym (Jain et al., 2025). SA-SWE-32B achieves 39.4% Pass@1 on SWE-Bench Ver-
ified (Jimenez et al., 2024), matching the performance of state-of-the-art models of similar scale
while reducing the total training cost by more than 2×. This efficiency gain stems from two key
contributions: an asynchronous pipeline dispatcher that delivers a 1.55× speedup over naive asyn-
chronous batching by overlapping CPU- and GPU-bound operations (§3.2), and a tool-enhanced
training recipe leveraging an AST-based search tool that facilitates code navigation, leading to
higher Pass@K for rollouts and improved sample efficiency (§4.2). Although trained exclusively
on software-engineering tasks, SA-SWE-32B generalizes effectively to other agentic benchmarks
(§4.3) such as Terminal-Bench (Team, 2025b), BrowseComp-Plus (Chen et al., 2025b), and We-
bArena (Zhou et al., 2023).
Beyond the SWE agent, we further demonstrate the versatility of S KY RL-AGENT in §5 by training
several additional agents in smaller scale, including the Deep Research Agent, the Computer Use
Agent, and the Memory Agent, each connected to distinct RL backends, showcasing the framework’s
flexibility and interoperability.

2      BACKGROUND

Table 1: Comparison of S KY RL-AGENT with existing agent training frameworks. S KY RL-
AGENT offers unified tool interface, efficient rollout scheduling, backend portability, runtime scaling
utilities, and dynamic trajectory construction for scalable agent training.

    Framework                             Backend        Agent Execution           Interface Runtime Scaling      Trajectory
    VeRL-Tool (Jiang et al., 2025)         VeRL            Data-parallel             Tool         Ray               Mask
    rLLM (Tan et al., 2025)                VeRL            Data-parallel             Gym          K8s          Mask / Transition
    GEM (Liu et al., 2025c)                Multi           Data-parallel             Gym           –             Transition
    Agent-Lightning (Luo et al., 2025b)    Multi           Data-parallel              –            –             Transition
    SkyRL-Agent (Ours)                     Multi    Data + Pipeline (extensible)     Tool       Ray/K8s        Mask / Transition



Multi-Turn LLM Agent Training. Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown strong potential for
improving single-turn reasoning tasks such as mathematics, logic, and coding (Shao et al., 2024;
Guo et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2025; An et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2025b). In these settings, the model
generates a complete response to a single prompt and receives a scalar reward reflecting its cor-
rectness or quality. Building on these successes, researchers have further explored tool-integrated
reasoning, where the model interacts with external tools such as search engines, calculators, or
code executors (Li et al., 2025c; Jin et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2017) to enhance its reasoning abili-
ties, showing significant improvement on related reasoning benchmarks. Since tool responses (e.g.,
retrieved documents or computed results) are interleaved with the model’s own reasoning, most ap-
proaches employ a mask-based loss construction, where non-model-generated tokens are masked
during optimization to ensure that only generated segments contribute to the policy gradient.
Recent works have also applied RL to long-horizon, multi-turn agent training (Cao et al., 2025; Luo
et al., 2025a; Gao et al., 2025; Lu et al., 2025), enabling optimization of agent scaffolds such as
ReAct (Yao et al., 2022), CodeAct (Wang et al., 2024a), and MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023) beyond
supervised learning (Pan et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025a). A multi-turn agent can be formulated as
a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) (Kaelbling et al., 1998), where at each
step t, the agent observes a context ot , generates an action at from a policy πθ (at |ot ), and receives a
scalar reward rt from the environment. The objective is to maximize the expected cumulative return
                                                                       T
                                                                      hX   i
                                                     J(θ) = Eπθ          rt ,
                                                                       t=1

where T is the number of agent turns per task.


                                                                  3
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




In multi-turn settings, agents often modify their context between steps through summarization, trun-
cation, or selective incorporation of retrieved information, which makes the overall interaction his-
tory non-stationary. Such dynamic context management breaks the assumption of a single continu-
ous text sequence, making the conventional mask-based method difficult to generalize beyond short,
tool-integrated reasoning tasks.
Building on the POMDP formulation, recent work instead adopts a more general transition-based
data representation (Tan et al., 2025; Luo et al., 2025b), where each model invocation and its re-
sulting feedback are represented as a tuple (ot , at , rt ). This representation supports flexible reward
assignment and decouples learning from the details of agent execution and context management. It
also naturally applies to multi-agent or sub-agent systems, where different policies interact within a
shared environment.

Training Frameworks for LLM Agents. Existing agent training frameworks such as VeRL-
Tool (Jiang et al., 2025), rLLM (Tan et al., 2025), GEM (Liu et al., 2025c), and Agent-
Lightning (Luo et al., 2025b) have advanced large-scale RL training for LLM agents, yet remain
limited by naive asynchronous batching (i.e., data-parallel) execution. S KY RL-AGENT supports
flexible rollout scheduling in multiple dimensions (e.g., data-parallel + pipeline-parallel). Beyond
execution efficiency, S KY RL-AGENT unifies stateless tools (e.g., python interpreter), environment-
modifying actions (e.g., file editor), and agent-state-modifying operations (e.g., summarization)
within a single tool, unlike Gym-centric loops (Tan et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025c), which manage
agent state outside env.step with ad hoc implementations. As summarized in Tab. 1, Agent-
Lightning serves as a middle layer between training backends and workflow frameworks such as
LangChain (LangChain, 2025) and AutoGen (AutoGen, 2025), but lacks native support for user-
defined tools and new task integration. rLLM and VeRL-Tool provide stronger extensibility, but
they are tied to the VeRL (Sheng et al., 2025) backend, and VeRL-Tool’s mask-based trajectory
construction limits its applicability to settings such as multi-agent systems or memory agents.


3   F RAMEWORK A RCHITECTURE

                                                                        adv_calc(),
                                 llm.generate()                    forward_backward(),
          SkyRL-train,                                               optimizer_step()
         VeRL, Tinker,...          input_ids        llm response                  input_ids, response_ids, reward, mask

      SkyRL-Agent
                            @record_transitions                              post_process()

               2      Agent                                                                         3
                                                                             T1      T2        T3
                         T6
                          T5                                                   Reward
                            T4                                                Calculation                      Task
                                                                                Runtime                       Datasets
                            History
                                               Tools                          Initialization
                            Message
                 Agent                                                               T8
                                                                             T7                T9
                  Run
                                                                                                    1
                                      observation         command, args
                                                                            Agent Loop Dataflow           Training Data Flow
                             Tool Execution Runtime
                            (K8s/Ray/Remote Server)                    Tx    x-th Trajectory               Transition Buffer


Figure 2: Overview Architecture of S KY RL-AGENT. The framework decomposes each rollout into
three stages: (1) runtime initialization for tool execution runtime setup, (2) agent run where the
agent performs actions through the tool interface, and (3) reward calculation for outcome evalua-
tion. During execution, the inputs and outputs of LLM calls are recorded as transitions and stored
in a buffer, while post process aggregates these transitions together with their rewards into for-
matted data compatible with multiple RL training backends such as SkyRL-train, VeRL, and Tinker.
The dispatcher schedules jobs across the three stages according to predefined policies.


                                                                   4
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




S KY RL-AGENT is designed as a modular framework for training and evaluating tool-use agents at
scale. The system architecture is illustrated in Fig. 2, consisting of three main components: a tool-
centric agent loop (§3.1) for flexible tool and task integration, a fine-grained dispatcher (§3.2) for
heterogeneous scheduling, and a backend bridge (§3.3) for seamless connection with RL training
systems.

3.1    T OOL - CENTRIC AGENT LOOP.

In S KY RL-AGENT, agents act purely via OpenAI-style function calls. Each tool implements its own
execution logic and specifies its runtime. Existing Gym-style environments (Liu et al., 2025c; Jain
et al., 2025; Xie et al., 2024), can be integrated by wrapping their step() as a tool, for example,
an implementation of tools for the computer use agent is shown in Listing 1.
This design yields several practical benefits: (i) unified management of agent and environment states:
unlike Gym-centric agent loops (Tan et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025c), where agent state is managed
outside env.step through ad hoc code, S KY RL-AGENT brings it under the same tool abstraction
as other actions, making agent-state-modifying operations such as context management modular
and learnable. (ii) convenient multi-task training: different datasets bind to different tool sets and
verifiers without modifying the agent loop, allowing the runner to multiplex tasks within a single
training job; and (iii) minimal-change task integration: adding a new task reduces to providing a
small set of tool implementations together with task-specific instruction builder and verifiers, leaving
agent code unchanged and without touching other parts of the system.

@register_tool("osworld_action")
class OSWorldActionTool(BaseTool):
    name = "osworld_action"
    description = (
        "Execute desktop automation actions using pyautogui. "
        "Provide Python code such as 'pyautogui.click(500, 300)' "
        "or 'pyautogui.typewrite(\"Hello World\")'."
    )
    parameters = {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {"code": {"type": "string"}},
        "required": ["code"]
    }

      def call(self, params: Union[str, dict], runtime=None, **kwargs) -> str:
          ...
          code = params.get("code", "").strip()
          obs, reward, done, info = runtime.step(code, TIMEOUT)
          ...

            Listing 1: Example definition for desktop tools in the Computer Use agent.


3.2    F INE - GRAINED HETEROGENEOUS SCHEDULING VIA THE DISPATCHER .

Multi-turn RL rollouts comprise operations with disparate costs and device affinities. As illustrated
in Fig. 2, S KY RL-AGENT decomposes each trajectory into stage jobs: 1 runtime initialization,
 2 agent run, and 3 reward calculation. The dispatcher maintains bounded queues per stage and
routes jobs according to predefined policies, balancing workloads on heterogeneous devices to im-
prove overall resource utilization.
We provide several dispatching strategies under a unified interface, allowing practitioners to conve-
niently select the policy that best matches the characteristics of their tasks, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
Async Batch launches all trajectories concurrently and is effective when both runtime initialization
and reward calculation are lightweight, such as in search-integrated reasoning tasks (Jin et al., 2025).
Async Batch (Bounded) limits concurrency to a configurable pool size, which is suitable for environ-
ments where concurrency must be restricted to prevent overloading the runtime or where persistent
resources (e.g., long-lived virtual machines in computer-use tasks) can be efficiently reused across


                                                   5
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




                          INIT 0         LLM 0 Env            LLM 0            Reward 0


    Async Batch
                        INIT 1        LLM 1 Env            LLM 1         Env          LLM 1                Reward 1                                           ...
                            INIT 2             LLM 2        Env          LLM 2              Env            LLM 2      Env            LLM 2         Reward 2

                             INIT 3                LLM 3     Env          LLM 3               Env            LLM 3            Reward 3



                                                                        Low GPU utilization period


    Async Batch           INIT 0         LLM 0 Env     LLM 0       Reward 0            INIT 2                LLM 2     Env     LLM 2     Env    LLM 2    Env       LLM 2     Reward 2
                                                                                                                                                                                        ...
     (Bounded)          INIT 1        LLM 1 Env LLM 1 Env LLM 1           Reward 1                INIT 3             LLM 3     Env      LLM 3      Env     LLM 3      Reward 3




                                          INIT 2                                   INIT 5
                                              INIT 3                      INIT 4

   Async Pipeline
                          INIT 0         LLM 0 Env     LLM 0          LLM 2    Env    LLM 2       Env      LLM 2   Env       LLM 2      LLM 5
                                                                                                                                                                                 ...
                        INIT 1        LLM 1 Env LLM 1 Env LLM 1               LLM 3   Env         LLM 3      Env     LLM 3       LLM 4       Env   LLM 4     Env     LLM 4
                                                                   Reward 0                                                            Reward 2
                                                                          Reward 1                                              Reward 3
                                                                                                                                                                                         Time


Figure 3: Examples of Supported Dispatching Methods. Async Batch is normally used for reasoning
tasks where runtime initialization and reward computation are lightweight. Async Batch (Bounded)
schedules trajectories sequentially with capped concurrency, leading to unbalanced GPU utilization
across stages, but remains effective when runtime reset is inexpensive, such as in computer-use
tasks. Async Pipeline overlaps the three stages to maintain high GPU utilization, suitable for tasks
with expensive runtime or reward stages.


rollouts. Async Pipeline employs three bounded queues of different, configurable sizes to overlap
CPU-bound stages with GPU-bound inference, preventing CPU overhead from throttling the agent
loop and overload of runtime services. Existing agent training frameworks typically adopt the asyn-
chronous batching approaches.
In our SWE agent training (§4.2), the Async Pipeline dispatching strategy achieves approximately a
1.55× speedup over the naive Async Batch (Bounded) approach, as shown in Fig. 1b. With the async
pipeline method, GPU utilization remains stable at around 90% throughout the generation stage. In
contrast, the async batch strategy exhibits large fluctuations and frequent drops in utilization, reveal-
ing bubbles on the GPU side caused by CPU-bound operations such as runtime initialization and
reward computation. During these intervals, the GPU stays idle while waiting for CPU-side prepa-
ration to complete. The asynchronous pipeline approach eliminates these idle periods by overlap-
ping CPU- and GPU-bound stages, keeping the GPU consistently active and achieving significantly
higher overall hardware efficiency.

@register_dispatcher("async_batch_bounded")
async def async_batch_bounded(cfg, trajs, init_fn, run_fn, eval_fn):
    sem = asyncio.Semaphore(cfg.get("max_parallel_agents", 8))
    async def one(i, j):
        async with sem:
            tr = trajs[i][j]
            await getattr(tr, init_fn)()
            await getattr(tr, run_fn)()
            await getattr(tr, eval_fn)()
    await asyncio.gather(*[asyncio.create_task(one(i, j)) for i in trajs for j in
    ,→  trajs[i]])


                    Listing 2: Simplified Implementation for Async Batch (Bounded).

An example implementation of Async Batch (Bounded) is provided in Listing 2, demonstrating that
new dispatching strategies can be added with minimal code under the unified interface. This design
makes it easy to implement customized parallelization strategies for different workload characteris-
tics, for example, priority-based scheduling that prioritizes trajectories with higher evaluation cost
(e.g., more test cases), preventing them from becoming long-tail stragglers and reducing the overall
makespan.


                                                                                 6
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




3.3   C ONNECTING TO TRAINING BACKENDS .

We adopt a transition-based design that records each LLM invocation as an individual transition
containing the input tokens, output tokens, and their corresponding log probabilities (if provided
by the inference endpoint). These transitions form the foundation for constructing the final training
data and enable several key capabilities for robust RL training. First, it can help mitigate consistency
between inference and training. By explicitly recording log probabilities, we can apply recent tech-
niques such as Flash-RL (Liu et al., 2025a) to correct for inference–training engine mismatch (Yao
et al., 2025). Second, it guarantees token-level fidelity. The transition format naturally supports
token-in/token-out processing, eliminating off-policy drift caused by re-tokenization or text postpro-
cessing (Team, 2025a). Third, it enables algorithmic flexibility. Transition-level data enables a wider
range of RL algorithms beyond mask-based concatenation approaches, which are often inefficient
and rigid. For example, we can dynamically summarize prior context (see examples in §5.2), insert
structured prompts, or even modify the agent’s roles across turns, thereby enabling more diverse
and flexible agent training methods. The recording mechanism is implemented via a lightweight
decorator that transparently captures model inputs and outputs during generation, creating transition
objects without requiring any modification to agent logic:
@record_transition
async def _generate(self, input_ids, sampling_params):
    return await self.backend.generate(input_ids, sampling_params)

Additionally, for computational efficiency, we dynamically pack transitions that share the same pre-
fix into a single training sample using a standard masking-based method. As a result, for trajectories
without any context modification during execution, the system naturally falls back to the traditional
concatenation-and-mask approach.
After execution, the runner aggregates the training samples into a unified intermediate format, as
shown in Listing 3. S KY RL-AGENT transparently converts this format into the required input struc-
ture for different backends for advantage estimation and policy updates. As a result, switching from
local evaluation to distributed training only requires adjusting configuration rather than modifying
agent or task code, preserving a clean separation of concerns while enabling backend specialization.

def post_process(...):
    return {
        "prompt_token_ids": ...,
        "response_ids": ...,
        "logprobs": ...,
        "loss_masks": ...,
        "traj_rewards": ...,
        "traj_idx": ...,
        "rollout_metrics": ...,
    }

              Listing 3: Backend-agnostic training data returned by post process.

By abstracting away the training backend, researchers can compare alternative approaches on iden-
tical tasks without confounds from differing implementations, accelerating algorithmic progress.
Equally, the abstraction preserves access to backend-specific strengths such as advanced model
support, novel training algorithms, specialized hardware support (e.g., GPU/TPU/AMD accelera-
tors), and API-based execution for very large models, so practitioners can exploit these capabilities
through configuration without changing the code.

3.4   E RROR H ANDLING

Agent execution in realistic environments inevitably encounters various failures: LLM generation
issues, malformed tool calls, execution timeouts, and resource exhaustion. While our tool-centric
design already localizes many environment-specific errors to the tool level, S KY RL-AGENT addi-
tionally handles two classes of failures in the agent loop: terminal conditions (e.g., context-window
exceeded, max-iterations reached), which immediately stop the episode, and recoverable conditions


                                                   7
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




(e.g., parse failures, incorrect parameters), for which the framework injects corrective feedback into
the conversation history to enable self-correction on the next step, so that agents can recover from
these failures, improving overall success rates.


4     SWE AGENT

We will now present the full training recipe for SA-SWE-32B, implemented using S KY RL-AGENT.

4.1   BACKGROUND

Recent work has rapidly advanced the use of large language models (LLMs) for automating soft-
ware engineering (SWE) tasks (Jimenez et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; 2025b; Pan et al., 2024).
SWE-B ENCH (Jimenez et al., 2024) has emerged as a central testbed: given a real GitHub repos-
itory and a bug report, a system must produce a patch and is judged by whether the project’s unit
tests pass after applying that patch.
Current solutions on SWE tasks cluster into two
families. Agent-based systems (Wang et al.,
2024b; Yang et al., 2024) place the model in an                            Tools
executable environment with a set of tools (e.g.,
                                                                             Edit File        Computer
shell, search, and file viewer/editor) and let it it-
eratively inspect, edit, build, and test until com-                          Search              Terminal
pletion, as illustrated in Fig. 4. This mirrors de-         Agent
                                                                              View              File System
veloper workflows and supports incremental di-
agnosis and repair. Workflow-based systems such
                                                                            Feedback
as Agentless (Xia et al., 2024), by contrast, pre-
scribe a fixed pipeline (e.g., localize → repair →
test), reducing the problem to a chain of verifiable          Figure 4: Illustration of an SWE Agent.
single-turn sub-tasks. The former favors flexibil-
ity and fidelity to practice; the latter simplifies orchestration and evaluation at the cost of interactivity
and generalizability.
S KY RL-AGENT is designed to facilitate end-to-end RL training of long-horizon, multi-turn,
multi-tool agents across diverse agentic tasks. We posit that the tool-use competence acquired in
SWE, where agents must iteratively inspect, edit, and test real codebases, transfers to other domains
that similarly require stateful tool interaction. Consequently, in this work, we focus more on training
the full interactive loop in an end-to-end manner.

4.2   T RAINING R ECIPE

Bootstrapping training with better tools. Recent studies have shown that agents often struggle
with error localization, a key bottleneck in software-enginerring tasks (Chen et al., 2025a; Zan et al.,
2025). We observe that this failure largely arises from the agent’s inability to use commands to
effectively navigate the codebase. Specifically, agents tend to over-rely on viewing files directly
instead of leveraging search utilities (e.g., grep, find), and often fail to refine their queries with
informative patterns or precise keywords, leading to repeated failures to locate relevant context. As
a result, the agent frequently falls back to using the view tool to look through files chunk by chunk,
or retrieves large amounts of irrelevant content, both of which consume excessive context and reduce
overall efficiency.
Based on these observations, we implement an AST-based search tool that provides powerful re-
trieval capabilities supporting both fuzzy matching and structural pattern search, inspired by LocA-
gent (Chen et al., 2025a). To further encourage the search tool usage, we append contextual hints
at the end of each search result (e.g., suggesting which specific terms or patterns to search next) to
guide the agent toward more precise queries. We find that such tool enhancements are critical for ef-
ficient RL training. Without them, end-to-end RL becomes extremely challenging due to the sparse
and delayed rewards inherent in long-horizon tasks. In particular, minimal-tool configurations, such
as the bash-only setup used in Mini-SWE-Agent (min, 2025), exhibit very high non-resolved rates
(e.g., 50/64) on the R2E-Gym data, making the learning process challenging and inefficient. In con-


                                                     8
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




trast, our optimized, tool-guided setup significantly accelerates convergence, achieving comparable
or even higher performance than prior models of similar size within only 125 steps of RL training
(Fig. 1a). For evaluation, to assess generalization, we ablate the search tool. Remarkably, the model
exhibits emergent, internally realized search behavior and attains comparable performance without
explicit access to a dedicated search tool. We also observe in the training that as training progresses,
there is a steady increase in the average number of search invocations per trajectory, indicating that
the agent gradually learns to rely more on search for efficient code localization, as shown in Fig. 1a.

RL algorithms and hyper-parameters. For stable training, we adopt a fully on-policy setup
where the training batch size equals the mini-batch size (both set to 64), and the number of roll-
outs per task is 8. Trajectories that terminate due to external constraints, such as the maximum
context length (32K tokens), step limit (50 turns), are masked out during gradient updates to prevent
the model from being biased against trajectories with more actions or reasoning steps. Importantly,
this masking does not modify the reward or advantage estimation; it only excludes those samples
from the gradient computation. Following prior works (Luo et al., 2025a; Liu et al., 2025b), we
apply leave-one-out advantage estimation and remove both standard deviation and length normal-
ization in advantage computation. We disable KL and entropy loss and train with a learning rate
of 1e − 6. The Qwen3 chat template is modified to preserve the “thinking” from previous turns,
maintaining reasoning continuity across steps.

Hints for agent to recover and proceed. Multi-turn agent reinforcement learning often suffers
from agents getting stuck in repetitive or unproductive behaviors. Prior work, such as SWE-
Gym (Pan et al., 2024) and Kimi-Dev (Yang et al., 2025b) observes that starting from a generic
pre-trained model can lead to brittle behaviors: failing to invoke tools, generating no or incorrect
function calls, or looping over similar actions without progress. Agents may also lose track of the
task context or remaining steps, and tend to stop solving the problem prematurely without reaching
the maximum turn or context limit. During training, hints are introduced as structured cues that help
agents recover from failed actions and re-enter valid trajectories. Such hints include suggestions
about potential actions to take upon tool execution failure, notifications that the remaining step bud-
get or context window is about to be exceeded, corrections for invalid or incomplete function calls,
or prompts to re-examine failed edits. These hints substantially improve trajectory quality, stabilize
rollout collection, and increase the proportion of successful trajectories used for policy optimization.

4.3   E VALUATIONS

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our RL training, we evaluate SA-SWE-32B across 4 repre-
sentative agentic benchmarks. These include SWE-Bench Verified (Jimenez et al., 2024) as the
in-domain evaluation, and three out-of-domain benchmarks: Terminal-Bench (Team, 2025b), We-
bArena (Zhou et al., 2023), and BrowseComp-Plus (Chen et al., 2025b), which assess the model’s
generalization to diverse interactive environments involving command-line reasoning, web naviga-
tion, and search-integrated reasoning.

SWE-Bench Verified We evaluate SA-SWE-32B and several baseline models on SWE-Bench
verified using a simple ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) scaffold, and the models are provided with only a
bash tool and a file editor tool2 . The maximum context length is set to 40K (the default for Qwen3-
32B), and the maximum number of steps to 100. The main results are reported in Tab. 2. We
highlight that, SA-SWE-32B achieves state-of-the-art performance across open-recipe models at its
scale, on SWE-Bench Verified, under an end-to-end interactive evaluation setting, demonstrating
strong agentic tool-use ability, while incurring substantially lower training cost and without relying
on distillation from a stronger teacher model.
Among the baseline models, SWE-agent-LM-32B (Yang et al., 2025a) is fine-tuned from Qwen2.5-
Coder-32B-Instruct on 5,016 SWE-smith (Yang et al., 2025a) trajectories generated by Claude Son-
net 3.7. DeepSWE (Luo et al., 2025a), on the other hand, is trained purely with reinforcement
learning on the same 4.5K R2E-Gym dataset using the default R2E-Gym scaffold. Compared to
DeepSWE, we enhance the training recipe with tool-guided RL, which significantly improves train-
  2
    https://github.com/All-Hands-AI/openhands-aci/blob/main/openhands_aci
/editor/editor.py


                                                   9
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




ing efficiency. As shown in Fig. 1a, the non-resolved rate of SA-SWE-32B remains consistently
lower and decreases faster than that of DeepSWE. Combined with the system-level optimizations
introduced in §3.2, our approach achieves 50% lower training cost while delivering superior perfor-
mance. Models such as Kimi-dev (Yang et al., 2025b) and SWE-Swiss (He et al., 2025), which are
trained under the Agentless (Xia et al., 2024) scaffold, struggle to follow tool-call instructions in the
ReAct setup, leading to substantially lower scores than those reported in their original works, and
we therefore only include their reported results in the table for reference.

Table 2: Pass@1 performance on SWE-Bench Verified for reference and open-source SWE models.
“–” denotes unavailable values. “×” denotes omitted results. Reported scores are taken from the
corresponding papers/blogs; because different works use distinct scaffolds and evaluation setups,
the numbers may not be strictly comparable. Simple ReAct denotes a minimal ReAct agent loop that
exposes only a bash tool and a file-editing tool and the model generates only one patch per instance.

                                                            SWE-Bench Verified
   Model                 Model Size   Recipe                                         Cost (H100 Hours)
                                                           Simple ReAct   Reported
   Reference
   Qwen3-32B             32B          –                        24.4          –              –
   Qwen3-Coder-30B       30B          –                        45.0          –              –
   Open-source models <100B
   SWE-agent-LM-32B 32B               3.7 Sonnet Distill        38          40.2             –
   SWE-Swiss            32B           R1 Distill + RL           ×           45.0            –
   Kimi-dev             72B           R1 Distill + RL           ×           48.6            –
   DeepSWE              32B           RL                       36.4         42.2           9180
   SA-SWE-32B           32B           RL                       39.4          –             4601


Terminal-Bench Terminal-Bench (version 0.1.1) is a command-line interaction benchmark de-
signed to evaluate agents on system-level tasks that require sequential command execution, environ-
ment manipulation, and output verification. It contains 80 tasks spanning categories such as software
engineering, system administration, and security, measuring an agent’s ability to navigate file sys-
tems, execute shell commands, and complete multi-step technical workflows. In our evaluation, we
use the OpenHands agent3 to compare the baseline Qwen3-32B model against SA-SWE-32B.

WebArena WebArena is a web-based interaction benchmark designed to evaluate agents on real-
istic website navigation and task completion across multiple domains. It contains 812 tasks spanning
e-commerce, social forums, collaborative software, and content management systems, measuring an
agent’s ability to interpret web interfaces, execute multi-step workflows, and achieve specified goals
through browser interactions. The benchmark uses fully functional websites with dynamic con-
tent to simulate real-world web automation scenarios. In our evaluation, we compare the baseline
Qwen3-32B model against SA-SWE-32B.

BrowseComp-Plus BrowseComp-Plus
is a search-oriented benchmark designed Table 3: SA-SWE-32B’s performance on other tasks.
to evaluate agents on iterative search,
reasoning, and planning tasks. It uses a                                BrowseComp-Plus
                                             Model       Terminal Bench                  WebArena
fixed, human-verified corpus containing
                                                                        Acc.   Avg. Turn
both supporting and hard-negative doc-
                                             Reference
uments to ensure fair and reproducible
                                             Qwen3-32B       13.75      18.1     3.68      15.8
evaluation. The benchmark consists of
830 questions and measures an agent’s        SA-SWE-32B      16.25      19.4      4.6      17.0

ability to plan multi-step searches, reason
over retrieved evidence, and generate accurate final answers. In our evaluation, we use Qwen3-
Embedding-8B (Zhang et al., 2025) as the retriever and configure the search tool to return top-5
search results.
  3
    https://github.com/laude-institute/terminal-bench/tree/main/terminal_
bench/agents/installed_agents/openhands


                                                    10
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




As demonstrated in Tab. 3, SA-SWE-32B demonstrates improved performance over the base model
across all of the benchmarks. During SWE agent training (refer to Fig. 1a), we observe that the
average number of search calls increases from 3 to 4, and the average number of turns grows from
18 to 25, indicating that the agent learns to rely more on external search and iterative reasoning
as training progresses. Remarkably, on BrowseComp-Plus, which requires extensive search and
reasoning across multiple documents, our model, although trained only on the SWE task, exhibits a
similar trend by making more search calls than the base model.


5     OTHER AGENTS

In this section, we provide additional examples implemented in S KY RL-AGENT, including deep
research agents, a special agent that manages its own memory, and computer use agents.

5.1   D EEP R ESEARCH

Deep Research agents (OpenAI, 2025; Gao et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025b;a) are designed to tackle
comprehensive question-answering tasks where the required knowledge is not contained within
the model parameters. These agents typically rely on web-scale search (e.g., Google Search) and
browser-based interaction to gather, reason over, and synthesize external information.
In S KY RL-AGENT, we support both searching and web-browsing tools under the unified tool-
centric interface. Specifically, we adopt the ReAct framework, using SerperAPI for search and
Jina Reader API (Jina.ai, 2025) for web-page retrieval. To improve efficiency, we introduce caching
to avoid repeated fetches and a two-stage summarization pipeline that splits long pages into chunks,
summarizes each, and merges the results while preserving references. These optimizations signifi-
cantly accelerate rollouts and reduce repeated failures during multi-turn research tasks.

Experiment setup. Recent work (An et al., 2025; Cheng et al., 2025) highlights the importance
of balancing both difficulty and diversity in reinforcement learning data. To this end, we sample
50K problems from (Fan et al., 2025) and perform offline difficulty estimation using Qwen3-8B in
thinking mode, generating four rollouts per example. Each problem is categorized by the number
of successful rollouts: 0/4 (Impossible), 1/4 (Hard), 2/4 (Medium), 3/4 (Easy), and 4/4 (Perfect).
Following the mirrored difficulty distribution proposed in Polaris, we construct a dataset composed
of 25% Impossible, 30% Hard, 30% Medium, and 15% Easy examples, further balanced across
STEM disciplines (computer science, biology, physics, and economics) to ensure broad coverage
and representational diversity. All experiments are trained using the SkyRL-train (Griggs et al.,
2025) backend.
We train Qwen3-8B with GRPO Shao et al. (2024)
using the general verifier from (Ma et al., 2025), a
                                                                           Reward
global batch size of 64 with 8 rollouts, a mini-batch            0.7       Eval score
size of 64, and a learning rate of 5×10−6 . The train-
                                                                 0.6
ing uses Qwen3-235B in non-reasoning mode as the
summarizer. Reward and validation curves during                  0.5
training are shown in Fig. 5. For evaluation, we use     Score   0.4
LLM-as-a-Judge on the HLE-500 benchmark (Li                      0.3
et al., 2025b). Since the general verifier (Ma et al.,
                                                                 0.2
2025) tends to be more lenient, we additionally use
gpt-oss-20b as the primary judge. Under the general              0.1
verifier, scores improve from 12.6% to 18.8%, and                      0   10     20     30     40       50   60   70
under gpt-oss-20b, from 9.2% to 10.2% / 11.0%.                                          Training steps

Challenges. We encountered two challenges in Figure 5: Training Curve for Deep Research
deep-research training. First, heavy tools intro- Agent on SkyRL-train backend.
duce significant compute overhead and, if under-
provisioned, harm both throughput and stability.
Web-scraping pipelines (∼10k tokens/request) paired with large summarizers (e.g., Qwen-3-32B)
slowed training drastically: serving Qwen-3-32B on a single H200 took 2,101.6 s per iteration,
whereas switching to a Qwen API reduced this to 592.1 s (∼3.5× faster). Our final stage used four


                                                  11
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




GH200s with a data-parallel router. Insufficient serving caused timeouts that contaminated rollouts
(e.g., a dip around iteration 30) and required multiple steps (30–33) to recover, motivating both ad-
equate tool capacity and robust handling (e.g., masking abnormal trajectories) to protect the reward
signal. Second, online search can leak benchmark answers. During evaluation on GPQA-Diamond,
models sometimes retrieved solutions directly from public pages (e.g., Hugging Face) instead of
reasoning, inflating scores via shortcut retrieval. We therefore enforce domain blocks (e.g., Hugging
Face, GitHub, GitLab, Chegg) to limit leakage and encourage authentic, tool-augmented reasoning.

5.2            M EMORY AGENT

The fixed context length remains a fundamental limitation for contemporary LLMs. Recent work
such as MemAgent (Yu et al., 2025a) proposes a recursive long-text processing mechanism, where
the model incrementally summarizes content into a fixed-size memory buffer. We implemented the
MemAgent scaffold by introducing a Next tool, as illustrated in Fig. 6a.
Experimental Setup. We evaluate on the RULER-HotpotQA dataset (Hsieh et al., 2024), which
provides a golden supporting paragraph accompanied by several distractor paragraphs. Follow-
ing the setup of MemAgent, the model is presented with chunks of text up to 4k tokens each.
During training, it processes sequences of up to 28k
tokens, and during evaluation, up to 112k tokens.      Task          Next          Obs.          Next        ...      Answer
We use GPT-5-nano as the verifier for answer cor-
                                                            Next Tool: Given a model generated summary of the current chunk,
rectness. We train the model using the Tinker back-    Next
                                                            reset context to only contain the summary, present the next chunk.
end from Qwen3-8B (non-thinking mode), using a
LoRA rank of 128, batch size 32, 8 rollouts, and a (a) MemAgent Scaffold in S KY RL-AGENT. The
maximum of 8K tokens per turn. Training curves agent processes document chunks using the Next
are shown in Fig. 6b. For reference, MemAgent re- tool, which summarizes the current chunk and ap-
                                                     pends the summary to the next chunk as input for
ports a 79.69% accuracy when training Qwen2.5- the following turn.
7B-Instruct under the same dataset using a batch
size of 128 and group size 16, evaluated with an            0.8
                                                                        Reward
                                                                        Validation
exact-match verifier.
                                                                                 0.7

                                                                                 0.6
5.3            C OMPUTER U SE AGENT                                      Score
                                                                                 0.5
Computer Use agents aim to complete tasks via in-           0.4
teracting with an actual computer interface. We
                                                            0.3
implement Computer Use agent training using the                 0       5       10       15 20
OSWorld environment (Xie et al., 2024) where the                           Training step
model can interact with a virtual computer through (b) Training Reward and Validation Score. Re-
the PyAutoGUI APIs and get environment feed- sults on RULER-HotpotQA for the memory agent
back through accessibility trees generated from the trained from the Tinker backend.
virtual desktop. We integrate the OSWorld environ-
ment as a tool in S KY RL-AGENT, as shown in List-            Figure 6: MemAgent Results.
ing 1, enabling agents to perform GUI interactions such as mouse clicks, keystrokes, scrolling, and
window manipulation directly through generated Python codes with PyAutoGUI APIs.

                                                         Experiement Setup. Due to the lack of data, we mir-
               0.5                                       ror the setup in ARPO (Lu et al., 2025), which chooses
                                                         a subset from the benchmark to be the training data.
               0.4
                                                         Similar to the data filtering process for the Deep Re-
      Reward   0.3                                       search task (§5.1), we filter the OSWorld benchmark
               0.2                                       and collect a subset of 32 tasks with Hard, Medium,
                                                         and Easy difficulties.
               0.1
                     0   10   20    30    We train Qwen3-8B with GRPO and implement the
                              Training steps
                                               40   50
                                          rollout process using the Async Batch (Bounded) dis-
Figure 7: Training Curve for Computer
                                          patcher with fixed 32 virtual desktop environments.
Use Agent on VeRL backend.
                                          We scale the OSWorld environments by launching its
virtual-machine as Ray (Moritz et al., 2018) remote tasks, disaggregating CPU-bound feedback
loops from GPU-bound model generation. The training batch size is set to 8 with 8 rollouts for each


                                                             12
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




task. The evaluation is directly performed by the environment’s native evaluation function, with
training curves shown in Fig. 7.

Observations. We observe that for OSWorld tasks, while the training reward steadily improves,
the validation accuracy shows little to no gain. This suggests that the tasks are inherently difficult for
Qwen3-8B, and the learned policy struggles to generalize beyond the training environments. Similar
trends have also been reported in (Lu et al., 2025).

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the kind compute support from Anyscale, Amazon, Lambda, Thinking
Machine Lab, and gifts from AMD, Google, Mayfield, Mithril, Laude Institute, Accenture, Broad-
com, Cisco, IBM, Intel, Intesa Sanpaolo, Lightspeed, Mibura, Microsoft, NVIDIA, Samsung SDS,
and SAP. We also thank John Yang, Naman Jain, Xingyao Wang, Jiayi Pan, Chuan Li and Eric Tu
for helpful discussion and feedback.

R EFERENCES
The 100 line ai agent that solves github issues & more. https://github.com/SWE-agent
  /mini-swe-agent, 2025.
Chenxin An, Zhihui Xie, Xiaonan Li, Lei Li, Jun Zhang, Shansan Gong, Ming Zhong, Jingjing Xu,
  Xipeng Qiu, Mingxuan Wang, and Lingpeng Kong. Polaris: A post-training recipe for scaling
  reinforcement learning on advanced reasoning models, 2025. URL https://hkunlp.git
  hub.io/blog/2025/Polaris.
AutoGen. AutoGen. https://github.com/microsoft/autogen, 2025.
Shiyi Cao, Sumanth Hegde, Dacheng Li, Tyler Griggs, Shu Liu, Eric Tang, Jiayi Pan, Xingyao
  Wang, Akshay Malik, Graham Neubig, Kourosh Hakhamaneshi, Richard Liaw, Philipp Moritz,
  Matei Zaharia, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Skyrl-v0: Train real-world long-horizon
  agents via reinforcement learning, 2025.
Chen Chen, Xiaojun Meng, Shengdong Zhao, and Morten Fjeld. Retool: Interactive microtask and
  workflow design through demonstration. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human
  Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 3551–3556, 2017.
Zhaoling Chen, Xiangru Tang, Gangda Deng, Fang Wu, Jialong Wu, Zhiwei Jiang, Viktor Prasanna,
  Arman Cohan, and Xingyao Wang. Locagent: Graph-guided llm agents for code localization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09089, 2025a.
Zijian Chen, Xueguang Ma, Shengyao Zhuang, Ping Nie, Kai Zou, Andrew Liu, Joshua Green,
  Kshama Patel, Ruoxi Meng, Mingyi Su, et al. Browsecomp-plus: A more fair and transparent
  evaluation benchmark of deep-research agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06600, 2025b.
Zhoujun Cheng, Shibo Hao, Tianyang Liu, Fan Zhou, Yutao Xie, Feng Yao, Yuexin Bian, Yonghao
  Zhuang, Nilabjo Dey, Yuheng Zha, et al. Revisiting reinforcement learning for llm reasoning
  from a cross-domain perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14965, 2025.
Run-Ze Fan, Zengzhi Wang, and Pengfei Liu. Megascience: Pushing the frontiers of post-training
  datasets for science reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.16812, 2025.
Wei Fu, Jiaxuan Gao, Xujie Shen, Chen Zhu, Zhiyu Mei, Chuyi He, Shusheng Xu, Guo Wei, Jun
 Mei, Jiashu Wang, Tongkai Yang, Binhang Yuan, and Yi Wu. Areal: A large-scale asynchronous
 reinforcement learning system for language reasoning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/ab
 s/2505.24298.
Jiaxuan Gao, Wei Fu, Minyang Xie, Shusheng Xu, Chuyi He, Zhiyu Mei, Banghua Zhu, and Yi Wu.
   Beyond ten turns: Unlocking long-horizon agentic search with large-scale asynchronous rl. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2508.07976, 2025.


                                                   13
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




Tyler Griggs, Sumanth Hegde, Eric Tang, Shu Liu, Shiyi Cao, Dacheng Li, Charlie Ruan, Philipp
  Moritz, Kourosh Hakhamaneshi, Richard Liaw, et al. Evolving skyrl into a highly-modular rl
  framework. Notion Blog, 2025.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
  Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms
  via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Zhenyu He, Qingping Yang, Wei Sheng, Xiaojian Zhong, Kechi Zhang, Chenxin An, Wenlei Shi,
  Tianle Cai, Di He, Jiaze Chen, and Jingjing Xu. Swe-swiss: A multi-task fine-tuning and rl recipe
  for high-performance issue resolution. https://www.notion.so/SWE-Swiss-A-Mul
  ti-Task-Fine-Tuning-and-RL-Recipe-for-High-Performance-Issue-R
  esolution-21e174dedd4880ea829ed4c861c44f88, 2025. Notion Blog.
Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Simeng Sun, Samuel Kriman, Shantanu Acharya, Dima Rekesh, Fei Jia, Yang
  Zhang, and Boris Ginsburg. Ruler: What’s the real context size of your long-context language
  models? arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06654, 2024.
Jingcheng Hu, Yinmin Zhang, Qi Han, Daxin Jiang, Xiangyu Zhang, and Heung-Yeung Shum.
   Open-reasoner-zero: An open source approach to scaling up reinforcement learning on the base
   model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.24290, 2025.
Naman Jain, Jaskirat Singh, Manish Shetty, Liang Zheng, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. R2e-gym:
  Procedural environments and hybrid verifiers for scaling open-weights swe agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2504.07164, 2025.
Dongfu Jiang, Yi Lu, Zhuofeng Li, Zhiheng Lyu, Ping Nie, Haozhe Wang, Alex Su, Hui Chen, Kai
  Zou, Chao Du, et al. Verltool: Towards holistic agentic reinforcement learning with tool use.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.01055, 2025.
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R
  Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview
  .net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and
  Jiawei Han. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516, 2025.
Jina.ai. Jina, 2025. URL https://jina.ai/.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in
  partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial intelligence, 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.
Thinking Machines Lab. Tinker api. https://tinker-docs.thinkingmachines.ai/,
  2025.
LangChain. LangChain. https://www.langchain.com/, 2025.
Kuan Li, Zhongwang Zhang, Huifeng Yin, Liwen Zhang, Litu Ou, Jialong Wu, Wenbiao Yin, Baix-
  uan Li, Zhengwei Tao, Xinyu Wang, et al. Websailor: Navigating super-human reasoning for web
  agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02592, 2025a.
Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Guanting Dong, Hongjin Qian, Yongkang Wu, Ji-Rong Wen, Yutao Zhu, and
  Zhicheng Dou. Webthinker: Empowering large reasoning models with deep research capability.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21776, 2025b.
Xuefeng Li, Haoyang Zou, and Pengfei Liu. Torl: Scaling tool-integrated rl. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2503.23383, 2025c.
Liyuan Liu, Feng Yao, Dinghuai Zhang, Chengyu Dong, Jingbo Shang, and Jianfeng Gao. Flashrl:
  8bit rollouts, full power rl, August 2025a. URL https://fengyao.notion.site/flas
  h-rl.


                                                14
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




Zichen Liu, Changyu Chen, Wenjun Li, Penghui Qi, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Wee Sun Lee,
  and Min Lin. Understanding r1-zero-like training: A critical perspective. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2503.20783, 2025b.
Zichen Liu, Anya Sims, Keyu Duan, Changyu Chen, Simon Yu, Xiangxin Zhou, Haotian Xu,
  Shaopan Xiong, Bo Liu, Chenmien Tan, et al. Gem: A gym for agentic llms. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2510.01051, 2025c.
Fanbin Lu, Zhisheng Zhong, Shu Liu, Chi-Wing Fu, and Jiaya Jia. Arpo: End-to-end policy opti-
  mization for gui agents with experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16282, 2025.
Michael Luo, Naman Jain, Jaskirat Singh, Sijun Tan, Ameen Patel, Qingyang Wu, Alpay Ariyak,
 Colin Cai, Tarun Venkat, Shang Zhu, Ben Athiwaratkun, Manan Roongta, Ce Zhang, Li Erran
 Li, Raluca Ada Popa, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. Deepswe: Training a state-of-the-art coding
 agent from scratch by scaling rl. https://pretty-radio-b75.notion.site/DeepS
 WE-Training-a-Fully-Open-sourced-State-of-the-Art-Coding-Agent
 -by-Scaling-RL-22281902c1468193aabbe9a8c59bbe33, 2025a. Notion Blog.
Xufang Luo, Yuge Zhang, Zhiyuan He, Zilong Wang, Siyun Zhao, Dongsheng Li, Luna K Qiu, and
  Yuqing Yang. Agent lightning: Train any ai agents with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2508.03680, 2025b.
Xueguang Ma, Qian Liu, Dongfu Jiang, Ge Zhang, Zejun Ma, and Wenhu Chen. General-reasoner:
  Advancing llm reasoning across all domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14652, 2025.
Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang, Alexey Tumanov, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang,
  Melih Elibol, Zongheng Yang, William Paul, Michael I Jordan, et al. Ray: A distributed frame-
  work for emerging {AI} applications. In 13th USENIX symposium on operating systems design
  and implementation (OSDI 18), pp. 561–577, 2018.
OpenAI. Deep research system card, 2025. URL https://cdn.openai.com/deep-resea
  rch-system-card.pdf.
Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph E Gonzalez.
  Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. 2023.
Jiayi Pan, Xingyao Wang, Graham Neubig, Navdeep Jaitly, Heng Ji, Alane Suhr, and Yizhe
   Zhang. Training software engineering agents and verifiers with swe-gym. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2412.21139, 2024.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
  Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathemati-
  cal reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng,
  Haibin Lin, and Chuan Wu. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. In Proceedings
  of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems, pp. 1279–1297, 2025.
Sijun Tan, Michael Luo, Colin Cai, Tarun Venkat, Kyle Montgomery, Aaron Hao, Tianhao Wu,
   Arnav Balyan, Manan Roongta, Chenguang Wang, Li Erran Li, Raluca Ada Popa, and Ion Stoica.
   rllm: A framework for post-training language agents. https://pretty-radio-b75.not
   ion.site/rLLM-A-Framework-for-Post-Training-Language-Agents-21b
   81902c146819db63cd98a54ba5f31, 2025. Notion Blog.
The Agent Lightning (AGL) Team. No more retokenization drift: Returning token ids via the openai
  compatible api matters in agent rl, 2025a. URL https://blog.vllm.ai/2025/10/22/
  agent-lightning.html.
The Terminal-Bench Team. Terminal-bench: A benchmark for ai agents in terminal environments,
  Apr 2025b. URL https://github.com/laude-institute/terminal-bench.
Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Exe-
  cutable code actions elicit better llm agents. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2024a.


                                                15
S KY RL-AGENT (W ORK IN P ROGRESS )




Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan,
  Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, et al. Openhands: An open platform for ai software
  developers as generalist agents. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2024b.
Xumeng Wen, Zihan Liu, Shun Zheng, Zhijian Xu, Shengyu Ye, Zhirong Wu, Xiao Liang, Yang
  Wang, Junjie Li, Ziming Miao, et al. Reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards implicitly
  incentivizes correct reasoning in base llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14245, 2025.
Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. Agentless: Demystifying
  llm-based software engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01489, 2024.
Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing
  Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, Yitao Liu, Yiheng Xu, Shuyan Zhou, Silvio
  Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Tao Yu. Osworld: Benchmarking multimodal agents
  for open-ended tasks in real computer environments, 2024.
John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan,
  and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:50528–50652, 2024.
John Yang, Kilian Lieret, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kabir Khandpur, Yanzhe Zhang,
  Binyuan Hui, Ofir Press, Ludwig Schmidt, and Diyi Yang. Swe-smith: Scaling data for software
  engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21798, 2025a.
Zonghan Yang, Shengjie Wang, Kelin Fu, Wenyang He, Weimin Xiong, Yibo Liu, Yibo Miao, Bofei
  Gao, Yejie Wang, Yingwei Ma, et al. Kimi-dev: Agentless training as skill prior for swe-agents.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23045, 2025b.
Feng Yao, Liyuan Liu, Dinghuai Zhang, Chengyu Dong, Jingbo Shang, and Jianfeng Gao. Your
  efficient rl framework secretly brings you off-policy rl training, August 2025. URL https:
  //fengyao.notion.site/off-policy-rl.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
  Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international
  conference on learning representations, 2022.
Hongli Yu, Tinghong Chen, Jiangtao Feng, Jiangjie Chen, Weinan Dai, Qiying Yu, Ya-Qin Zhang,
  Wei-Ying Ma, Jingjing Liu, Mingxuan Wang, et al. Memagent: Reshaping long-context llm with
  multi-conv rl-based memory agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02259, 2025a.
Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian
  Fan, Gaohong Liu, Lingjun Liu, et al. Dapo: An open-source llm reinforcement learning system
  at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14476, 2025b.
Daoguang Zan, Zhirong Huang, Wei Liu, Hanwu Chen, Linhao Zhang, Shulin Xin, Lu Chen, Qi Liu,
  Xiaojian Zhong, Aoyan Li, et al. Multi-swe-bench: A multilingual benchmark for issue resolving.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02605, 2025.
Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie,
  An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, et al. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and
  reranking through foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176, 2025.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
  Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al. Webarena: A realistic web environment for build-
  ing autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023.
Zilin Zhu, Chengxing Xie, Xin Lv, and slime Contributors. slime: An llm post-training frame-
  work for rl scaling. https://github.com/THUDM/slime, 2025. GitHub repository.
  Corresponding author: Xin Lv.




                                               16
