                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




                                         T EST-T IME A DAPTATION FOR LLM AGENTS VIA E N -
                                         VIRONMENT I NTERACTION

                                          Arthur Chen1∗ Zuxin Liu2 Jianguo Zhang2 Akshara Prabhakar2 Zhiwei Liu2
                                          Shelby Heinecke2 Silvio Savarese2 Victor Zhong1† Caiming Xiong2†
                                          1                               2
                                              University of Waterloo          Salesforce AI Research



                                                                                       A BSTRACT




arXiv:2511.04847v4 [cs.LG] 22 Feb 2026
                                                    Large language model (LLM)-based agents struggle to generalize to novel and
                                                    complex environments, such as unseen websites or new sets of functions, due to
                                                    a fundamental mismatch between their pre-training and test-time conditions. This
                                                    challenge stems from two distinct failure modes: a syntactic misunderstanding of
                                                    environment-specific components like observation formats, and a semantic misun-
                                                    derstanding of state-transition dynamics, which are only revealed at test time. To
                                                    address these issues, we propose two distinct strategies for adapting LLM agents
                                                    by leveraging environment-specific information from interaction that is available
                                                    during deployment. First, an online syntactic alignment (SA) method parameter-
                                                    izes environmental nuances by learning a lightweight adaptation vector that biases
                                                    the model’s output distribution, enabling rapid alignment with an environment
                                                    response format. Second, a deployment-time dynamics grounding (DG) method
                                                    employs a persona-driven exploration phase to systematically probe and learn the
                                                    environment’s causal dynamics before task execution, equipping the agent with
                                                    an in-context world model. We evaluate these strategies across diverse agentic
                                                    benchmarks, including function calling and web navigation. Our empirical re-
                                                    sults show the effectiveness of both strategies across all benchmarks with minimal
                                                    computational cost. We find that dynamics grounding is particularly effective
                                                    in complex environments where unpredictable dynamics pose a major obstacle,
                                                    demonstrating a robust path toward more generalizable and capable LLM-based
                                                    agents. For example, on the WebArena multi-site split, this method increases the
                                                    agent’s success rate from 2% to 23%. We release our code1 .


                                         1        I NTRODUCTION

                                         Large language model (LLM)-based AI agents have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across
                                         diverse tasks (Li et al., 2023a; Zhou et al., 2024a; Patil et al.; Xie et al., 2024), yet they often fail
                                         to generalize when deployed in novel agentic environments such as web navigation (Zhou et al.,
                                         2024a; He et al., 2024) and function calling (Patil et al.; Yao et al., 2024). These failures reflect
                                         two core challenges—the systematic mismatch between the agent’s pre-trained knowledge and the
                                         specific syntax and dynamics of the deployed environment (Yang et al., 2025; Thil et al., 2024).
                                         Although both mismatches stem from a lack of prior knowledge, we distinguish them operationally
                                         because they require different adaptation mechanisms (syntactic vs. semantic). To illustrate these
                                         two failure patterns, we consider an LLM agent tasked with booking a flight on a previously unseen
                                         travel website:

                                         1. Syntactic Mismatch: the LLM agent’s prior knowledge does not align with environment-specific
                                            information, such as observation structure (Yang et al., 2024; Gur et al., 2023) and the environ-
                                            ment’s unique syntax (Lei et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024). This causes parsing and context-
                                            understanding issues: a pre-trained LLM agent might try click(‘‘Search’’) or target
                                              ∗
                                                Work done during internship. Correspondence to: haonan.chen@uwaterloo.ca
                                              †
                                                Equal advising.
                                              1
                                                https://github.com/r2llab/GTTA


                                                                                             1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




   destination, while the new site exposes Go and dest field, producing invalid actions
   and immediate failures. (Yang et al., 2024; Gur et al., 2023; Lei et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024)
2. Semantic Mismatch: the agent lacks an accurate, environment-specific causal model of state
   transitions, so it cannot predict the consequences of actions. For example, the agent may expect
   click(‘‘Go’’) to show flight results, but the site instead opens a date-confirmation pop-up;
   without knowing this transition, the agent cannot form the correct multi-step plan and fails. (For-
   rester, 1971; Chae et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024)

Current approaches to this generalization gap are ill-suited for rapid adaptation in novel envi-
ronments. In addition, many methods require human-annotated or LLM-annotated demonstra-
tions (Wang et al., 2024b; Murty et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2024), which can be resource-intensive
or rely on LLM’s prior knowledge about the environment. On the other hand, to address semantic
mismatch, explicit world modeling like (Chae et al., 2025) involves a heavyweight pipeline of exten-
sive data collection and fine-tuning a separate, specialized model that is computationally expensive
and struggles to generalize without being retrained. Both paradigms present significant overhead,
highlighting the need for more efficient strategies that can ground an agent using only the informa-
tion available at test time.
To address the two failure modes and close the generalization gap, we propose two annotation-
free strategies that operate at deployment time. (1) Online syntactic alignment (SA)—a lightweight
module that learns a small per-interaction bias (an adaptation vector applied to late features) to
quickly align an agent’s output distribution with environment-specific syntax. Observing Go and
dest field on the page, for example, lets the adapter steer action generation toward the site’s
actual element names. (2) Dynamics grounding (DG)—a short, persona-guided exploration phase
that iteratively collects in-context rules about state transitions (e.g., clicking Go opens a date pop-up)
and supplies those rules as context for downstream planning. Both methods require only test-time
observations and no trajectory annotations or expensive fine-tuning.
We evaluate our methods on function-calling and web-navigation benchmarks. Both approaches
yield consistent improvements: syntactic alignment gives efficient, steady gains across sites, while
dynamics grounding produces particularly large improvements on environments with unfamiliar
transitions. For example, on the WebArena multi-site split (Zhou et al., 2024a), dynamics ground-
ing raises GPT-4.1 success from 2% to 23%. Taken together, syntactic and semantic test-time
grounding substantially narrow the deployment generalization gap and offer a practical path toward
more robust LLM agents.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Test-Time Adaptation Originating in computer vision, test-time adaptation (TTA) addresses dis-
tributional shifts between training and testing data by adapting models at inference time (Wang et al.,
2021; Niu et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2020). Our syntactic alignment builds directly on methods that up-
date model parameters or steering vectors at test time to minimize an unsupervised objective, such
as entropy minimization or self-supervised learning (Wang et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2025; Li et al.,
2023b). Our syntactic alignment aligns with steering vector research (Tan et al., 2025; Sinii et al.,
2025; Panickssery et al., 2024; Turner et al., 2024) in its use of latent space biases to shift output
distributions. However, standard steering approaches generally apply modulation vectors to shift
high-level traits (Tan et al., 2025), such as honesty (Zou et al., 2025). We distinguish our work by
tailoring this mechanism to the dynamic nature of agentic tasks: our vector is treated as a tempo-
rary parameter, updated online using the environment’s response as a self-supervisory signal, and
reset per episode to ensure precise, context-dependent alignment without interference across tasks.
While TTA for LLMs is emerging for tasks like math reasoning (Zuo et al., 2025) and few-shot
learning (Akyürek et al., 2025), its application to the unique, interactive, and stateful challenges of
LLM agents remains underexplored. Our work is the first to systematically apply this paradigm to
adapt agents to novel environment formats without supervised trajectories.

Environment Modeling for Agents Recent work has focused on incorporating environment dy-
namics into LLM-based planning by training a parameterized world model (Fang et al., 2025; Chae
et al., 2025; Ding et al., 2026; Qiao et al., 2024), or using an LLM to predict the next state using
continuously updated environment rules (Zhou et al., 2024b). Such approaches typically require


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




collecting a large set of observations for learning a world model, and can be computationally expen-
sive (Chae et al., 2025). In contrast, our dynamics grounding introduces a lightweight, deployment-
time pipeline to generate a temporary, in-context world model from a few exploratory interactions.
This aligns with a broader trend of using in-context learning for adaptation, including methods like
agent workflow memory (Wang et al., 2024b) and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) for plan-
ning (Luo et al., 2023; Kagaya et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a). However, our contribution lies in
the systematic and automated process of generating this knowledge via persona-driven exploration,
removing the need for pre-existing annotated demonstrations or a separate, trained dynamics model.

LLM-Based Agents Large language models (LLMs) have become the planning backbone of a
wide range of agentic systems due to their strong instruction-following capabilities and generaliza-
tion across diverse tasks (Ouyang et al., 2022; Mishra et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2024a). Their ability
to interpret complex instructions and generate coherent action plans has enabled their integration
into applications such as web navigation (Zhou et al., 2024a; He et al., 2024; Lù et al., 2024; Deng
et al., 2023) and function calling (Patil et al.; Yao et al., 2024). Despite recent advances, LLM agents
struggle to comprehend the specific syntactical input structure of different environments, such as in
web navigation (Yang et al., 2024; Gur et al., 2023) and text-to-SQL (Lei et al., 2024). This is
due to the fundamental mismatch between the LLM pre-training corpus and the specific agentic
environment (Chen et al., 2024; Ben-David et al., 2010).

3     G ROUNDED T EST-T IME A DAPTATION S TRATEGIES
In this section, we detail our two adaptation strategies which mitigate syntactic and semantic gaps.
We first formalize the problem setup, which is designed to reflect realistic deployment scenarios and
is defined by three key constraints:

1. No annotated trajectories or offline data. The agent cannot access expert demonstrations or
   pre-collected data from the target environment. It must learn from scratch during interaction. For
   our running travel example, the agent has never seen travel-example.com and has no pre-existing
   dataset of successful bookings on that site.
2. Online, streaming adaptation. The agent receives tasks one at a time and must adapt on-the-fly
   without seeing a full batch of test instances in advance. For example, it must adapt to the web-
   site’s quirks while handling a single request (e.g. “Book a flight from New York to Saskatoon”)
   before seeing any future tasks.
3. Permitted test-time interaction. The agent is allowed to interact with the environment to gather
   information before receiving a specific task, but without supervision. For instance, it can perform
   a “blind” exploration of travel-example.com to discover that a button triggers a calendar pop-up,
   but it does not know what kind of tasks the user will ultimately ask it to execute.

This setting mirrors constraints in practical benchmarks (e.g., BIRD (Li et al., 2023a), We-
bArena (Zhou et al., 2024a)) and necessitates methods that can leverage only unsupervised, test-time
interaction. To formulate this challenge, at test-time the LLM input I is constructed as
                                                          −1
                                          I = [p; o; {a}Ti=1 ]                                      (1)
where p denotes the task instruction (e.g., rules, task description), o denotes the current environment
                                                                                         −1
observation (e.g., accessibility tree observation, response of function call), and {a}Ti=1   denotes the
sequence of past actions taken by the LLM-based agent up to the current step. For environments
with short or simple observations (e.g., tool-use scenarios), we instead construct the model input
using all previous interactions between the agent and the environment, which may include both en-
vironment responses and agent actions. With this formulation of the challenge in mind, we describe
two adaptation methods in the remainder of this section.

3.1   S YNTACTIC A LIGNMENT

To address syntactic mismatches that arise in novel environments, we propose syntactic alignment.
The objective is to parametrically adapt the model’s output distribution at test time by treating the
current context (i.e. task instructions, observations, and action history) as a self-supervisory signal.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Figure 1: Overview of syntactic alignment (SA). This figure includes an example of web nav-
igation shopping task to illustrate how the agent adapts to new environment. (1) At the start of
each episode, we initialize an adaptation vector δ as a zero vector and construct inputs to the LLM
agent. (2) During task execution, the agent receives environment instructions and observations. (3)
At each step, we update the adaptation vector using cross-entropy loss on the current input, and
apply the adaptation vector as a bias to the LLM’s final hidden layer. This enables rapid alignment
to environment-specific observation and action formats. (4) The LLM agent takes a new action
with the updated vector, which shifts the model’s output distribution to better match the test-time
environment.

This allows the model to align with local syntactic patterns, such as unique UI element labels or
response formats, without requiring a deep understanding of the environment’s causal dynamics.
Our approach introduces a single lightweight adaptation vector δ ∈ Rd , where d is the hidden
dimension of the language model. This vector acts as an additive bias to the final hidden representa-
tions H ∈ Rn×d before the final projection layer. At each step of an episode, the adapted logits are
computed as:
                                     logits′ = (H + δ)WLM T
                                                                                                  (2)
where WLM ∈ R|V |×d is the model’s output projection matrix and |V | is the vocabulary size.
This vector δ is updated at each turn by performing one gradient descent step to minimize the
language modeling loss of the current input context I according to the following:
                            δnew ← δold − η∇δ LCE (fθ,δ (I1:n−1 ), I2:n )                           (3)
where fθ,δ is the LLM parameterized by its fixed weights θ and the adaptable vector δ, and η is
the learning rate. I1:n−1 denotes the input subsequence consisting of tokens 1 through n − 1,
and I2:n denotes the corresponding next-token targets obtained by shifting the sequence by one
position. The loss in Eq. 3 is therefore computed by predicting each token in I2:n from its preceding
context I1:n−1 . This update encourages the model to internalize the syntactic features present in the
immediate context by adapting its output distribution to the environment context.
To illustrate this in practice, consider our agent on the unseen website travel-example.com.
The agent’s input context I contains the accessibility tree, which includes strings such as [145]
<button>Go and dest field.
1. Initialization: At the episode’s start, the adaptation vector is initialized as a zero vector, δ ← 0.
2. Prediction: Without adaptation, the model’s logits would likely favor the action
   click(‘‘Search’’), based on its pre-trained priors.
3. Adaptation: We compute the language modeling loss on the context I (Eq. 3). Because the
   strings Go and dest field are present in I, the gradient update to δ will shift its values to
   favor their tokens.
4. Correction: In the subsequent generation step, the adapted logits (Eq. 2) now assign a higher
   probability to the syntactically correct action, click(‘‘Go’’).
This process is computationally efficient, and steps 2-4 are repeated at every model prediction within
an episode. To prevent catastrophic forgetting and ensure that adaptation is specific to the current


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




environment, δ is reset to zero at the beginning of each new episode. This lightweight update aligns
the model’s pre-trained distribution with the specific distribution of the test-time environment.

3.2   DYNAMICS G ROUNDING




Figure 2: Overview of dynamics grounding (DG). This figure includes an example of web navi-
gation shopping task to illustrate how the pipeline generates environment dynamics in language. (1)
We synthesize diverse exploration tasks based on personas using environment descriptions. (2) An
exploration agent interacts with the environment to collect interaction logs of state transitions. (3)
An LLM extracts and summarizes environment dynamics from these logs. (4) A reasoning model
filters less informative rules, which are then used to augment the agent’s context during evaluation,
enabling more transition-aware decision making.
LLM-based agents often fail in novel environments due to a semantic mismatch: they lack a “world
model” to predict the outcomes of their actions (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Chae et al., 2025).
To address this, we propose dynamics grounding, a strategy that proactively discovers the causal
dynamics of an environment before the agent encounters any user tasks during deployment.
The objective is to construct an in-context world model using natural language by performing a one-
time, automated exploration. The cost of this discovery phase is amortized over all subsequent tasks
performed in that environment.
Our method follows a four-step pipeline to generate a concise set of environment dynamics, denoted
as Eclean , for a given new environment.

1. Persona/Exploratory Goal Synthesis. An LLM is prompted with a high-level description of
   the environment (e.g., website purpose, API documentation) to generate a set of N diverse, ex-
   ploratory “personas” or “goals”. Personas frame open-ended tasks designed to probe for non-
   obvious interactions. For our travel-example.com scenario, a synthesized persona might
   be: “As a first-time user, I want to see what happens if I try to search for a flight without select-
   ing a date.”. We prefer personas over a less-structured exploration policy (e.g. maximizing state
   novelty or coverage) to guide the agent to explore complex, multi-step interactions that a naive
   exploration strategy might miss, thus yielding more semantically rich dynamics.
2. Exploration and on-the-fly Dynamics Extraction For each persona or goal, an LLM agent
   interacts with the environment. The agent is instructed to take novel actions to maximize its
   discovery of new state transitions. After each action is executed and the system transitions into
   the next state, we take (observation, action, new observation) to summarize into a concise human-
   readable rule e. Immediately after, the list of generated rules {e}Ti=1 is appended to the agent to
   encourage taking actions that have not been taken before. In our example, the agent would
   execute click(‘‘Go’’) and log the transition from the main page to a state where a calendar


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




    pop-up is active. Then the transition on travel-example.com would be extracted as the
    dynamic: Executing the action click(‘Go’) on the main page causes a calendar modal to
    appear for date selection.
3. Filtering and Consolidation. The set of all extracted dynamics, E = {e}M        i=1 , is passed to
   a reasoning model. This model filters out trivial (e.g., “typing in a text field shows text”) or
   repetitive rules, producing a final, clean set of dynamics, Eclean .

During task execution at test time, we augment the input context I with discovered dynamics:
                                          I ′ = [I; Eclean ]                                      (4)
By leveraging the LLM’s in-context learning capabilities, this explicit knowledge of the environ-
ment’s state-transition patterns guides the agent to make more informed and transition-aware deci-
sions. In our example, with the calendar pop-up dynamic in its context, the agent correctly antici-
pates the outcome of its click and plans its subsequent actions accordingly, successfully navigating
the semantic mismatch. Example prompts for exploration and dynamics extraction are shown in
Appendix sections section A.2 and section A.3.

4       E XPERIMENTS
4.1      S ETUP

We evaluate our approach on three realistic agentic Table 1: Number of tasks per website in
benchmarks: BFCLv3 (Patil et al.), WebArena (Zhou the WebArena benchmark. The benchmark
et al., 2024a), and Tau-Bench (Yao et al., 2024), which consists of six websites, including a multi-
together cover both web navigation and conversational site category for tasks that require interact-
function calling tasks. As for baselines, we evalu- ing across multiple websites (from the six
ate open-source Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct (Qwen sites), for a total of 812 tasks.
et al., 2025) model and closed-source GPT-4.1.
On WebArena, we additionally compare to the                   Website         Number of Tasks
World-model-augmented (WMA) agent from (Chae                 Shopping                 187
et al., 2025) as a baseline.           This approach     Shopping   Admin             182
first collects exploration demonstrations, then trains        GitLab                  180
a Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al.,                    Map                   109
2024) model to predict the next state given an action          Reddit                 106
(i.e., a learned world model). During evaluation, this       Multi-site                48
world model is used to provide next-state predictions           Total                 812
to the agent on-the-fly, helping the agent reason about the consequences of its actions. In this
comparison, we use the same GPT-4o mini as the original WMA experiments. Aside from the
syntactic alignment and dynamics grounding experiments, we provide ablation studies in section 4.3.
For all dynamics grounding experiments, we leverage GPT-4.1 as an exploration policy to extract
environmental dynamics. For each environment, we conduct 10 exploration episodes to gather a
diverse set of dynamics. For environment dynamics filtering, we apply o32 to remove repetitive
and trivial environment dynamics. We also include ablation studies on the number of exploration
episodes and the effect of filtering in section 4.3.
Before delving into the results, we first introduce the benchmarks and describe the specific experi-
mental setups used for experiments.

WebArena The WebArena benchmark consists of five self-hosted websites and a total of 812
tasks. Many tasks require interacting across multiple websites, which poses additional challenges
for LLM-based agents. For evaluation, WebArena employs a string-matching-based mechanism to
assess correctness, providing more stable and objective results compared to benchmarks using LLMs
to score, such as (He et al., 2024; Gou et al., 2025). For dynamics grounding, we first synthesize
10 personas via prompt instruction 1 for each website using GPT-4o (OpenAI et al., 2024) and with
seed personas from NNetNav (Murty et al., 2025). Then for each persona, we roll-out a GPT-4.1
agent to explore the environment guided by the persona description, with the exploration prompt
    2
        https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/o3


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 2: Main results on WebArena, WebVoyager, BFCLv3, and Tau-Bench benchmarks. We report
task success rates (%) for each model and adaptation method. For Tau-Bench, we average runs
across 5 seeds and use a custom more stable codebase. Both test-time adaptation strategies improve
performance. ”N/A” indicates not applicable—AWM requires training a web-specific world model
on state transitions, which is not applicable to Tau-Bench (conversational only) or BFCLv3 (no
explicit web-like state transition data); Dynamics grounding does not operate in conversational Tau-
Bench as there is no explicit and fixed state transition rules in the environment.
                  Model                                               Task
                                             WebArena        BFCLv3              Tau-Bench
                                                                            Airline      Retail
 GPT-4.1                                        30.0          55.5             -           -
 GPT-4.1 (+ DG)                              35.0 (+5.0)   64.0 (+8.5)       N/A          N/A
 GPT-4o mini                                    12.0            -              -           -
 GPT-4o mini (+ WMA)                         13.5 (+1.5)      N/A            N/A          N/A
 GPT-4o mini (+ DG)                          18.0 (+6.0)        -            N/A          N/A
 Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct                           17.0          18.5           21.6         43.3
 Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct (+ SA)                 18.0 (+1.0)   20.0 (+1.5)    25.2 (+3.6) 44.9 (+1.6)
 Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct (+ DG)                 20.0 (+3.0)   22.0 (+3.5)       N/A          N/A
 Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct (hybrid)               21.0 (+4.0)   21.0 (+2.5)       N/A          N/A

instruction 2 derived from NNetNav, and with a maximum exploration budget of 30 steps. To extract
environment dynamics from interaction logs, we summarize each state transition pair (observation,
action taken, new observation) with prompt instruction 3, and concatenate all summarized state
transition pairs to obtain the list of environmental dynamics E = {e}M  i=1 for each website. Finally,
we utilize the o3 model to remove repetitive and trivial environment dynamic entries from the list via
prompt instruction 4, resulting in Eclean . We provide all prompts we use in section A. With syntactic
alignment, we reset the adaptation vector after each episode and we use a learning rate of 0.1 and
training step of 1 for all experiments. During evaluation, we use the text-based accessibility tree as
the observation type and run experiments using BrowserGym3 and AgentLab4 with a maximum step
of 30.

BFCLv3 BFCLv3 (Patil et al.) is a benchmark with various realistic APIs to evaluate the functions
calling abilities of LLM. It contains 8 different API domains. We provide the number of APIs for
each environment in table 8. We choose the multi-turn-base split to assess the agent’s multi-turn
function calling capabilities. This split is multi-turn and multi-step, meaning that instead of just
handling a single tool call in a one-off request, models have to carry out sequences of function calls
across multiple dialogue turns. BFCLv3 uses state-based evaluation (checking the system’s resulting
state) and response-based evaluation (checking whether the call sequences are valid and minimally
sufficient) to assess correctness, therefore being stable and deterministic. For dynamics grounding,
we synthesize 10 exploration tasks with GPT-4o conditioned on the function documentation for
each domain via prompt instruction 7. Concretely, we instruct the LLM to think about what functions
it wants to explore in order to find out unpredictable outcomes or interesting behaviors, given the
function documentation. We use a GPT-4.1 agent to execute the exploration task and we collect
interaction logs for environment dynamics extraction. During exploration, we ask the exploration
agent to decide if the steps taken so far are sufficient to answer the exploration task with prompt
instruction 8. The environment dynamics are extracted using prompt instruction 9. We follow the
same procedure as in WebArena to remove repetitive and trivial environment dynamics with prompt
instruction 10. For syntactic alignment, we reset adaptation vector at each turn (when a new user
query arrives).

Tau-Bench Tau-Bench (Yao et al., 2024) is a realistic function calling benchmark that simulates
real-world service agents interacting with an LLM-simulated user. It comprises two domains: air-
line (50 tasks) and retail (115 tasks). The airline domain is generally more challenging than retail,
as it features a much larger database, increasing the complexity of the tasks. Tau-bench’s use of an
LLM-simulated user agent introduces significant variance in evaluation results, as the simulated hu-
   3
       https://github.com/ServiceNow/BrowserGym
   4
       https://github.com/ServiceNow/AgentLab


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 3: Success rates (%) on the WebArena benchmark across different websites and models. Both
adaptation strategies improve performance over baselines. and dynamics grounding (DG) surpasses
WMA on GPT-4o mini. DG improves success rate substantially on complex multi-site split.
                                                                Website
             Model                 Gitlab   Shop Admin      Shop  Reddit       Map     Multi     Avg
 GPT-4.1                           48.0%      31.0%        37.0% 29.0%        28.0%     2.0%    30.0%
 GPT-4.1 (+DG)                     45.0%      27.0%        33.0% 42.0%        31.0%    23.0%    35.0%
 GPT-4o mini                        9.0%      12.0%        18.0%   8.0%       12.0%    12.0%    12.0%
 GPT-4o mini (+WMA)                   –          –           –       –          –         –     13.5%
 GPT-4o mini (+DG)                 18.0%      14.0%        26.0% 14.0%        19.0%    12.0%    18.0%
 Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct              20.0%      14.0%        22.0% 13.0%        13.0%     6.0%    17.0%
 Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct (+SA)        16.0%      14.0%        24.0% 25.0%        16.0%     6.0%    18.0%
 Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct (+DG)        23.0%      13.0%        24.0% 23.0%        20.0%    10.0%    20.0%
 Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct (Hybrid)     26.0%      13.0%        24.0% 31.0%        19.0%     4.0%    21.0%

man may drift from the original instruction or be influenced by the agent’s responses over multiple
conversational turns. To address this, we adopt the improved evaluation codebase from (Prabhakar
et al., 2025), which substantially reduces reward variance and improves evaluation fidelity. Specif-
ically, we (1) fix incorrect labels, (2) set the temperature of the LLM-simulated user agent to 0
for deterministic responses, and (3) employ a Best-of-N (N=5) sampling strategy combined with
a self-critique mechanism, allowing the simulated user to better adhere to the task instruction and
avoid being misled by the agent’s outputs. This protocol has been shown to improve consistency
in agent performance evaluation across multiple trials according to (Prabhakar et al., 2025). Tau-
Bench consists solely of API-based tasks without observable state transitions, meaning there are
no environment dynamics to extract. As a result, dynamics grounding, which relies on extracting
and leveraging such dynamics, is not applicable to this benchmark. Therefore, we only evaluate the
syntactic alignment method on Tau-Bench. To further reduce variance, we report results averaged
over 5 random seeds in table 2.

4.2   R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

Both Adaptation Strategies Consistently Improve Performance As shown in table 2, both syn-
tactic alignment (SA) and dynamics grounding (DG) improve performance across models and tasks.
dynamics grounding yields substantial improvements for GPT-4.1, which is better able to leverage
the provided dynamics due to its superior instruction-following abilities. It is also evident in table 2
that our GPT-4o mini surpasses WMA that uses a learned world model by a large margin. For
Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct, both methods provide gains, highlighting the general applicability of
test-time adaptation. The improvements of dynamics grounding are especially significant for models
with stronger instruction-following abilities (e.g., GPT-4.1), likely because they can better leverage
the provided dynamics context.

Both Adaptation Strategies are computationally efficient The Table 4: Relative latency gain
two proposed strategies are computationally efficient, though they (%) of PA on BFCLv3 multi-
have different profiles. syntactic alignment is highly efficient turn. LR fixed to 0.1.
for real-time use. As shown in table 4, a single update step            Step Latency Gain ↓
adds only a 3% latency overhead. In contrast, dynamics ground-            0            0%
ing is a one-time, deployment-time investment designed to be              1           3.0%
far more lightweight than traditional world-modeling approaches           2           5.9%
like the WMA baseline. For example, while WMA requires syn-               3           8.2%
thesizing 870 tasks to collect trajectories for training a separate       4          12.6%
Llama-3.1-8B model, our method uses only 50 exploratory roll-             5          15.6%
outs and requires no additional model training. This streamlined
process avoids WMA’s costly training phase and its significant inference overhead, where action
simulation takes approximately 140 seconds per step. The total upfront cost for our dynamics
grounding procedure on a single WebArena website is approximately 7M tokens, a cost that is
amortized across all subsequent tasks. This investment pays significant dividends where environ-
mental dynamics are unpredictable. For instance, on the challenging multi-site split, the success
rate of our agent increases from 2% to 23%. This demonstrates the value of efficiently learning an
environment’s dynamics at test time to compensate for the limitations of an agent’s pre-training.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 5: Ablation on exploration policy and dynamics extractor backbones on WebArena. Here
we use different backbones of exploration policy and dynamics extractor. We found for dynamics
grounding—using the same LLM agent (itself) improves the same as using a stronger one.
            Task Model                  Exploration Policy      Dynamics Extractor           SR
    GPT-4o mini (baseline)            –                         –                           12.0
    GPT-4o mini                       GPT-4.1                   GPT-4.1                  18.0 (+6.0)
    GPT-4o mini (self)                GPT-4o mini               GPT-4o mini              19.0 (+7.0)
    Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct (baseline)   –                         –                           17.0
    Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct              GPT-4.1                   GPT-4.1                  20.0 (+3.0)
    Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct (self)       Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct      Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct     20.0 (+3.0)

Effectiveness Depends on Environment Complexity and Method Synergy The smaller gains
for DG on simpler websites like “Shopping” suggest that when an environment’s dynamics align
with common sense priors (e.g., clicking ’search’ shows a search bar), the explicit dynamics provide
less new information, and the overhead of a longer context may slightly hinder performance. In
these simple settings, longer input on dynamics may negatively impact the model’s effectiveness,
as prior work has shown that excessively long contexts can hurt performance (Beltagy et al., 2020;
Liu et al., 2024). We further analyze this phenomenon and provide exemplar environment dynamics
in section A.5. Furthermore, our test of a naive hybrid approach showed mixed results, underper-
forming the dynamics grounding method alone on BFCLv3 (21.0% vs 22.0%). This suggests a
simple combination is insufficient and may create interference between the two adaptation signals.
A key challenge for future work is developing a more principled integration of semantic guidance
and distributional alignment.

4.3    A BLATIONS

Dynamics grounding enables self-improvement We ablate the choice of backbone LLMs for
exploration and dynamics extraction in our dynamics grounding method (table 5). Results show that
using the same model for both components (self-improvement) performs as well as using a stronger
model, indicating that our approach is robust to the choice of exploration policy and dynamics
extractor.

Effect of filtering environmental dynamics We conduct an ablation experiment on BFCLv3 and
find that filtering improves success rate across exploration budgets. Specifically, with 10 episodes,
success rate rises from 61.0 to 64.0 (+3.0).

Syntactic alignment is robust to different hyperparameters As shown in table 6, training with
different learning rates generally improves performance across a range of reasonable hyperparameter
values. However, using extreme hyperparameters can degrade performance. For example, in the
case of the 7B model, applying a very high learning rate of 1.0 or training for 5 steps leads to
reduced success rates, highlighting the importance of careful hyperparameter selection for optimal
adaptation.

Larger models benefit from a larger learning rate When testing with a very large learning rate
(i.e., learning rate of 1.0), we find that larger models (i.e., 14B and 32B models) benefit more with a
larger learning rate. We attribute this to the fact that the dimension of the adaptation vector for 14B
and 32B models is the same (i.e., 5120), and is much larger compared to the 7B model’s (i.e., 3584).


5     L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

Our study is primarily focused on the Qwen2.5 model family for syntactic alignment; future work
should validate these findings across a broader range of open-source architectures. Our dynamics
grounding method currently operates in environments with explicit state transitions, where testbeds
such as user-oriented conversational tasks are not explored. Additionally, our online syntactic align-
ment method does not currently normalize updates by the hidden dimension size, which could im-
prove robustness to hyperparameters.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




The most promising direction for future work is the development of a principled method for integrat-
ing our two adaptation strategies as our analysis suggests that simply combining them is suboptimal.
A more advanced approach could involve a meta-controller that assesses an environment’s complex-
ity to dynamically decide whether to rely on efficient online adaptation for simple tasks or to deploy
the more costly dynamics grounding for complex, unfamiliar environments.

6   C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, we presented a comparative study of two distinct strategies for adapting LLM agents
to novel, complex environments. We identified two primary failure modes—syntactic and semantic
mismatches—and investigated targeted solutions for each. The first, syntactic alignment (SA), is an
efficient technique for aligning an agent’s output distribution to the local format of an environment.
The second, dynamics grounding (DG), is an effective and efficient method for providing the agent
with a causal world model through proactive dynamics extraction.
Our evaluations on diverse agentic benchmarks demonstrate that both strategies significantly im-
prove performance. Online adaptation provides consistent, low-cost gains, while dynamics ground-
ing is critical for success in complex settings where an agent’s pre-trained knowledge fails. Our
findings highlight that a multi-faceted approach to adaptation is necessary for robust agent gen-
eralization and point toward exciting future directions in creating more intelligent and integrated
adaptation systems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Salesforce AI Research for supporting this work. We also thank the reviewers and the area
chairs for their time and thoughtful feedback.

R EFERENCES
Ekin Akyürek, Mehul Damani, Adam Zweiger, Linlu Qiu, Han Guo, Jyothish Pari, Yoon Kim,
  and Jacob Andreas. The Surprising Effectiveness of Test-Time Training for Few-Shot Learning,
  March 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2411.07279. arXiv:2411.07279 [cs].
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E. Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The Long-Document Transformer,
   December 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.05150. arXiv:2004.05150 [cs].
Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wort-
  man Vaughan. A theory of learning from different domains. Machine Learning, 79(1):151–175,
  May 2010. ISSN 1573-0565. doi: 10.1007/s10994-009-5152-4. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1007/s10994-009-5152-4.
Hyungjoo Chae, Namyoung Kim, Kai Tzu-iunn Ong, Minju Gwak, Gwanwoo Song, Jihoon Kim,
  Sunghwan Kim, Dongha Lee, and Jinyoung Yeo. Web Agents with World Models: Learning and
  Leveraging Environment Dynamics in Web Navigation, March 2025. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/2410.13232. arXiv:2410.13232 [cs].
Zehui Chen, Kuikun Liu, Qiuchen Wang, Wenwei Zhang, Jiangning Liu, Dahua Lin, Kai Chen, and
  Feng Zhao. Agent-FLAN: Designing Data and Methods of Effective Agent Tuning for Large
  Language Models. arXiv, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2403.12881. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2403.12881. Version Number: 1.
Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Samuel Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and
  Yu Su. Mind2Web: Towards a Generalist Agent for the Web, December 2023. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2306.06070. arXiv:2306.06070 [cs].
Jingtao Ding, Yunke Zhang, Yu Shang, Yuheng Zhang, Zefang Zong, Jie Feng, Yuan Yuan,
   Hongyuan Su, Nian Li, Nicholas Sukiennik, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. Understanding World
   or Predicting Future? A Comprehensive Survey of World Models. ACM Computing Sur-
   veys, 58(3):1–38, February 2026. ISSN 0360-0300, 1557-7341. doi: 10.1145/3746449. URL
   https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3746449.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Tianqing Fang, Hongming Zhang, Zhisong Zhang, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Haitao Mi, and Dong Yu.
  WebEvolver: Enhancing Web Agent Self-Improvement with Coevolving World Model. 2025. doi:
  10.48550/ARXIV.2504.21024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21024. Publisher:
  arXiv Version Number: 2.
Jay W. Forrester. Counterintuitive behavior of social systems. Theory and Decision, 2(2):109–140,
  December 1971. ISSN 1573-7187. doi: 10.1007/BF00148991. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1007/BF00148991.
Boyu Gou, Zanming Huang, Yuting Ning, Yu Gu, Michael Lin, Weijian Qi, Andrei Kopanev,
  Botao Yu, Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez, Yiheng Shu, Chan Hee Song, Jiaman Wu, Shijie Chen,
  Hanane Nour Moussa, Tianshu Zhang, Jian Xie, Yifei Li, Tianci Xue, Zeyi Liao, Kai Zhang,
  Boyuan Zheng, Zhaowei Cai, Viktor Rozgic, Morteza Ziyadi, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Mind2Web
  2: Evaluating Agentic Search with Agent-as-a-Judge, July 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2506.21506. arXiv:2506.21506 [cs].
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
  Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan,
  Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Ko-
  renev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava
  Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux,
  Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret,
  Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius,
  Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary,
  Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab
  AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco
  Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind That-
  tai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Kore-
  vaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra,
  Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
  hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu,
  Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jong-
  soo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala,
  Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid
  El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren
  Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin,
  Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi,
  Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew
  Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Ku-
  mar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoy-
  chev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan
  Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan,
  Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ra-
  mon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Ro-
  hit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan
  Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell,
  Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng
  Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer
  Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman,
  Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mi-
  haylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor
  Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vı́tor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei
  Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang
  Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Gold-
  schlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning
  Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh,
  Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria,
  Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein,
  Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, An-
  drew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, An-


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




  nie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel,
  Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leon-
  hardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu
  Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Mon-
  talvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao
  Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia
  Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide
  Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le,
  Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily
  Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smoth-
  ers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni,
  Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia
  Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan,
  Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harri-
  son Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj,
  Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James
  Geboski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jen-
  nifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang,
  Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Jun-
  jie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy
  Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang,
  Kunal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell,
  Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa,
  Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias
  Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L.
  Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike
  Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari,
  Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan
  Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong,
  Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent,
  Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar,
  Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Ro-
  driguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy,
  Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin
  Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon,
  Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ra-
  maswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha,
  Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal,
  Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satter-
  field, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj
  Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo
  Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook
  Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar,
  Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li,
  Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian Wu,
  Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi,
  Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen
  Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen,
  Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. The Llama 3 Herd of Models, November 2024. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783. arXiv:2407.21783 [cs].

Izzeddin Gur, Hiroki Furuta, Austin Huang, Mustafa Safdari, Yutaka Matsuo, Douglas Eck, and
   Aleksandra Faust. A Real-World WebAgent with Planning, Long Context Understanding, and
   Program Synthesis. 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2307.12856. URL https://arxiv.org/
   abs/2307.12856. Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 4.

David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World Models. March 2018. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.1207631.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.10122. arXiv:1803.10122 [cs].


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Yong Dai, Hongming Zhang, Zhenzhong Lan,
  and Dong Yu. WebVoyager: Building an End-to-End Web Agent with Large Multimodal Models,
  June 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.13919. arXiv:2401.13919 [cs].
Yang Hu, Xingyu Zhang, Xueji Fang, Zhiyang Chen, Xiao Wang, Huatian Zhang, and Guojun Qi.
  SLOT: Sample-specific Language Model Optimization at Test-time, May 2025. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2505.12392. arXiv:2505.12392 [cs].
Tomoyuki Kagaya, Thong Jing Yuan, Yuxuan Lou, Jayashree Karlekar, Sugiri Pranata, Akira Ki-
  nose, Koki Oguri, Felix Wick, and Yang You. RAP: Retrieval-Augmented Planning with Con-
  textual Memory for Multimodal LLM Agents. 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2402.03610. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03610. Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 1.
Fangyu Lei, Jixuan Chen, Yuxiao Ye, Ruisheng Cao, Dongchan Shin, Hongjin Su, Zhaoqing Suo,
  Hongcheng Gao, Wenjing Hu, Pengcheng Yin, Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, Ruoxi Sun, Qian
  Liu, Sida Wang, and Tao Yu. Spider 2.0: Evaluating Language Models on Real-World Enterprise
  Text-to-SQL Workflows, November 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2411.07763.
  arXiv:2411.07763 [cs].
Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin,
   Rongyu Cao, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, Xuanhe Zhou, Chenhao Ma, Guoliang Li, Kevin C. C.
   Chang, Fei Huang, Reynold Cheng, and Yongbin Li. Can LLM Already Serve as A Database
   Interface? A BIg Bench for Large-Scale Database Grounded Text-to-SQLs, November 2023a.
   URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.03111. arXiv:2305.03111 [cs].
Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg.
  Inference-Time Intervention: Eliciting Truthful Answers from a Language Model. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:41451–41530, December 2023b.
  URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
  81b8390039b7302c909cb769f8b6cd93-Abstract-Conference.html.
Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio
  Petroni, and Percy Liang.    Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long
  Contexts.    Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 12:157–
  173, February 2024.    ISSN 2307-387X.     doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00638. URL https:
  //direct.mit.edu/tacl/article/doi/10.1162/tacl_a_00638/119630/
  Lost-in-the-Middle-How-Language-Models-Use-Long.
Linhao Luo, Yuan-Fang Li, Gholamreza Haffari, and Shirui Pan. Reasoning on Graphs: Faithful
  and Interpretable Large Language Model Reasoning. 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2310.01061.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01061. Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 2.
Xing Han Lù, Zdeněk Kasner, and Siva Reddy. WebLINX: Real-World Website Navigation with
  Multi-Turn Dialogue, September 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05930.
  arXiv:2402.05930 [cs].
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Cross-Task General-
  ization via Natural Language Crowdsourcing Instructions. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3470–
  3487, Dublin, Ireland, 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  acl-long.244. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.244.
Shikhar Murty, Hao Zhu, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and Christopher D. Manning. NNetNav: Unsuper-
  vised Learning of Browser Agents Through Environment Interaction in the Wild, February 2025.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02907. arXiv:2410.02907 [cs].
Shuaicheng Niu, Jiaxiang Wu, Yifan Zhang, Yaofo Chen, Shijian Zheng, Peilin Zhao, and Mingkui
  Tan. Efficient Test-Time Model Adaptation without Forgetting. arXiv, 2022. doi: 10.48550/
  ARXIV.2204.02610. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02610. Version Number: 2.
OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
  cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




  Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Moham-
  mad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher
  Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brock-
  man, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann,
  Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis,
  Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey
  Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux,
  Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila
  Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix,
  Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gib-
  son, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan
  Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hal-
  lacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan
  Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu,
  Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun
  Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Ka-
  mali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook
  Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel
  Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen
  Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel
  Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez,
  Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv
  Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney,
  Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick,
  Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel
  Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Ra-
  jeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe,
  Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel
  Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe
  de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny,
  Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl,
  Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra
  Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders,
  Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Sel-
  sam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor,
  Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky,
  Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang,
  Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Pre-
  ston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vi-
  jayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan
  Ward, Jason Wei, C. J. Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng,
  Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Work-
  man, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming Yuan,
  Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao Zheng,
  Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. GPT-4 Technical Report, March 2024. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs].
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kel-
  ton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike,
  and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, March
  2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155. arXiv:2203.02155 [cs].
Nina Panickssery, Nick Gabrieli, Julian Schulz, Meg Tong, Evan Hubinger, and Alexander Matt
  Turner. Steering Llama 2 via Contrastive Activation Addition, July 2024. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2312.06681. arXiv:2312.06681 [cs].
Shishir G Patil, Huanzhi Mao, Fanjia Yan, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji, Vishnu Suresh, Ion Stoica, and
  Joseph E Gonzalez. The Berkeley Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL): From Tool Use to
  Agentic Evaluation of Large Language Models.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Akshara Prabhakar, Zuxin Liu, Ming Zhu, Jianguo Zhang, Tulika Awalgaonkar, Shiyu Wang, Zhi-
  wei Liu, Haolin Chen, Thai Hoang, Juan Carlos Niebles, Shelby Heinecke, Weiran Yao, Huan
  Wang, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. APIGen-MT: Agentic Pipeline for Multi-Turn Data
  Generation via Simulated Agent-Human Interplay, July 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2504.03601. arXiv:2504.03601 [cs].

Shuofei Qiao, Runnan Fang, Ningyu Zhang, Yuqi Zhu, Xiang Chen, Shumin Deng, Yong Jiang,
  Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen. Agent Planning with World Knowledge Model.
  2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2405.14205. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14205.
  Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 4.

Qwen, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan
 Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,
 Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin
 Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li,
 Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang,
 Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 Technical Report,
 January 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115. arXiv:2412.15115 [cs].

Viacheslav Sinii, Alexey Gorbatovski, Artem Cherepanov, Boris Shaposhnikov, Nikita Balagansky,
  and Daniil Gavrilov. Steering LLM Reasoning Through Bias-Only Adaptation, October 2025.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.18706. arXiv:2505.18706 [cs].

Yu Sun, Xiaolong Wang, Zhuang Liu, John Miller, Alexei Efros, and Moritz Hardt. Test-Time
  Training with Self-Supervision for Generalization under Distribution Shifts. In Proceedings of the
  37th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9229–9248. PMLR, November 2020.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/sun20b.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.

Daniel Tan, David Chanin, Aengus Lynch, Dimitrios Kanoulas, Brooks Paige, Adria Garriga-
  Alonso, and Robert Kirk. Analyzing the Generalization and Reliability of Steering Vectors, May
  2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.12404. arXiv:2407.12404 [cs].

Lucas-Andrei Thil, Mirela Popa, and Gerasimos Spanakis. Navigating WebAI: Training Agents
  to Complete Web Tasks with Large Language Models and Reinforcement Learning. Proceed-
  ings of the 39th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing, pp. 866–874, April 2024.
  doi: 10.1145/3605098.3635903. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3605098.
  3635903. Conference Name: SAC ’24: 39th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing
  ISBN: 9798400702433 Place: Avila Spain Publisher: ACM.

Alexander Matt Turner, Lisa Thiergart, Gavin Leech, David Udell, Juan J. Vazquez, Ulisse Mini,
  and Monte MacDiarmid. Steering Language Models With Activation Engineering, October 2024.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10248. arXiv:2308.10248 [cs].

Dequan Wang, Evan Shelhamer, Shaoteng Liu, Bruno Olshausen, and Trevor Darrell. Tent: Fully
  Test-time Adaptation by Entropy Minimization, March 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2006.10726. arXiv:2006.10726 [cs].

Junjie Wang, Mingyang Chen, Binbin Hu, Dan Yang, Ziqi Liu, Yue Shen, Peng Wei, Zhiqiang
  Zhang, Jinjie Gu, Jun Zhou, Jeff Z. Pan, Wen Zhang, and Huajun Chen. Learning to Plan
  for Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models from Knowledge Graphs. 2024a. doi:
  10.48550/ARXIV.2406.14282. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14282. Publisher:
  arXiv Version Number: 3.

Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. Agent Workflow Memory,
  September 2024b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2409.07429. arXiv:2409.07429 [cs].

Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing
  Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, Yitao Liu, Yiheng Xu, Shuyan Zhou, Silvio
  Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Tao Yu. OSWorld: Benchmarking Multimodal
  Agents for Open-Ended Tasks in Real Computer Environments, May 2024. URL http://
  arxiv.org/abs/2404.07972. arXiv:2404.07972 [cs].

                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Yiheng Xu, Dunjie Lu, Zhennan Shen, Junli Wang, Zekun Wang, Yuchen Mao, Caiming Xiong,
  and Tao Yu. AgentTrek: Agent Trajectory Synthesis via Guiding Replay with Web Tutorials,
  December 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.09605. arXiv:2412.09605 [cs].

Ke Yang, Jiateng Liu, John Wu, Chaoqi Yang, Yi R. Fung, Sha Li, Zixuan Huang, Xu Cao, Xingyao
  Wang, Yiquan Wang, Heng Ji, and Chengxiang Zhai. If LLM Is the Wizard, Then Code Is the
  Wand: A Survey on How Code Empowers Large Language Models to Serve as Intelligent Agents.
  2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2401.00812. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.00812.
  Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 2.

Ke Yang, Yao Liu, Sapana Chaudhary, Rasool Fakoor, Pratik Chaudhari, George Karypis, and
  Huzefa Rangwala. AgentOccam: A Simple Yet Strong Baseline for LLM-Based Web Agents,
  May 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13825. arXiv:2410.13825 [cs].

Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. $\tau$-bench: A Benchmark
  for Tool-Agent-User Interaction in Real-World Domains, June 2024. URL http://arxiv.
  org/abs/2406.12045. arXiv:2406.12045 [cs].

Yanzhe Zhang, Tao Yu, and Diyi Yang. Attacking Vision-Language Computer Agents via Pop-ups,
  November 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2411.02391. arXiv:2411.02391 [cs]
  version: 1.

Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
  Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. WebArena: A Realistic
  Web Environment for Building Autonomous Agents, April 2024a. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/2307.13854. arXiv:2307.13854 [cs].

Siyu Zhou, Tianyi Zhou, Yijun Yang, Guodong Long, Deheng Ye, Jing Jiang, and Chengqi
  Zhang. WALL-E: World Alignment by Rule Learning Improves World Model-based LLM
  Agents. 2024b. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2410.07484. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2410.07484. Publisher: arXiv Version Number: 2.

Andy Zou, Long Phan, Sarah Chen, James Campbell, Phillip Guo, Richard Ren, Alexander
  Pan, Xuwang Yin, Mantas Mazeika, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Nathaniel Li,
  Michael J. Byun, Zifan Wang, Alex Mallen, Steven Basart, Sanmi Koyejo, Dawn Song, Matt
  Fredrikson, J. Zico Kolter, and Dan Hendrycks. Representation Engineering: A Top-Down Ap-
  proach to AI Transparency, March 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01405.
  arXiv:2310.01405 [cs].

Yuxin Zuo, Kaiyan Zhang, Li Sheng, Shang Qu, Ganqu Cui, Xuekai Zhu, Haozhan Li, Yuchen
  Zhang, Xinwei Long, Ermo Hua, Biqing Qi, Youbang Sun, Zhiyuan Ma, Lifan Yuan, Ning
  Ding, and Bowen Zhou. TTRL: Test-Time Reinforcement Learning, June 2025. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2504.16084. arXiv:2504.16084 [cs].


A       A PPENDIX

A.1     E XPERIMENT DETAILS

WebArena We follow the BrowserGym guide5 to setup WebArena enviornment. We use AWS
EC2 instance with a t3a.xlarge instance. For all exploration episodes of dynamics grounding,
we use a temperatue of 1.0. We use a temperature of 0.0 for all task evaluation experiments.

BFCLv3      For BFCLv3, we follow the official setup6 and consistently using a temperature of 0.
    5
    https://github.com/ServiceNow/BrowserGym/blob/main/browsergym/
webarena/README.md
  6
    https://github.com/ShishirPatil/gorilla/tree/main/
berkeley-function-call-leaderboard


                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Tau-bench We adopt the codebase form (Prabhakar et al., 2025) and use Best-of-N (N=5) strategy
for LLM-simulated user agent, so each trajectory will be scored by an LLM judge and the reponse
that best adheres with user intent will be select, therefore drastically mitigating variance in average
reward.

A.2    P ROMPTS USED IN W EBA RENA EXPERIMENTS

                       Listing 1: prompt used to synthesize personas for WebArena
You a r e an e x p e r t a t c r e a t i n g r e a l i s t i c u s e r p e r s o n a s g i v e n a
   w e b s i t e . You a r e g i v e n t h e name o f a w e b s i t e and some e x a m p l e
   o u t p u t s f o r t h e website , g e n e r a t e a d i v e r s e l i s t of ${
   n p e r s o n a s } p e r s o n a s , e a c h w i t h a u n i q u e ” p e r s o n a ” name and a
   1−2 s e n t e n c e ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” o f t h e i r t y p i c a l b e h a v i o r ,
    i n t e r e s t s , o r m o t i v a t i o n s on t h a t s i t e .

F o r m a t y o u r o u t p u t a s a JSON a r r a y , where e a c h e l e m e n t i s an
      o b j e c t w i t h two f i e l d s :
− ” p e r s o n a ” : a s h o r t , d e s c r i p t i v e name f o r t h e p e r s o n a ( e . g . , ”
      C a s u a l B r o w s e r ” , ” Tech E n t h u s i a s t ” )
− ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : a b r i e f d e s c r i p t i o n o f how t h i s p e r s o n a t y p i c a l l y
        uses the website

Now , g e n e r a t e a l i s t o f p e r s o n a s i n t h e s p e c i f i e d JSON f o r m a t . You
      a r e g i v e n t h e name o f t h e w e b s i t e and some e x a m p l e o u t p u t s
     for the website .
Website : ${ w e b s i t e }
Example o u t p u t s : $ { e x a m p l e s }

               Listing 2: prompt used for persona-driven exploration in WebArena
You a r e an a u t o n o m o u s i n t e l l i g e n t a g e n t t a s k e d w i t h n a v i g a t i n g a
   web b r o w s e r . Your o b j e c t i v e i s t o s i m u l a t e a t a s k t h a t a
   p e r s o n m i g h t p e r f o r m , by i n t e r a c t i n g w i t h t h e b r o w s e r t h r o u g h
   the use of s p e c i f i c a c t i o n s .

Here ’ s t h e i n f o r m a t i o n you ’ l l h a v e :

The c u r r e n t web page ’ s a c c e s s i b i l i t y t r e e : T h i s i s a s i m p l i f i e d
       r e p r e s e n t a t i o n o f t h e webpage , p r o v i d i n g key i n f o r m a t i o n .
The c u r r e n t web page ’ s URL : T h i s i s t h e p a g e you ’ r e c u r r e n t l y
       navigating .
The open t a b s : T h e s e a r e t h e t a b s you h a v e open .
The p r e v i o u s a c t i o n : T h i s i s t h e a c t i o n you j u s t p e r f o r m e d . I t may
         be h e l p f u l t o t r a c k y o u r p r o g r e s s .
T r a j e c t o r y : This i s a sequence of n a t u r a l language d e s c r i p t i o n s of
         t h e a g e n t ’ s i n t e r a c t i o n w i t h t h e web− b r o w s e r .
P e r s o n D e s c r i p t i o n : The d e s c r i p t i o n o f a s p e c i f i c k i n d o f p e r s o n
       whose t a s k you a r e s u p p o s e d t o s i m u l a t e .
E n v i r o n m e n t d y n a m i c s : D e s c r i p t i o n s o f how s t a t e s t r a n s i t i o n .

The a c t i o n s you c a n p e r f o r m f a l l i n t o s e v e r a l c a t e g o r i e s :

Page O p e r a t i o n A c t i o n s :
‘ c l i c k [ i d ] ‘ : T h i s a c t i o n c l i c k s on an e l e m e n t w i t h a s p e c i f i c i d
       on t h e webpage .
‘ t y p e [ i d ] [ c o n t e n t ] [ p r e s s e n t e r a f t e r = 0 | 1 ] ‘ : Use t h i s t o t y p e
       t h e c o n t e n t i n t o t h e f i e l d w i t h i d . By d e f a u l t , t h e ” E n t e r ”
       key i s p r e s s e d a f t e r t y p i n g u n l e s s p r e s s e n t e r a f t e r i s s e t t o
         0.


                                                      17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




‘ h o v e r [ i d ] ‘ : Hover o v e r an e l e m e n t w i t h i d .
‘ p r e s s [ key comb ] ‘ :         S i m u l a t e s t h e p r e s s i n g o f a key c o m b i n a t i o n
      on t h e k e y b o a r d ( e . g . , C t r l +v ) .
‘ s c r o l l [ d i r e c t i o n =down | up ] ‘ : S c r o l l t h e p a g e up o r down .

Tab Management A c t i o n s :
‘ n e w t a b ‘ : Open a new , empty b r o w s e r t a b .
‘ t a b f o c u s [ t a b i n d e x ] ‘ : Switch t h e browser ’ s focus t o a s p e c i f i c
       tab using i t s index .
‘ c l o s e t a b ‘ : Close the c u r r e n t l y a c t i v e tab .

URL N a v i g a t i o n A c t i o n s :
‘ g o t o [ u r l ] ‘ : N a v i g a t e t o a s p e c i f i c URL .
‘ go back ‘ : N a v i g a t e t o t h e p r e v i o u s l y viewed page .
‘ go forward ‘ : Navi gate t o t h e n e x t page ( i f a p r e v i o u s ’ go back ’
       a c t i o n was p e r f o r m e d ) .

Completion Action :
‘ s t o p [ ” done ” ] ‘ : I s s u e t h i s a c t i o n when you a r e done .

Homepage :
I f you want t o v i s i t o t h e r w e b s i t e s , c h e c k o u t t h e homepage a t
     h t t p : / / homepage . com . I t h a s a l i s t o f w e b s i t e s you c a n v i s i t .

To be s u c c e s s f u l , i t i s v e r y i m p o r t a n t t o f o l l o w t h e f o l l o w i n g
     rules :
1 . You s h o u l d o n l y i s s u e an a c t i o n t h a t i s v a l i d g i v e n t h e c u r r e n t
       observation
2 . You s h o u l d o n l y i s s u e one a c t i o n a t a t i m e .
3 . You s h o u l d f o l l o w t h e e x a m p l e s t o r e a s o n s t e p by s t e p and t h e n
     issue the next action .
4. Generate the a c t i o n in the c o r r e c t format . S t a r t with a ” In
    summary , t h e n e x t a c t i o n I w i l l p e r f o r m i s ” p h r a s e , f o l l o w e d
    by a c t i o n i n s i d e ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ . F o r example , ” I n summary , t h e n e x t
     a c t i o n I w i l l perform i s ‘ ‘ ‘ c l i c k [1234] ‘ ‘ ‘”.
5 . To g e n e r a t e an i n t e r e s t i n g t a s k , make s u r e you i s s u e a t l e a s t 4
     a c t i o n s b e f o r e s t o p p i n g . More i n t e r e s t i n g t a s k s t y p i c a l l y
     i n v o l v e more i n t e r a c t i o n s w i t h t h e b r o w s e r .
6 . You c a n i s s u e a t m o s t 40 a c t i o n s b e f o r e s t o p p i n g , b u t f e e l f r e e
    t o o u t p u t t h e s t o p a c t i o n e a r l y i f you want t o s t o p e x p l o r i n g .
       Don ’ t g e n e r a t e a n y t h i n g a f t e r s t o p .
Here a r e t h e l i s t o f e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s o f t h i s e n v i r o n m e n t :

OBSERVATION :
[ 1 7 4 4 ] l i n k ’HP CB782A#ABA 640 I n k j e t Fax Machine ( Renewed ) ’
                               [ 1 7 4 9 ] S t a t i c T e x t ’ $279 . 4 9 ’
                               [ 1 7 5 7 ] b u t t o n ’ Add t o C a r t ’
                               [ 1 7 6 0 ] b u t t o n ’ Add t o Wish L i s t ’
                               [ 1 7 6 1 ] b u t t o n ’ Add t o Compare ’
URL : h t t p : / / o n e s t o p m a r k e t . com / o f f i c e − p r o d u c t s / o f f i c e − e l e c t r o n i c s .
      html
ENVIRONMENTAL DYNAMICS :
[ { ’ i n i t i a l s t a t e ’ : ’ Homepage o f o n e s t o p m a r k e t . com , w i t h t h e b u t t o n
         Add t o C a r t v i s i b l e ’ , ’ a c t i o n ’ : ’ c l i c k [ 1 7 5 7 ] where t h e
       button i s purchase ’}]
PREVIOUS ACTION : None
Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p . T h i s p a g e l i s t s t h e i n f o r m a t i o n o f HP
       I n k j e t Fax Machine , which i s t h e p r o d u c t i d e n t i f i e d i n t h e
       o b j e c t i v e . I t s p r i c e i s $279 . 4 9 . I h a v e c h e c k e d t h e


                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




       e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s and s e e t h a t s t o p p i n g w i t h t h i s a n s w e r
      from t h i s s t a t e h a s n o t b e e n done b e f o r e , s o t h i s a c t i o n w i l l
       c o n t r i b u t e t o e x p l o r a t i o n d i v e r s i t y . I t h i n k I have a c h i e v e d
       t h e o b j e c t i v e . I n summary , t h e n e x t a c t i o n I w i l l p e r f o r m i s
       ‘ ‘ ‘ s t o p [ $279 . 4 9 ] ‘ ‘ ‘
OBSERVATION :
[ 1 6 4 ] t e x t b o x ’ Search ’ f o c u s e d : True r e q u i r e d : F a l s e
[ 1 7 1 ] b u t t o n ’Go ’
[ 1 7 4 ] l i n k ’ F i n d d i r e c t i o n s b e t w e e n two p o i n t s ’
[212] heading ’ Search Results ’
[ 2 1 6 ] b u t t o n ’ Close ’
URL : h t t p : / / o p e n s t r e e t m a p . o r g
ENVIRONMENTAL DYNAMICS :
[ { ’ i n i t i a l s t a t e ’ : ’ O p e n S t r e e t M a p homepage w i t h s e a r c h box and Go
       button v i s i b l e ’ , ’ action ’ : ’ c l i c k [171] to submit a search ’} ,
      { ’ i n i t i a l s t a t e ’ : ’ O p e n S t r e e t M a p homepage w i t h s e a r c h box
      f o c u s e d ’ , ’ a c t i o n ’ : ’ t y p e [ 1 6 4 ] [ p a r k s n e a r NY] [ 1 ] ’ } ]
PREVIOUS ACTION : None
Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p . T h i s p a g e h a s a s e a r c h box whose ID i s
       [ 1 6 4 ] . According t o t h e nominatim r u l e of openstreetmap , I can
         s e a r c h f o r r e s t a u r a n t s n e a r a l o c a t i o n by t y p i n g ” r e s t a u r a n t s
         n e a r ” f o l l o w e d by t h e l o c a t i o n . I c a n s u b m i t my t y p i n g by
       p r e s s i n g Enter a f t e r w a r d s . Before proceeding , I w i l l check t he
         e n v i r o n m e n t a l dynamics t o see i f a s i m i l a r a c t i o n has a l r e a d y
         b e e n p e r f o r m e d from t h i s s t a t e . I s e e t h a t t h e r e i s no
       p r e v i o u s a c t i o n where , s t a r t i n g from t h e c u r r e n t s t a t e ,
      someone s e a r c h e d f o r ” r e s t a u r a n t s n e a r CMU” i n t h e s e a r c h box .
         T h i s means my a c t i o n w i l l c o n t r i b u t e t o e x p l o r a t i o n d i v e r s i t y
       . I n summary , t h e n e x t a c t i o n I w i l l p e r f o r m i s ‘ ‘ ‘ t y p e [ 1 6 4 ]
      [ r e s t a u r a n t s n e a r CMU] [ 1 ] ‘ ‘ ‘
OBSERVATION :
$ {OBSERVATION}
Person Description :
$ {PERSON DESCRIPTION}
URL : $ {URL}
PREVIOUS ACTION : $ {PREVIOUS ACTION}
ENVIRONMENTAL DYNAMICS :
$ {ENVIRONMENTAL DYNAMICS}


              Listing 3: prompt used to extract environment dynamics from observations
You a r e g i v e n t h e o u t p u t o f an a c t i o n t a k e n by an a u t o n o m o u s
    i n t e l l i g e n t a g e n t n a v i g a t i n g a web b r o w s e r . Your o b j e c t i v e i s
   t o p r o d u c e a d e s c r i p t i o n o f t h e c h a n g e s made t o t h e s t a t e o f
   t h e b r o w s e r . S p e c i f i c a l l y , you n e e d t o p r o d u c e t h e f o l l o w i n g
   elements :
1) I n i t i a l s t a t e : p r o v i d e a c o n c i s e d e s c r i p t i o n of t h e browser ’ s
    s t a t e b e f o r e t h e a c t i o n was t a k e n ( f o r e x a m p l e : ” GitHub
   homepage ” o r ” GitHub r e p o s i t o r y p a g e ” ) .
2) Environmental dynamics : c l e a r l y d e s c r i b e t h e s p e c i f i c changes
    t h a t o c c u r r e d in t h e browser ’ s s t a t e as a r e s u l t of t h e a c t i o n
      ( f o r e x a m p l e : ” The s e a r c h b a r e x p a n d e d and i s a b l e t o consume
      input ”) .

Here ’ s t h e i n f o r m a t i o n you ’ l l h a v e :
− ** I n i t i a l s t a t e o f t h e b r o w s e r a s an a c c e s s i b i l i t y t r e e : * *
  T h i s i s a s i m p l i f i e d r e p r e s e n t a t i o n o f t h e webpage , p r o v i d i n g
         key i n f o r m a t i o n .
− ** F i n a l s t a t e o f t h e b r o w s e r : * *


                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




   This i s the a c c e s s i b i l i t y t r e e r e p r e s e n t a t i o n a f t e r the agent
         took the a c t i o n .
− ** The a c t i o n t a k e n by t h e web a g e n t : * *
   The a g e n t c a n t a k e a c t i o n s t h a t f a l l u n d e r t h e f o l l o w i n g
         c a t e g o r i e s ( with d e s c r i p t i o n s ) :
** Page      Operation Actions :**
− ‘ c l i c k [ i d ] ‘ : C l i c k s on an e l e m e n t w i t h a s p e c i f i c i d on t h e
     webpage .
− ‘ t y p e [ i d ] [ c o n t e n t ] [ p r e s s e n t e r a f t e r = 0 | 1 ] ‘ : Types t h e c o n t e n t
       i n t o t h e f i e l d w i t h i d . By d e f a u l t , t h e ” E n t e r ” key i s
     pressed a f t e r typing unless ‘ p r e s s e n t e r a f t e r ‘ is set to 0.
− ‘ h o v e r [ i d ] ‘ : H o v e r s o v e r an e l e m e n t w i t h i d .
− ‘ p r e s s [ key comb ] ‘ : S i m u l a t e s p r e s s i n g a key c o m b i n a t i o n on t h e
     k e y b o a r d ( e . g . , C t r l +v ) .
− ‘ s c r o l l [ d i r e c t i o n =down | up ] ‘ : S c r o l l s t h e p a g e up o r down .

** Tab Management A c t i o n s : * *
− ‘ n e w t a b ‘ : Opens a new , empty b r o w s e r t a b .
− ‘ t a b f o c u s [ t a b i n d e x ] ‘ : Switches t h e browser ’ s focus t o a
     s p e c i f i c tab using i t s index .
− ‘ close tab ‘ : Closes the c u r r e n t l y a c t i v e tab .

**URL N a v i g a t i o n A c t i o n s : * *
− ‘ g o t o [ u r l ] ‘ : N a v i g a t e s t o a s p e c i f i c URL .
− ‘ go back ‘ : N a v i g a t e s t o t h e p r e v i o u s l y viewed page .
− ‘ go forward ‘ : N a v i g a t e s t o t h e n e x t page ( i f a p r e v i o u s ’ go back
    ’ a c t i o n was p e r f o r m e d ) .

** C o m p l e t i o n A c t i o n : * *
− ‘ s t o p [ a n s w e r ] ‘ : I s s u e t h i s a c t i o n when you b e l i e v e t h e t a s k i s
     c o m p l e t e . I f t h e o b j e c t i v e i s t o f i n d a t e x t − b a s e d answer ,
     p r o v i d e t h e a n s w e r i n t h e b r a c k e t . I f you b e l i e v e t h e t a s k i s
     i m p o s s i b l e t o c o m p l e t e , p r o v i d e t h e a n s w e r a s ”N / A” i n t h e
     bracket .

** To be s u c c e s s f u l , i t i s v e r y i m p o r t a n t t o f o l l o w t h e s e r u l e s : * *
1 . E x p l i c i t l y t h i n k a b o u t t h e v a r i o u s f e a t u r e s on t h e w e b s i t e and
    how t h e i n t e r a c t i o n w i t h t h e w e b s i t e c h a n g e d t h e s e f e a t u r e s .
2 . P r o v i d e t h e d e s c r i p t i o n o f c h a n g e s i n one o r two s e n t e n c e s .
3 . I f t h e r e i s no change , y o u r d e s c r i p t i o n o f t h e c h a n g e s i n s t a t e
       s h o u l d be ” no c h a n g e ” .
4 . S t r i c t l y f o l l o w t h e JSON f o r m a t i n y o u r r e s p o n s e : {”
     i n i t i a l s t a t e ” : < d e s c r i p t i o n o f i n i t i a l s t a t e >, ”
     e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s ” : < d e s c r i p t i o n o f e n v i r o n m e n t a l change
    >}

Here a r e some o u t p u t e x a m p l e s f o r some random t a s k s :
1 . {” i n i t i a l s t a t e ” : ” Google homepage w i t h s e a r c h b a r v i s i b l e ” , ”
    e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s ” : ”A modal s e a r c h d i a l o g o p e n e d up ,
    b r i n g i n g up a f o c u s e d s e a r c h i n p u t w i t h s u g g e s t i o n s , a l l o w i n g
    t h e u s e r t o s e a r c h o r jump t o v a r i o u s GitHub s e c t i o n s . ” }
2 . {” i n i t i a l s t a t e ” : ” W i k i p e d i a a r t i c l e p a g e ” , ”
    e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s ” : ” The p a g e s c r o l l e d down , r e v e a l i n g
    the ’ History ’ section .”}
3 . {” i n i t i a l s t a t e ” : ” Amazon p r o d u c t p a g e ” , ”
    e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s ” : ”A c o n f i r m a t i o n m e s s a g e a p p e a r e d
     i n d i c a t i n g t h e i t e m was a d d e d t o t h e c a r t . ” }




                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




    Listing 4: prompt used to remove repeatitive or trivial environment dynamics in WebArena


You a r e g i v e n a l i s t o f e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s o f an e n v i r o n m e n t
    c o l l e c t e d by an a u t o n o m o u s web b r o w s i n g a g e n t . You a r e t a s k e d
    t o remove r e p e t i t i v e and t r i v i a l e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s . Each
    of the point c o n s i s t s of the following :
1) i n i t i a l s t a t e : p r o v i d e a c o n c i s e d e s c r i p t i o n of t h e browser ’ s
     s t a t e b e f o r e t h e a c t i o n was t a k e n ( f o r e x a m p l e : ” GitHub
    homepage ” o r ” GitHub r e p o s i t o r y p a g e ” ) .
2 ) a c t i o n : a c t i o n t a k e n t o make t h e e n v i r o n m e n t a l c h a n g e
2) environmental dynamics : c l e a r l y d e s c r i b e the s p e c i f i c changes
    t h a t o c c u r r e d in t h e browser ’ s s t a t e as a r e s u l t of t h e a c t i o n
       ( f o r e x a m p l e : ” The s e a r c h b a r e x p a n d e d and i s a b l e t o consume
       input ”) .

To be s u c c e s s f u l , i t i s i m p o r t a n t t o f o l l o w t h e s e r u l e s :
1 . e n t r i e s w i t h t r i v i a l e n v i o r n m e n t a l dynamics , s u c h a s ” when I
    s c r o l l down , t h e p a g e w i l l r e v e a l more c o n t e n t ” s h o u l d be
    removed . T r i v i a l e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s a r e t h o s e t h a t do n o t
    r e f l e c t a meaningful or unique change in t h e environment , such
      as simple s c r o l l i n g , pagination , or t o g g l i n g the v i s i b i l i t y
    o f a l r e a d y a v a i l a b l e c o n t e n t w i t h o u t i n t r o d u c i n g new
    information or i n t e r f a c e elements .

2 . Remove e n t r i e s where t h e e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s o n l y d e s c r i b e
    t h e e x p a n s i o n o r c o l l a p s e o f t e x t ( e . g . , ” The f u l l a b s t r a c t
    e x p a n d e d and i s now v i s i b l e ” ) , u n l e s s t h e e x p a n s i o n r e v e a l s
    new i n t e r f a c e e l e m e n t s o r o p t i o n s t h a t were n o t p r e v i o u s l y
    accessible .

3 . Remove e n t r i e s where t h e e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s o n l y d e s c r i b e
    n a v i g a t i o n t o a d i f f e r e n t s e c t i o n o f t h e same p a g e ( e . g . , ” The
      page s c r o l l e d t o t h e ’ References ’ s e c t i o n ” ) , u n l e s s t h i s
    n a v i g a t i o n r e s u l t s in a s u b s t a n t i a l change in t h e a v a i l a b l e
    i n t e r f a c e or content .

4 . Keep e n t r i e s where t h e e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s d e s c r i b e :
    − U n e x p e c t e d o r s p u r i o u s s t a t e c h a n g e o f e x e c u t i n g an a c t i o n a t
          the i n i t i a l s t a t e .
    − Keep e n t r i e s where t h e e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s i n d i c a t e t h a t
        p e r f o r m i n g an a c t i o n d i d n o t r e s u l t i n any c h a n g e t o t h e
        b r o w s e r ’ s s t a t e , e v e n t h o u g h a c h a n g e would n o r m a l l y be
        e x p e c t e d ( f o r example , c l i c k i n g a b u t t o n t h a t s h o u l d open a
          menu b u t n o t h i n g h a p p e n s ) .
    − The a p p e a r a n c e o f new c o n t r o l s , f i l t e r s , o r o p t i o n s i n t h e
        interface .
    − N a v i g a t i o n t o a new p a g e o r a s u b s t a n t i a l l y d i f f e r e n t view ( e
        . g . , from s e a r c h r e s u l t s t o a d e t a i l e d a r t i c l e p a g e ) .
    − The a d d i t i o n o r r e m o v a l o f s e a r c h f i e l d s , f i l t e r s , o r o t h e r
        i n t e r a c t i v e elements .
    − Any c h a n g e t h a t e n a b l e s new a c t i o n s o r r e v e a l s new t y p e s o f
        information not previously a c c e s s i b l e .

5 . When i n d o u b t , p r e f e r t o remove e n t r i e s t h a t a r e r e p e t i t i v e ( e .
    g . , m u l t i p l e e n t r i e s d e s c r i b i n g t h e same t y p e o f a b s t r a c t
    e x p a n s i o n ) o r t h a t do n o t add new i n f o r m a t i o n a b o u t t h e
    environment ’ s c a p a b i l i t i e s or s t a t e .



                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Your o u t p u t s h o u l d be a c l e a n e d l i s t o f e n v i r o n m e n t a l dynamics ,
   w i t h o n l y t h e non − t r i v i a l , non − r e p e t i t i v e , and m e a n i n g f u l
   c h a n g e s r e t a i n e d . P l e a s e o u t p u t i n t h e o r i g i n a l JSON f o r m a t .



                          Listing 5: prompt used for evaluation in WebArena
You a r e an a u t o n o m o u s i n t e l l i g e n t a g e n t t a s k e d w i t h n a v i g a t i n g a
   web b r o w s e r . You w i l l be g i v e n web− b a s e d t a s k s . T h e s e t a s k s
    w i l l be a c c o m p l i s h e d t h r o u g h t h e u s e o f s p e c i f i c a c t i o n s you
   can i s s u e .

Here ’ s t h e i n f o r m a t i o n you ’ l l h a v e :
The u s e r ’ s o b j e c t i v e : T h i s i s t h e t a s k you ’ r e t r y i n g t o c o m p l e t e .
The c u r r e n t web page ’ s a c c e s s i b i l i t y t r e e : T h i s i s a s i m p l i f i e d
    r e p r e s e n t a t i o n o f t h e webpage , p r o v i d i n g key i n f o r m a t i o n .
The c u r r e n t web page ’ s URL : T h i s i s t h e p a g e you ’ r e c u r r e n t l y
    navigating .
The open t a b s : T h e s e a r e t h e t a b s you h a v e open .
The p r e v i o u s a c t i o n s : T h e s e a r e a l l t h e a c t i o n you h a v e p e r f o r m e d .
      I t may be h e l p f u l t o t r a c k y o u r p r o g r e s s .

The a c t i o n s you c a n p e r f o r m f a l l i n t o s e v e r a l c a t e g o r i e s :

Page O p e r a t i o n A c t i o n s :
‘ c l i c k [ i d ] ‘ : T h i s a c t i o n c l i c k s on an e l e m e n t w i t h a s p e c i f i c i d
       on t h e webpage .
‘ t y p e [ i d ] [ c o n t e n t ] [ p r e s s e n t e r a f t e r = 0 | 1 ] ‘ : Use t h i s t o t y p e
       t h e c o n t e n t i n t o t h e f i e l d w i t h i d . By d e f a u l t , t h e ” E n t e r ”
       key i s p r e s s e d a f t e r t y p i n g u n l e s s p r e s s e n t e r a f t e r i s s e t t o
         0.
‘ h o v e r [ i d ] ‘ : Hover o v e r an e l e m e n t w i t h i d .
‘ p r e s s [ key comb ] ‘ :         S i m u l a t e s t h e p r e s s i n g o f a key c o m b i n a t i o n
       on t h e k e y b o a r d ( e . g . , C t r l +v ) .
‘ s c r o l l [ down | up ] ‘ : S c r o l l t h e p a g e up o r down .

Tab Management A c t i o n s :
‘ n e w t a b ‘ : Open a new , empty b r o w s e r t a b .
‘ t a b f o c u s [ t a b i n d e x ] ‘ : Switch t h e browser ’ s focus t o a s p e c i f i c
       tab using i t s index .
‘ c l o s e t a b ‘ : Close the c u r r e n t l y a c t i v e tab .

URL N a v i g a t i o n A c t i o n s :
‘ g o t o [ u r l ] ‘ : N a v i g a t e t o a s p e c i f i c URL .
‘ go back ‘ : N a v i g a t e t o t h e p r e v i o u s l y viewed page .
‘ go forward ‘ : Navi gate t o t h e n e x t page ( i f a p r e v i o u s ’ go back ’
       a c t i o n was p e r f o r m e d ) .

Completion Action :
‘ s t o p [ a n s w e r ] ‘ : I s s u e t h i s a c t i o n when you b e l i e v e t h e t a s k i s
       c o m p l e t e . I f t h e o b j e c t i v e i s t o f i n d a t e x t − b a s e d answer ,
       p r o v i d e t h e a n s w e r i n t h e b r a c k e t . I f you b e l i e v e t h e t a s k i s
       i m p o s s i b l e t o c o m p l e t e , p r o v i d e t h e a n s w e r a s ”N / A” i n t h e
       bracket .

Homepage :
I f you want t o v i s i t o t h e r w e b s i t e s , c h e c k o u t t h e homepage a t
     h t t p : / / homepage . com . I t h a s a l i s t o f w e b s i t e s you c a n v i s i t .



                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




To be s u c c e s s f u l , i t i s v e r y i m p o r t a n t t o f o l l o w t h e f o l l o w i n g
     rules :
1 . You s h o u l d o n l y i s s u e an a c t i o n t h a t i s v a l i d g i v e n t h e c u r r e n t
       observation
2 . You s h o u l d o n l y i s s u e one a c t i o n a t a t i m e .
3 . You s h o u l d f o l l o w t h e e x a m p l e s t o r e a s o n s t e p by s t e p and t h e n
     issue the next action .
4 . You a r e s t r i c t l y f o r b i d d e n from i s s u i n g a g o t o a c t i o n t o a URL
     t h a t i s n o t on t h e homepage .
5 . G e n e r a t e t h e a c t i o n i n t h e c o r r e c t f o r m a t . S t a r t by r e a s o n i n g
     a b o u t t h e c u r r e n t s i t u a t i o n . End w i t h ” I n summary , t h e n e x t
     a c t i o n I w i l l p e r f o r m i s ” p h r a s e , f o l l o w e d by a c t i o n i n s i d e
     ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ . F o r example , ” Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p . Given t h e
     c u r r e n t s t a t e , I n e e d t o c l i c k on t h e l i k e b u t t o n which h a s i d
       1 2 3 4 . I n summary , t h e n e x t a c t i o n I w i l l p e r f o r m i s ‘ ‘ ‘ c l i c k
     [1234] ‘ ‘ ‘”.
6 . I s s u e s t o p a c t i o n when you t h i n k you h a v e a c h i e v e d t h e
     o b j e c t i v e . Don ’ t g e n e r a t e a n y t h i n g a f t e r s t o p .

Here a r e some e x a m p l e o u t p u t s f o r some random t a s k s :
1 . Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p . T h i s p a g e l i s t t h e i n f o r m a t i o n o f HP
    I n k j e t Fax Machine , which i s t h e p r o d u c t i d e n t i f i e d i n t h e
    o b j e c t i v e . I t s p r i c e i s $279 . 4 9 . I t h i n k I h a v e a c h i e v e d t h e
    o b j e c t i v e . I w i l l i s s u e t h e s t o p a c t i o n with t h e answer . In
    summary , t h e n e x t a c t i o n I w i l l p e r f o r m i s ‘ ‘ ‘ s t o p [ $279
    .49] ‘ ‘ ‘
2 . Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p . T h i s p a g e h a s a s e a r c h box whose ID
    i s [ 1 6 4 ] . According t o t h e nominatim r u l e of openstreetmap , I
    c a n s e a r c h f o r t h e r e s t a u r a n t s n e a r a l o c a t i o n by ” r e s t a u r a n t s
      n e a r ” . I c a n s u b m i t my t y p i n g by p r e s s i n g t h e E n t e r
    a f t e r w a r d s . I n summary , t h e n e x t a c t i o n I w i l l p e r f o r m i s ‘ ‘ ‘
    t y p e [ 1 6 4 ] [ r e s t a u r a n t s n e a r CMU] [ 1 ] ‘ ‘ ‘



          Listing 6: prompt used for evaluation on WebArena with environment dynamics

You a r e an a u t o n o m o u s i n t e l l i g e n t a g e n t t a s k e d w i t h n a v i g a t i n g a
   web b r o w s e r . You w i l l be g i v e n web− b a s e d t a s k s . T h e s e t a s k s
    w i l l be a c c o m p l i s h e d t h r o u g h t h e u s e o f s p e c i f i c a c t i o n s you
   can i s s u e .

Here ’ s t h e i n f o r m a t i o n you ’ l l h a v e :
The u s e r ’ s o b j e c t i v e : T h i s i s t h e t a s k you ’ r e t r y i n g t o c o m p l e t e .
The c u r r e n t web page ’ s a c c e s s i b i l i t y t r e e : T h i s i s a s i m p l i f i e d
     r e p r e s e n t a t i o n o f t h e webpage , p r o v i d i n g key i n f o r m a t i o n .
The c u r r e n t web page ’ s URL : T h i s i s t h e p a g e you ’ r e c u r r e n t l y
    navigating .
The open t a b s : T h e s e a r e t h e t a b s you h a v e open .
The p r e v i o u s a c t i o n s : T h e s e a r e a l l t h e a c t i o n you h a v e p e r f o r m e d .
       I t may be h e l p f u l t o t r a c k y o u r p r o g r e s s .
The e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s : You w i l l a l s o be g i v e n t h e
    e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s o f t h e e n v i r o n m e n t . You c a n u s e t h e
    e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s t o p r e d i c t t h e n e x t a c t i o n . Each
    e n v i r o n m e n t a l dynamics e n t r y d e s c r i b e s a s t a t e change i n t h e
    e n v i r o n m e n t and c o n t a i n s t h e f o l l o w i n g f i e l d s :
− ” i n i t i a l s t a t e ” : The s t a t e o f t h e e n v i r o n m e n t b e f o r e t h e a c t i o n
     is taken .
− ” a c t i o n ” : The a c t i o n p e r f o r m e d by t h e a g e n t .


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




− ” e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s ” : A d e s c r i p t i o n o f how t h e e n v i r o n m e n t
    changes as a r e s u l t of the a c t i o n .

The a c t i o n s you c a n p e r f o r m f a l l i n t o s e v e r a l c a t e g o r i e s :

Page O p e r a t i o n A c t i o n s :
‘ c l i c k [ i d ] ‘ : T h i s a c t i o n c l i c k s on an e l e m e n t w i t h a s p e c i f i c i d
       on t h e webpage .
‘ t y p e [ i d ] [ c o n t e n t ] [ p r e s s e n t e r a f t e r = 0 | 1 ] ‘ : Use t h i s t o t y p e
       t h e c o n t e n t i n t o t h e f i e l d w i t h i d . By d e f a u l t , t h e ” E n t e r ”
       key i s p r e s s e d a f t e r t y p i n g u n l e s s p r e s s e n t e r a f t e r i s s e t t o
         0.
‘ h o v e r [ i d ] ‘ : Hover o v e r an e l e m e n t w i t h i d .
‘ p r e s s [ key comb ] ‘ :         S i m u l a t e s t h e p r e s s i n g o f a key c o m b i n a t i o n
       on t h e k e y b o a r d ( e . g . , C t r l +v ) .
‘ s c r o l l [ down | up ] ‘ : S c r o l l t h e p a g e up o r down .

Tab Management A c t i o n s :
‘ n e w t a b ‘ : Open a new , empty b r o w s e r t a b .
‘ t a b f o c u s [ t a b i n d e x ] ‘ : Switch t h e browser ’ s focus t o a s p e c i f i c
       tab using i t s index .
‘ c l o s e t a b ‘ : Close the c u r r e n t l y a c t i v e tab .

URL N a v i g a t i o n A c t i o n s :
‘ g o t o [ u r l ] ‘ : N a v i g a t e t o a s p e c i f i c URL .
‘ go back ‘ : N a v i g a t e t o t h e p r e v i o u s l y viewed page .
‘ go forward ‘ : Navi gate t o t h e n e x t page ( i f a p r e v i o u s ’ go back ’
       a c t i o n was p e r f o r m e d ) .

Completion Action :
‘ s t o p [ a n s w e r ] ‘ : I s s u e t h i s a c t i o n when you b e l i e v e t h e t a s k i s
       c o m p l e t e . I f t h e o b j e c t i v e i s t o f i n d a t e x t − b a s e d answer ,
       p r o v i d e t h e a n s w e r i n t h e b r a c k e t . I f you b e l i e v e t h e t a s k i s
       i m p o s s i b l e t o c o m p l e t e , p r o v i d e t h e a n s w e r a s ”N / A” i n t h e
       bracket .

Homepage :
I f you want t o v i s i t o t h e r w e b s i t e s , c h e c k o u t t h e homepage a t
     h t t p : / / homepage . com . I t h a s a l i s t o f w e b s i t e s you c a n v i s i t .

To be s u c c e s s f u l , i t i s v e r y i m p o r t a n t t o f o l l o w t h e f o l l o w i n g
    rules :
1 . You s h o u l d o n l y i s s u e an a c t i o n t h a t i s v a l i d g i v e n t h e c u r r e n t
       observation
2 . You s h o u l d o n l y i s s u e one a c t i o n a t a t i m e .
3 . You s h o u l d f o l l o w t h e e x a m p l e s t o r e a s o n s t e p by s t e p and t h e n
    issue the next action .
4 . You a r e s t r i c t l y f o r b i d d e n from i s s u i n g a g o t o a c t i o n t o a URL
    t h a t i s n o t on t h e homepage .
5 . G e n e r a t e t h e a c t i o n i n t h e c o r r e c t f o r m a t . S t a r t by r e a s o n i n g
    a b o u t t h e c u r r e n t s i t u a t i o n . End w i t h ” I n summary , t h e n e x t
    a c t i o n I w i l l p e r f o r m i s ” p h r a s e , f o l l o w e d by a c t i o n i n s i d e
     ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ . F o r example , ” Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p . Given t h e
    c u r r e n t s t a t e , I n e e d t o c l i c k on t h e l i k e b u t t o n which h a s i d
      1 2 3 4 . I n summary , t h e n e x t a c t i o n I w i l l p e r f o r m i s ‘ ‘ ‘ c l i c k
    [1234] ‘ ‘ ‘”.
6 . When s e l e c t i n g a c t i o n s , c o n s i d e r t h e e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s −
    what s t a t e c h a n g e s w i l l o c c u r b a s e d on y o u r k n o w l e d g e o f how
    t h e w e b s i t e b e h a v e s . Use t h i s t o a v o i d a c t i o n s t h a t would l e a d


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




       to undesired s t a t e s or to s t r a t e g i c a l l y choose a c t i o n s t h a t
     l e a d t o d e s i r e d outcomes .
7 . I s s u e s t o p a c t i o n when you t h i n k you h a v e a c h i e v e d t h e
     o b j e c t i v e . Don ’ t g e n e r a t e a n y t h i n g a f t e r s t o p .

Here a r e some e x a m p l e o u t p u t s f o r some random t a s k s :
1 . Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p . T h i s p a g e l i s t s t h e i n f o r m a t i o n o f HP
      I n k j e t Fax Machine , which i s t h e p r o d u c t i d e n t i f i e d i n t h e
    o b j e c t i v e . I t s p r i c e i s $279 . 4 9 . By c o n s i d e r i n g t h e
    e n v i r o n m e n t a l dynamics , I c a n c o n f i r m t h a t no f u r t h e r a c t i o n s
    a r e n e e d e d t o c h a n g e t h e s t a t e , and I h a v e a c h i e v e d t h e
    o b j e c t i v e . I w i l l i s s u e t h e s t o p a c t i o n with t h e answer . In
    summary , t h e n e x t a c t i o n I w i l l p e r f o r m i s ‘ ‘ ‘ s t o p [ $279
    .49] ‘ ‘ ‘
2 . Let ’ s t h i n k s t e p −by − s t e p . T h i s p a g e h a s a s e a r c h box whose ID
    i s [ 1 6 4 ] . According t o t h e nominatim r u l e of openstreetmap , I
    c a n s e a r c h f o r t h e r e s t a u r a n t s n e a r a l o c a t i o n by ” r e s t a u r a n t s
      n e a r ” . By c o n s i d e r i n g t h e e n v i r o n m e n t a l dynamics , I know t h a t
      t y p i n g t h i s q u e r y and p r e s s i n g E n t e r w i l l t r i g g e r t h e s e a r c h
    and u p d a t e t h e r e s u l t s a c c o r d i n g l y . T h e r e f o r e , I c a n s u b m i t my
      t y p i n g by p r e s s i n g t h e E n t e r a f t e r w a r d s . I n summary , t h e n e x t
      a c t i o n I w i l l p e r f o r m i s ‘ ‘ ‘ t y p e [ 1 6 4 ] [ r e s t a u r a n t s n e a r CMU]
      [1] ‘ ‘ ‘




                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




A.3    P ROMPTS USED IN BFCLV 3 EXPERIMENTS

                  Listing 7: prompt used to synthesize exploration tasks on BFCLv3
You a r e an e x p e r t a t c r e a t i n g e x p l o r a t i o n s t r a t e g i e s t h a t w i l l
   h e l p g u i d e an LLM t o e x p l o r e and u n d e r s t a n d a new f u n c t i o n
    c a l l i n g e n v i r o n m e n t . Your t a s k i s t o s y n t h e s i z e some
    e x p l o r a t i o n g o a l s b a s e d on a l i s t o f f u n c t i o n s and a s p e c i f i c
   environment .

## Task
Given a l i s t o f f u n c t i o n s and an e n v i r o n m e n t , c r e a t e $ {N} d i s t i n c t
     goals t h a t w i l l explore d i f f f e r e n t a s p e c t s of the environment
    . Each g o a l s h o u l d r e p r e s e n t d i f f e r e n t e x p l o r a t i o n s t r a t e g i e s
   and a p p r o a c h e s t o d i s c o v e r i n g f u n c t i o n a l i t y .

## I n p u t F o r m a t
− ** E n v i r o n m e n t * * : The c o m p u t i n g e n v i r o n m e n t o r s y s t e m ( e . g . , ”
    f i l e s y s t e m ” , ” v e h i c l e c o n t r o l ” , ” web b r o w s e r ” )
− ** F u n c t i o n s * * : A l i s t o f a v a i l a b l e f u n c t i o n s / commands a l o n g s i d e
    w i t h d e t a i l e d d e s c r i p t i o n s ( e . g . , [ ” cd ( ) ” , ” l s ( ) ” , ”pwd ( ) ” , ”
    m k d i r ( ) ” , ” rm ( ) ” ] )

## O u t p u t F o r m a t
O u t p u t a JSON l i s t o f g o a l s . Each g o a l s h o u l d be a s i n g l e s e n t e n c e
        t h a t c a p t u r e s t h e e x p l o r a t i o n g o a l and t h e s t r a t e g y t o
      achieve i t .

Format : [ ” g o a l d e s c r i p t i o n ” , ” g o a l d e s c r i p t i o n ” , . . . ]

## Example O u t p u t
** E n v i r o n m e n t * * : F i l e System
** F u n c t i o n s * * :
{” name ” : ” t o u c h ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ” T h i s t o o l b e l o n g s t o t h e G o r i l l a
        f i l e system . I t i s a simple f i l e system t h a t allows u s e r s to
     perform b a s i c f i l e o p e r a t i o n s such as n a v i g a t i n g d i r e c t o r i e s ,
     c r e a t i n g f i l e s and d i r e c t o r i e s , r e a d i n g and w r i t i n g t o f i l e s ,
     e t c . T o o l d e s c r i p t i o n : C r e a t e a new f i l e o f any e x t e n s i o n i n
     t h e c u r r e n t d i r e c t o r y . ” , ” p a r a m e t e r s ” : {” t y p e ” : ” d i c t ” , ”
     p r o p e r t i e s ” : {” f i l e n a m e ” : {” t y p e ” : ” s t r i n g ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ”
     The name o f t h e new f i l e i n t h e c u r r e n t d i r e c t o r y . f i l e n a m e
     i s l o c a l t o t h e c u r r e n t d i r e c t o r y and d o e s n o t a l l o w p a t h . ” } } ,
       ” r e q u i r e d ” : [ ” f i l e n a m e ” ] } , ” r e s p o n s e ” : {” t y p e ” : ” d i c t ” , ”
     p r o p e r t i e s ” : {}}}
{” name ” : ”wc ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ” T h i s t o o l b e l o n g s t o t h e G o r i l l a
     f i l e system . I t i s a simple f i l e system t h a t allows u s e r s to
     perform b a s i c f i l e o p e r a t i o n s such as n a v i g a t i n g d i r e c t o r i e s ,
     c r e a t i n g f i l e s and d i r e c t o r i e s , r e a d i n g and w r i t i n g t o f i l e s ,
     e t c . T o o l d e s c r i p t i o n : Count t h e number o f l i n e s , words , and
     c h a r a c t e r s i n a f i l e o f any e x t e n s i o n from c u r r e n t d i r e c t o r y
     . ” , ” p a r a m e t e r s ” : {” t y p e ” : ” d i c t ” , ” p r o p e r t i e s ” : {” f i l e n a m e ” :
       {” t y p e ” : ” s t r i n g ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ”Name o f t h e f i l e o f
     c u r r e n t d i r e c t o r y t o p e r f o r m wc o p e r a t i o n on . ” } , ” mode ” : {”
     t y p e ” : ” s t r i n g ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ”Mode o f o p e r a t i o n ( ’ l ’ f o r
     l i n e s , ’w’ f o r words , ’ c ’ f o r c h a r a c t e r s ) . ” , ” d e f a u l t ” : ” l
     ” } } , ” r e q u i r e d ” : [ ” f i l e n a m e ” ] } , ” r e s p o n s e ” : {” t y p e ” : ” d i c t ” ,
     ” p r o p e r t i e s ” : {” c o u n t ” : {” t y p e ” : ” i n t e g e r ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ”
     The c o u n t o f t h e number o f l i n e s , words , o r c h a r a c t e r s i n t h e
     f i l e . ” } , ” t y p e ” : {” t y p e ” : ” s t r i n g ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ” The t y p e


                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




     o f u n i t we a r e c o u n t i n g . [ Enum ] : [ \ ” l i n e s \ ” , \” words \ ” , \”
     c h a r a c t e r s \”]”}}}}
{” name ” : ” l s ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ” T h i s t o o l b e l o n g s t o t h e G o r i l l a
     f i l e system . I t i s a simple f i l e system t h a t allows u s e r s to
     perform b a s i c f i l e o p e r a t i o n s such as n a v i g a t i n g d i r e c t o r i e s ,
     c r e a t i n g f i l e s and d i r e c t o r i e s , r e a d i n g and w r i t i n g t o f i l e s ,
     e t c . Tool d e s c r i p t i o n : L i s t t h e c o n t e n t s of t h e c u r r e n t
     d i r e c t o r y . ” , ” p a r a m e t e r s ” : {” t y p e ” : ” d i c t ” , ” p r o p e r t i e s ” : {” a
     ” : {” t y p e ” : ” b o o l e a n ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ” Show h i d d e n f i l e s and
     d i r e c t o r i e s . D e f a u l t s to F a l s e . ” , ” d e f a u l t ” : f a l s e }} , ”
     r e q u i r e d ” : [ ] } , ” r e s p o n s e ” : {” t y p e ” : ” d i c t ” , ” p r o p e r t i e s ” : {”
     c u r r e n t d i r e c t o r y c o n t e n t ” : {” t y p e ” : ” a r r a y ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ”
    A l i s t of the c o n t e n t s of the s p e c i f i e d d i r e c t o r y . ” , ” items ”:
     {” t y p e ” : ” s t r i n g ”}}}}}
{” name ” : ” rm ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ” T h i s t o o l b e l o n g s t o t h e G o r i l l a
     f i l e system . I t i s a simple f i l e system t h a t allows u s e r s to
     perform b a s i c f i l e o p e r a t i o n s such as n a v i g a t i n g d i r e c t o r i e s ,
     c r e a t i n g f i l e s and d i r e c t o r i e s , r e a d i n g and w r i t i n g t o f i l e s ,
     e t c . T o o l d e s c r i p t i o n : Remove a f i l e o r d i r e c t o r y . ” , ”
     p a r a m e t e r s ” : {” t y p e ” : ” d i c t ” , ” p r o p e r t i e s ” : {” f i l e n a m e ” : {”
     t y p e ” : ” s t r i n g ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ” The name o f t h e f i l e o r
     d i r e c t o r y t o remove . ” } } , ” r e q u i r e d ” : [ ” f i l e n a m e ” ] } , ”
     r e s p o n s e ” : {” t y p e ” : ” d i c t ” , ” p r o p e r t i e s ” : {” r e s u l t ” : {” t y p e ” :
     ” s t r i n g ” , ” d e s c r i p t i o n ” : ” The r e s u l t o f t h e remove o p e r a t i o n
     .”}}}}


Generated goals :
[
  ” E x p l o r e s i m p l e ways t o c r e a t e a f i l e w i t h t o u c h ( ) , c o u n t words
        o f t h e f i l e w i t h wc ( ) , and remove t h e f i l e w i t h rm ( ) . ” ,
  ” Understand the ” f i l e n a m e ” argument of the touch ( ) f u n c t i o n to
        s e e i f a f i l e c a n be c r e a t e d u s i n g a p a t h i n s t e a d o f j u s t a
        f i l e name . ”
]

## G u i d e l i n e s
− ** Be f u n c t i o n − s p e c i f i c * * : Each g o a l s h o u l d e x p l i c i t l y m e n t i o n
    which s p e c i f i c f u n c t i o n s / t o o l s w i l l be u s e d and i n what
    sequence
− ** I n c o r p o r a t e f u n c t i o n d e s c r i p t i o n s i n t o g o a l f o r m u l a t i o n * * : You
      s h o u l d examine t h e given f u n c t i o n d e s c r i p t i o n s ( i . e . , i n p u t
    or output arguments ) to propose goals to solve confusing or
    ambiguous f u n c t i o n d e s c r i p t i o n s or e n v i r o n m e n t a l dynamics .
− ** E n s u r e c l a r i t y and a c h i e v a b i l i t y * * : Each g o a l s h o u l d be a
    s i n g l e , c l e a r a c t i o n t h a t c a n be c o m p l e t e d w i t h t h e a v a i l a b l e
    functions

## Your Task
Now s y n t h e s i z e g o a l d e s c r i p t i o n s f o r t h e e n v i r o n m e n t and f u n c t i o n s
    p r o v i d e d i n t h e f o r m a t o f a JSON l i s t . P l e a s e do n o t l e a v e
   any comment .


                           Listing 8: user prompt used in BFCLv3 exploration
Do you t h i n k you h a v e w e l l − e x p l o r e d a l l f u n c t i o n s t h a t you a r e
    i n t e r e s t e d in , p a r t i c u l a r l y t h o s e with ambiguous i n p u t f o r m a t s
   / s t r u c t u r e s or p o t e n t i a l l y unexpected outputs ?



                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




C o n s i d e r s t o p p i n g ( # # # STOP ) i f :
− You h a v e t h o r o u g h l y t e s t e d f u n c t i o n s w i t h u n c l e a r p a r a m e t e r
      requirements
− You h a v e e x p l o r e d f u n c t i o n s t h a t m i g h t p r o d u c e u n e x p e c t e d o r
      variable output formats
− You h a v e s u f f i c i e n t u n d e r s t a n d i n g o f how t o h a n d l e e d g e c a s e s
     and e r r o r s

C o n t i n u e e x p l o r i n g ( # # #CONTINUE) i f :
− There a r e s t i l l f u n c t i o n s with ambiguous i n p u t s p e c i f i c a t i o n s
      t h a t need c l a r i f i c a t i o n
− You haven ’ t f u l l y t e s t e d f u n c t i o n s t h a t c o u l d h a v e u n p r e d i c t a b l e
         outputs
− You n e e d more e x p l o r a t i o n t o u n d e r s t a n d p a r a m e t e r c o n s t r a i n t s
     and e r r o r h a n d l i n g

P l e a s e o u t p u t ###STOP i f you b e l i e v e you h a v e c o m p r e h e n s i v e
       c o v e r a g e , o r ###CONTINUE i f more e x p l o r a t i o n i s n e e d e d .


     Listing 9: prompt used to extract environment dynamics from interaction logs of BFCLv3
You a r e an e x p e r t d a t a a n a l y s t s p e c i a l i z i n g i n f u n c t i o n c a l l i n g
   e n v i r o n m e n t s . Your t a s k i s t o a n a l y z e i n t e r a c t i o n l o g s b e t w e e n
     a f u n c t i o n c a l l i n g b o t and an e n v i r o n m e n t t o e x t r a c t
   e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s b a s e d on a g i v e n e x p l o r a t i o n g o a l .

## Task
Given an e x p l o r a t i o n g o a l and an i n t e r a c t i o n l o g , e x t r a c t
    e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s t h a t d e s c r i b e how t h e e n v i r o n m e n t
   c h a n g e s i n r e s p o n s e t o b o t a c t i o n s . Each e n v i r o n m e n t a l dynamic
      s h o u l d c a p t u r e t h e c a u s e −and − e f f e c t r e l a t i o n s h i p b e t w e e n
    a c t i o n s and e n v i r o n m e n t a l c h a n g e s .

## E n v i r o n m e n t a l Dynamic S t r u c t u r e
Each e n v i r o n m e n t a l dynamic must i n c l u d e t h e s e t h r e e c o m p o n e n t s :

1 . ** i n i t i a l s t a t e * * : The r e l e v a n t s t a t e o f t h e e n v i r o n m e n t b e f o r e
      the action
    − Include context l i k e c u r r e n t directory , v a r i a b l e values , f i l e
           s t a t e s , o r any p e r t i n e n t e n v i r o n m e n t a l c o n d i t i o n s
    − Be s p e c i f i c a b o u t what m a t t e r s f o r u n d e r s t a n d i n g t h e a c t i o n ’ s
           impact

2 . ** a c t i o n t a k e n * * : The e x a c t f u n c t i o n c a l l o r a c t i o n p e r f o r m e d
    by t h e b o t
    − I n c l u d e t h e f u n c t i o n name and a l l p a r a m e t e r s w i t h t h e i r
         values
    − Use t h e e x a c t s y n t a x from t h e i n t e r a c t i o n l o g

3 . ** e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s * * : How t h e e n v i r o n m e n t c h a n g e s a s a
     r e s u l t of the a c t i o n
    − D e s c r i b e what was c r e a t e d , m o d i f i e d , d e l e t e d , o r r e v e a l e d
    − I n c l u d e any s t a t e t r a n s i t i o n s , d a t a c h a n g e s , o r new
           i n f o r m a t i o n made a v a i l a b l e
    − Be s p e c i f i c a b o u t t h e o b s e r v a b l e e f f e c t s

## G u i d e l i n e s
− ** O u t p u t f o r m a t * * : G e n e r a t e y o u r r e s p o n s e a s a JSON a r r a y o f
    objects


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




− ** C o m p l e t e n e s s * * : E x t r a c t d y n a m i c s f o r e v e r y s i g n i f i c a n t a c t i o n
    in the log
− ** A c c u r a c y * * : Base d e s c r i p t i o n s s t r i c t l y on what ’ s o b s e r v a b l e i n
     the i n t e r a c t i o n log
− ** C l a r i t y * * : Use p r e c i s e , u n a m b i g u o u s l a n g u a g e f o r e a c h
    component
− ** F o c u s * * : Only i n c l u d e d y n a m i c s t h a t show m e a n i n g f u l
    environmental changes

## Example I n p u t
Goal : I n v e s t i g a t e how t o c r e a t e a new f i l e w i t h t o u c h ( ) and
   confirm i t s e x is t e n c e using l s ( ) .

I n t e r a c t i o n Logs :
Step 1:
Assistant : [ ls () ]
E n v i r o n m e n t : {” c u r r e n t d i r e c t o r y c o n t e n t ” : [ ] }
Step 2:
A s s i s t a n t : [ m k d i r ( d i r n a m e =” t e s t d i r ” ) ]
E n v i r o n m e n t : None
Step 3:
A s s i s t a n t : [ cd ( f o l d e r =” t e s t d i r ” ) ]
E n v i r o n m e n t : {” c u r r e n t w o r k i n g d i r e c t o r y ” : ” t e s t d i r ”}
Step 4:
A s s i s t a n t : [ pwd ( ) ]
E n v i r o n m e n t : {” c u r r e n t w o r k i n g d i r e c t o r y ” : ” / / / t e s t d i r ”}

## Example O u t p u t
[
  {
     ” i n i t i a l s t a t e ” : ” The c u r r e n t d i r e c t o r y c o n t a i n s no f i l e s . ” ,
     ” a c t i o n t a k e n ” : ” t o u c h ( f i l e n a m e =\” t e s t f i l e . t x t \ ” ) ” ,
     ” e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s ” : ”A new f i l e named \” t e s t f i l e . t x t \”
            is created in the current directory .”
  },
  {
     ” i n i t i a l s t a t e ” : ” The c u r r e n t d i r e c t o r y c o n t a i n s t h e f i l e \”
            t e s t f i l e . txt \”.” ,
     ” action taken ”: ” ls () ” ,
     ” e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s ” : ” The e n v i r o n m e n t r e v e a l s t h e
            c o n t e n t s o f t h e c u r r e n t d i r e c t o r y , s h o w i n g t h a t \” t e s t f i l e
            . t x t \” e x i s t s . ”
  }
]



                  Listing 10: prompt used to filter environment dynamics of BFCLv3
You a r e an e x p e r t d a t a a n a l y s t s p e c i a l i z i n g i n f u n c t i o n c a l l i n g
   e n v i r o n m e n t s . Your t a s k i s t o f i l t e r e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s t o
     remove i n s i g n i f i c a n t o r e n v i r o n m e n t − s p e c i f i c d e t a i l s w h i l e
   preserving meaningful behavioral p a t t e r n s .

## Task
Given a JSON a r r a y o f e n v i r o n m e n t a l dynamics , i d e n t i f y and remove
    dynamics t h a t a r e :
1 . ** Very e n v i r o n m e n t − s p e c i f i c * * : C o n t a i n s p e c i f i c d a t a , names , o r
      values t h a t are unique to a p a r t i c u l a r environment i n s t a n c e /
    setup


                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




2 . ** I n s i g n i f i c a n t * * : D e s c r i b e t r i v i a l o r non − m e a n i n g f u l c h a n g e s
     t h a t don ’ t c o n t r i b u t e t o u n d e r s t a n d i n g f u n c t i o n b e h a v i o r ( e . g
     . , l s ( ) in a f i l e system )
3 . ** R e d u n d a n t * * : D u p l i c a t e s i m i l a r p a t t e r n s a l r e a d y c a p t u r e d i n
     o t h e r dynamics

## F i l t e r i n g C r i t e r i a

### Remove d y n a m i c s t h a t c o n t a i n :
− ** S p e c i f i c d a t a v a l u e s * * : Names , IDs , f i l e c o n t e n t s , u s e r l i s t s ,
      o r any c o n c r e t e d a t a t h a t v a r i e s b e t w e e n e n v i r o n m e n t s
− ** E n v i r o n m e n t − s p e c i f i c p a t h s * * : A b s o l u t e p a t h s , s p e c i f i c
    d i r e c t o r y names , o r l o c a t i o n − d e p e n d e n t i n f o r m a t i o n
− ** I n s t a n c e − s p e c i f i c i d e n t i f i e r s * * : U s e r names , s e s s i o n IDs ,
    timestamps , or o t h e r unique i d e n t i f i e r s
− ** T r i v i a l s t a t e c h a n g e s * * : Minor f o r m a t t i n g c h a n g e s , t e m p o r a r y
    s t a t e s , or cosmetic updates
− ** R e d u n d a n t i n f o r m a t i o n * * : M u l t i p l e d y n a m i c s d e s c r i b i n g t h e same
      b eh a v io r a l p a t t e r n with d i f f e r e n t s p e c i f i c values

### Keep d y n a m i c s t h a t d e s c r i b e :
− ** G e n e r a l b e h a v i o r a l p a t t e r n s * * : How f u n c t i o n s t y p i c a l l y b e h a v e
    across d i f f e r e n t environments
− ** E r r o r c o n d i t i o n s * * : S t a n d a r d e r r o r m e s s a g e s and f a i l u r e modes
− ** S t a t e t r a n s i t i o n s * * : G e n e r a l s t a t e c h a n g e s ( l o g g e d i n / o u t ,
    f i l e created / deleted , etc . )
− ** F u n c t i o n c a p a b i l i t i e s * * : What f u n c t i o n s c a n do , n o t what
    s p e c i f i c data they return
− ** F u n c t i o n c o n t a i n s m e a n i n g f u l a r g u m e n t s * * : Keep d y n a m i c s where
    the f u n c t i o n c a l l i n c l u d e s arguments t h a t a f f e c t behavior or
    s t a t e , a s t h e s e i l l u s t r a t e how i n p u t p a r a m e t e r s i n f l u e n c e
    outcomes .

## G u i d e l i n e s
− ** O u t p u t f o r m a t * * : R e t u r n a JSON a r r a y c o n t a i n i n g o n l y t h e
    f i l t e r e d dynamics
− ** P r e s e r v e s t r u c t u r e * * : Keep t h e same JSON s t r u c t u r e f o r
    remaining dynamics
− ** G e n e r a l i z e d e s c r i p t i o n s * * : R e p l a c e s p e c i f i c v a l u e s w i t h
    g e n e r a l d e s c r i p t i o n s where p o s s i b l e
− ** M a i n t a i n a c c u r a c y * * : Don ’ t c h a n g e t h e c o r e meaning o f t h e
    dynamics , o n l y remove s p e c i f i c i t y
− ** F o c u s on p a t t e r n s * * : P r i o r i t i z e d y n a m i c s t h a t show r e u s a b l e
    behavioral patterns

## Examples

### Remove ( Very e n v i r o n m e n t − s p e c i f i c t h a t i t c o n t a i n s d a t a
       e n t r i e s s p e c i f i c to a environment i n s t a n c e ) :
‘ ‘ ‘ json
{
        ” i n i t i a l s t a t e ” : ”No u s e r i s l o g g e d i n t o t h e s y s t e m , and a
               l i s t o f u s e r s n e e d s t o be i d e n t i f i e d . ” ,
        ” action taken ”: ” l i s t u s e r s () ” ,
        ” environmental dynamics ” : ” Provides the l i s t of a v a i l a b l e
               u s e r s : A l i c e , Bob , C a t h e r i n e , and D a n i e l . ”
}
‘‘‘



                                                        30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




### Keep ( G e n e r a l p a t t e r n and e r r o r m e s s a g e ) :
‘ ‘ ‘ json
{
       ” i n i t i a l s t a t e ” : ”No u s e r i s c u r r e n t l y l o g g e d i n . ” ,
       ” a c t i o n t a k e n ” : ” s e a r c h m e s s a g e s ( keyword =\” t e s t \ ” ) ” ,
       ” e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s ” : ”An e r r o r m e s s a g e i s r e t u r n e d
              i n d i c a t i n g t h a t no u s e r i s c u r r e n t l y l o g g e d i n . ”
}
‘‘‘

### Remove ( T r i v i a l t r a n s i t i o n ) :
‘ ‘ ‘ json
{
       ” i n i t i a l s t a t e ” : ” In a d i r e c t o r y with e x i s t i n g f i l e s . ” ,
       ” action taken ”: ” ls () ” ,
       ” e n v i r o n m e n t a l d y n a m i c s ” : ” R e t u r n s a l i s t o f f i l e s and
             d i r e c t o r i e s in the current location .”
}
‘‘‘

## I n s t r u c t i o n s
1 . A n a l y z e e a c h e n v i r o n m e n t a l dynamic i n t h e i n p u t JSON a r r a y
2 . Apply t h e f i l t e r i n g c r i t e r i a t o d e t e r m i n e i f i t s h o u l d be k e p t
    o r removed
3 . F o r d y n a m i c s t h a t a r e k e p t , g e n e r a l i z e any r e m a i n i n g s p e c i f i c
     details
4 . R e t u r n t h e f i l t e r e d JSON a r r a y w i t h o n l y t h e s i g n i f i c a n t ,
    g e n e r a l i z a b l e dynamics



A.4    A DDITIONAL RESULTS


Table 6: Success rate (SR) of syntactic alignment across different Qwen2.5 instruct model sizes
(7B, 14B, 32B) and training hyperparameters. Results are shown for varying numbers of training
iterations and two learning rates (LR=0.1 and LR=1.0). Syntactic alignment adaptation generally
improves SR over the baseline, with larger models and moderate learning rates yielding higher gains.
          Model                  Number of Training Iterations             SR (LR=0.1)        SR (LR=1.0)
    Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct                  Baseline (0)                          9.00                 -
    Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct                       1                                9.50               9.50
    Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct                       2                                9.50               8.50
    Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct                       3                                9.50               9.00
    Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct                       4                               10.00               8.50
    Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct                       5                               10.00               8.50
    Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct                 Baseline (0)                          18.5                 -
    Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct                      1                               20.00              20.00
    Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct                      2                               20.00              20.00
    Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct                      3                               20.00              21.00
    Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct                      4                               19.50              20.00
    Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct                      5                               19.00              19.00
    Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct                 Baseline (0)                         26.00                 -
    Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct                      1                               25.50              26.50
    Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct                      2                               26.50              26.50
    Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct                      3                               26.50              27.00
    Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct                      4                               26.50              27.00
    Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct                      5                               26.00              26.50



                                                        31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 7: Number of environment dynamics per website before and after filtering with GPT-4.1 as
the exploration policy and dynamics extractor. Most environment dynamics are filtered out.
 Website             Number of Env Dynamics         Number of Env Dynamics (after filtering)
 Shopping                      334                                   52
 Shopping Admin                334                                   50
 GitLab                        334                                   53
 Map                           334                                   18
 Reddit                        334                                   23


              Table 8: Number of functions available in each BFCLv3 environment.
                             Environment         Num of Functions
                          VehicleControlAPI               22
                           GorillaFileSystem              18
                               TravelAPI                  17
                               MathAPI                    17
                              TwitterAPI                  14
                             MessageAPI                   10
                               TicketAPI                   9
                              TradingBot                  22


A.5   E NVIRONMENT DYNAMICS ANALYSIS

Here we provide some concrete examples of environment dynamics that are removed by our filtering
mechanism. Exploration policy and dynamics extractor is GPT-4.1.

      • No Change Dynamics
        {
            "initial_state": "Magento Admin product edit page, with the ’
                Country of Manufacture’ dropdown expanded and no country
                selected.",
            "action": "click [1405] where [1405] is United States",
            "environmental_dynamics": "no change"
        }

      • Basic Dropdown/Combobox Expansion
        {
            "initial_state": "Magento Admin product edit page for ’Sprite
                Stasis Ball 65 cm’, with the ’Country of Manufacture’
                combobox (notice-WPNSU51) collapsed and not focused.",
            "action": "click [1168] where [1168] is notice-WPNSU51",
            "environmental_dynamics": "The ’Country of Manufacture’ combobox
                 became focused and expanded, showing its list of country
                options."
        }

      • Basic Dialog Open/Close
        {
            "initial_state": "Magento Admin product edit page for ’Sprite
                Stasis Ball 65 cm’, with the ’Add Attribute’ button visible
                but no attribute selection dialog open.",
            "action": "click [720] where [720] is Add Attribute",
            "environmental_dynamics": "Clicking the ’Add Attribute’ button
                opened the ’Add Attribute’ dialog, displaying available
                product attributes for selection and actions such as ’Create
                New Attribute’."
        }



                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




      • Standard Form Field Visibility
        {
            "initial_state": "Magento Admin product detail page for ’Sprite
                Stasis Ball 65 cm’ with all product attribute forms visible,
                including a collapsed ’Country of Manufacture’ dropdown (
                combobox).",
            "action": "click [1267] where [1267] is notice-BKW2147",
            "environmental_dynamics": "The ’Country of Manufacture’ combobox
                 was clicked, causing attribute fields for ’Country of
                Manufacture’ and all subsequent grouped attributes to become
                visible."
        }

      • Basic Button Focus
        {
            "initial_state": "Magento Admin product edit page with the ’Add
                Attribute’ dialog open; in the attributes table, the ’Options
                ’ column header includes a checkbox and an ’Options’ button,
                neither focused nor expanded.",
            "action": "click [2372] where [2372] is ",
            "environmental_dynamics": "The ’Options’ button in the ’Options’
                 column header of the Add Attribute dialog became focused and
                 expanded a dropdown list with a single option, ’Select All’,
                 now visible below the button."
        }




                                               33
