                                                                                                                                        Youtu-Agent




                                                  Youtu-Agent: Scaling Agent Productivity with
                                             Automated Generation and Hybrid Policy Optimization
                                                                                                            ∗
                                                                                       Youtu-Agent Team



                                                 Existing Large Language Model (LLM) agent frameworks face two significant challenges: high
                                                 configuration costs and static capabilities. Building a high-quality agent often requires extensive




arXiv:2512.24615v1 [cs.AI] 31 Dec 2025
                                                 manual effort in tool integration and prompt engineering, while deployed agents struggle to adapt
                                                 to dynamic environments without expensive fine-tuning. To address these issues, we propose Youtu-
                                                 Agent, a modular framework designed for the automated generation and continuous evolution of
                                                 LLM agents. Youtu-Agent features a structured configuration system that decouples execution envi-
                                                 ronments, toolkits, and context management, enabling flexible reuse and automated synthesis. We
                                                 introduce two generation paradigms: a Workflow mode for standard tasks and a Meta-Agent mode
                                                 for complex, non-standard requirements, capable of automatically generating tool code, prompts,
                                                 and configurations. Furthermore, Youtu-Agent establishes a hybrid policy optimization system:
                                                 (1) an Agent Practice module that enables agents to accumulate experience and improve perfor-
                                                 mance through in-context optimization without parameter updates; and (2) an Agent RL module
                                                 that integrates with distributed training frameworks to enable scalable and stable reinforcement
                                                 learning of any Youtu-Agents in an end-to-end, large-scale manner. Experiments demonstrate that
                                                 Youtu-Agent achieves state-of-the-art performance on WebWalkerQA (71.47%) and GAIA (72.8%)
                                                 using open-weight models. Our automated generation pipeline achieves over 81% tool synthesis
                                                 success rate, while the Practice module improves performance on AIME 2024/2025 by +2.7% and
                                                 +5.4% respectively. Moreover, our Agent RL training achieves 40% speedup with steady performance
                                                 improvement on 7B LLMs, enhancing coding/reasoning and searching capabilities respectively up
                                                 to 35% and 21% on Maths and general/multi-hop QA benchmarks.

                                                     Date: December 26, 2025
                                                     Code: https://github.com/TencentCloudADP/youtu-agent




                                         1        Introduction

                                         As Large Language Models (LLMs) evolve towards general purpose agents, building systems that au-
                                         tonomously solve complex real-world tasks has become a central pursuit in AI research. However, the
                                         current landscape of agent development is hindered by two primary bottlenecks.

                                         High Configuration Costs. Developing a robust agent remains a labor-intensive process. On one hand,
                                         practitioners must select appropriate tools and craft effective prompts, which require significant domain
                                         expertise and iterative refinement. On the other hand, implementing custom tools demands substantial
                                         engineering effort, including writing Python functions, integrating external APIs, and handling edge cases.
                                         This “craftsman” approach creates a high barrier to entry and limits the scalability of agent deployment.

                                         Static Capabilities. Once deployed, most existing agents remain static and struggle to adapt to new environ-
                                         ments. Improving their performance typically requires one of two approaches: (1) manual optimization of
                                         prompts or few-shot examples, which is costly and offers no guarantee of improvement; or (2) Supervised
                                             *
                                                 Full author list in contributions.


                                                                                                 1
                                                                                             Youtu-Agent


Fine-Tuning (SFT) or Reinforcement Learning (RL), which face substantial challenges including data scarcity,
high computational costs, and training instability issues such as “entropy explosion” in long-horizon tasks.

To overcome these challenges, we present Youtu-Agent, a comprehensive framework that bridges the
gap between “automated construction” and “continuous optimization.” To address high configuration
costs, Youtu-Agent adopts a layered, modular architecture that decouples Environment (execution context),
Toolkits (atomic operations), and Agent (LLM-driven planning) into standardized components. This design
enables a YAML-based structured configuration system that facilitates component reuse and serves as the
foundation for automated generation. Building on this architecture, we provide two generation paradigms:
the Workflow mode offers a deterministic pipeline for routine tasks, while the Meta-Agent mode deploys a
higher-level architect agent to handle complex, dynamic requirements.

To address static capabilities, Youtu-Agent establishes a hybrid policy optimization system. For low-cost
scenarios where manual prompt optimization proves unreliable, we introduce the Agent Practice module,
which enables agents to accumulate experience and self-evolve during runtime. By performing parallel
rollouts on dozens of samples and leveraging group relative experiential knowledge optimization, the agent
builds a contextual memory that enhances future performance without gradient updates. For scenarios
demanding significant and lasting performance improvement, the Agent RL module integrates with existing
RL training frameworks and bridging protocols to provide an end-to-end reinforcement learning recipe. To
ensure both stability and scalability during RL, our module tackles the concurrency bottleneck and entropy
explosion/collapsing challenges respectively from the infrastructure and algorithm implementations.

Our contributions are as follows:


    • Framework Efficiency. Built entirely on open-source models and tools, Youtu-Agent achieves 71.47%
      pass@1 on WebWalkerQA and 72.8% pass@1 on GAIA (text-only subset), establishing a strong open-
      source baseline and validating the framework’s general applicability.
    • Automated Agent Generation. Through our two-paradigm generation mechanism, we demonstrate
      the potential of LLMs to automatically generate tools and agent configurations, significantly reducing
      the burden of manual configuration. The automated tool synthesis achieves over 81% success rate.
    • Continuous Experience Learning. Through the Agent Practice module, we enable low-cost continuous
      evolution of agents via in-context experience accumulation. This approach yields +2.7% and +5.4%
      absolute improvements for DeepSeek-V3.1-Terminus on AIME 2024 and AIME 2025, respectively.
    • Scalable and Stable Agent RL. Through the Agent RL module, we address the scalability and sta-
      bility challenges in large-scale reinforcement learning training. Our optimizations achieve a 40%
      speedup in training iteration time and improve Qwen2.5-7B accuracy on AIME 2024 from 10% to 45%,
      demonstrating the framework’s potential for building evolvable agents.



2     Youtu-Agent Framework

Youtu-Agent is designed with modularity and automation at its core. The framework comprises three
hierarchical layers—Environment, Tools, and Agent—supported by a structured configuration system that
enables both manual flexibility and automated synthesis. Beyond the execution architecture, the framework
provides components for continuous optimization: the Agent Practice module enables low-cost experience-
based improvement, while the Agent RL module supports end-to-end reinforcement learning. In this section,
we describe each component in detail.



                                                     2
                                                                                              Youtu-Agent


2.1     System Architecture

2.1.1   Execution Framework


The agent execution architecture is organized into three hierarchical layers. This layered design decouples
concerns and enables flexible reuse of components across different agents.

Environment Layer. The Environment Layer provides the foundational execution context and low-level
capabilities. It serves as the substrate upon which tools operate, exposing both state information (such
as current page content or filesystem status) and primitive interfaces. Typical backends include browser
instances for web navigation (e.g., Playwright-based browser environments), operating system shells for
command execution, and sandboxed code execution environments (e.g., E2B). The environment abstraction
allows the same tools and agents to operate across different backends with minimal modification.

Tools Layer. The Tools Layer encapsulates atomic and composite operations behind stable interfaces
that the agent can invoke. Tools fall into three categories: (1) environment-related tools that wrap low-
level environment APIs (e.g., clicking a DOM element, running a bash command, taking screenshots), (2)
environment-independent utilities that perform standalone computations (e.g., mathematical operations,
text processing, date/time handling), and (3) MCP tools that integrate external Model Context Protocol
services for extended capabilities. This categorization allows tools to be composed, shared, and reused across
different agents and environments.

Agent Layer. The Agent Layer houses the LLM-driven planner/executor that orchestrates task completion.
The agent operates through a perceive–reason–act loop: it perceives environment state provided by the
Environment Layer, reasons about the next steps using LLM capabilities, and selects appropriate tools to
act. To handle long-horizon interactions that can overwhelm the model’s context window, we incorporate a
Context Manager module within this layer. The Context Manager maintains a compact working context
by pruning stale or redundant information while preserving essential state. For example, in browser-based
tasks, it removes obsolete HTML from prior navigation steps to control token cost without losing task-critical
history.



2.1.2   Configuration System


A distinguishing feature of Youtu-Agent is its YAML-based structured configuration system. All components—
environment specification, tool selection, agent instructions, and context management settings—are declared
via human-readable YAML files. This standardized format serves dual purposes: it facilitates manual
composition and sharing of agent configurations, and it provides the target schema for our automated
generation mechanisms (Section 2.2). An example configuration is shown below:
agent:
  name: research_agent
  instructions: "You are a helpful research assistant..."
env:
  name: e2b
  config: {}
context_manager:
  name: base
  config: {}
toolkits:
  search:
    activated_tools: ["search", "web_qa"]
  python_executor:
    activated_tools: ["execute_python_code"]



                                                      3
                                                                                                Youtu-Agent


This configuration specifies an agent with E2B sandbox environment, the default context manager, and two
toolkits for web search and Python code execution. The declarative nature of YAML configurations enables
rapid prototyping and systematic management of agent variants.



2.1.3   Continuous Optimization Components


Beyond execution, the framework emphasizes continuous agent improvement. Three supporting compo-
nents enable this capability:


   • Eval: Evaluates agent performance on predefined benchmarks, providing standardized metrics for
     comparison and iteration.
   • Agent Practice: Enables low-cost experience accumulation on small datasets without parameter
     updates (Section 2.3).

   • Agent RL: Supports end-to-end reinforcement learning training for scenarios requiring peak perfor-
     mance through parameter optimization (Section 2.4).


These components transform Youtu-Agent from a static execution framework into an evolvable system
capable of continuous self-improvement.



2.2     Automated Generation Mechanism

Building upon the structured configuration system, Youtu-Agent provides automated mechanisms for
generating complete agent configurations from high-level task descriptions. We introduce two generation
paradigms tailored to different complexity levels and use cases, as illustrated in Figure 1.



2.2.1   Workflow Mode


The Workflow mode follows a deterministic, four-stage pipeline suitable for well-defined, routine agent
construction tasks:

Stage 1: Intent Clarification and Decomposition. The user’s high-level task description is analyzed and
decomposed into specific technical requirements. This stage identifies core objectives, necessary capabilities,
and potential environmental constraints, producing a structured specification for subsequent stages.

Stage 2: Tool Retrieval and Ad-hoc Tool Synthesis. Based on the clarified requirements, the system searches
the existing toolkit library for relevant tools. If required tools are missing, the Ad-hoc Tool Synthesis module
automatically generates new Python tool implementations, complete with function signatures, docstrings,
and unit tests. This synthesis process leverages LLMs to produce executable code that integrates seamlessly
with the framework’s tool interface.

Stage 3: Prompt Engineering. With the selected or synthesized tools identified, this stage generates
optimized system instructions. The prompt engineering process considers task requirements, tool usage
patterns, and desired agent behavior to produce effective instructions.


                                                       4
                                                                                                 Youtu-Agent




Figure 1. Automated generation mechanism. Left: user input describing the desired agent. Middle: two generation
paradigms—Workflow mode (top) follows a deterministic four-stage pipeline, while Meta-Agent mode (bottom) deploys
an architect agent with flexible tool access. Right: the generated agent configuration ready for deployment.


Stage 4: Configuration Assembly. The final stage compiles all components—environment specification,
selected tools, generated prompts, and context management settings—into a complete YAML configuration
file ready for deployment.

This workflow provides a standardized, reproducible pipeline for agent generation, enabling rapid develop-
ment of agents for common task categories.



2.2.2   Meta-Agent Mode


For complex or ambiguous requirements that resist a fixed pipeline, the Meta-Agent mode deploys a
higher-level Architect Agent that treats generation capabilities as callable tools. The meta-agent is equipped
with: search_tool (retrieve existing tools from the library), create_tool (synthesize missing Python tools
with signatures, docstrings, and unit tests), ask_user (gather missing constraints or preferences through
multi-turn dialogue), and create_agent_config (assemble the final YAML configuration).

With these capabilities, the meta-agent can dynamically plan the generation process: it conducts multi-
turn clarification with ask_user to elicit task scope and constraints, alternates between search_tool and
create_tool depending on toolkit coverage, and finally integrates all components via create_agent_config.



2.3     Continuous Experience Learning

How can we adapt an agent to specific tasks without expensive parameter fine-tuning? Traditional ap-
proaches face significant limitations: manual prompt engineering is labor-intensive with no guarantee of
improvement, while SFT or RL requires substantial data and computational resources. To address this,


                                                       5
                                                                                                      Youtu-Agent


the Agent Practice module integrates Training-free Group Relative Policy Optimization (Training-free
GRPO) [1], enabling low-cost agent improvement through in-context experience accumulation without any
gradient updates.




Figure 2. Training-free GRPO mechanism. Given only a few dozen of samples, the agent performs multiple rollouts
per task. An LLM evaluator assesses group relative trajectory quality, and distilling contextual memory of experiential
knowledge by comparing successful and failed trials. During online testing, such learned experiences are injected as
“textual LoRA” to guide reasoning.

The core mechanism operates as follows: on a small training dataset (with or without ground truth), the
agent performs multiple rollouts per task, generating diverse solution trajectories. Inspired by GRPO’s
group relative optimization, an evaluator assesses the relative quality of trajectories for the same task. Rather
than calculating a numerical advantage in vanilla GRPO, the LLM introspects on these diverse outputs and
distill a semantic group advantage, i.e., a textual learning direction derived from contrasting successful and
failed trials. Such advantage optimizes the existing experiential knowledge, serving as a refined policy for
subsequent epochs. After completing practice, during online testing, these experiences are injected into the
agent’s context, acting as a form of “textual LoRA” that guides reasoning without modifying model weights.

Compared with traditional learning approaches, the agent practice module requires no gradient computation,
works with API-based models where fine-tuning is inaccessible, leverages small training sets effectively, and
allows experiences to be accumulated continuously.



2.4    Agent RL Training

For applications requiring significant and lasting performance improvement, the Agent RL module provides
a complete pipeline for end-to-end, production-grade reinforcement learning (see Figure 3). We implement
custom agent logic within our framework for inference, and integrate with Agent-Lightning [3] as the
connector between Youtu-Agent and modern RL framework such as VeRL [2] for distributed training. Such
integration addresses two critical challenges that have historically limited agent RL: scalability to large
distributed systems and stability over long-horizon tasks.

Scalability Solutions. Scaling agent RL presents unique challenges due to the complex, stateful nature of
agent-environment interactions. We address these through: (1) RESTful API wrapping that encapsulates
agent execution environments as standardized services, enabling seamless distribution and load balancing;
(2) Ray-based concurrency for highly parallel rollout collection across distributed workers; and (3) layered
timeout logic with hierarchical controls at tool, step, and episode levels to handle various potential timeout
issues without fatal failures. Such infrastructure-level optimization enables stable scaling to 128 GPUs.




                                                           6
                                                                                                Youtu-Agent




Figure 3. An end-to-end RL training pipeline with Youtu-Agent. Left: Data flow in the RL training framework [2].
Middle: Connector between RL framework and Agent framework [3]. Right: Data flow in the Youtu-Agent inference
framework.


Stability Solutions. Long-horizon agent tasks exacerbate the “entropy explosion” problem where policies
degenerate into repetitive or nonsensical actions. We mitigate this through: (1) filtering invalid and anoma-
lous tool calls from training data to prevent learning degenerate patterns; (2) removing batch shuffling and
reducing off-policy update iterations to prevent the policy from overfitting the outdated experience; and (3)
correcting bias of advantage estimation in turn-level GRPO training. These techniques ensure stable training
dynamics with consistent performance improvements across hundreds of training steps.



3     Experiments

We evaluate Youtu-Agent across four dimensions: general agent capabilities on standard benchmarks,
effectiveness of automated generation mechanisms, low-cost improvement through the Agent Practice
module, and scalable Agent RL training.



3.1   Benchmark Performance

To validate the effectiveness of our framework design and tool implementations, we evaluate Youtu-Agent
on established agent benchmarks. Prioritizing accessibility and reproducibility, we build our agents en-
tirely on open-source models—specifically the DeepSeek-V3 series—without relying on proprietary APIs
such as Claude or GPT. We adopt a Plan-and-Execute paradigm, where a planner agent orchestrates task
decomposition and scheduling while specialized executor agents handle subtasks.

WebWalkerQA. This benchmark (680 questions) evaluates LLMs’ ability to perform multi-step, deep web
navigation and question answering over real websites. Equipped with web search and crawling tools,
Youtu-Agent achieves 71.47% pass@1 accuracy, as shown in Figure 4. This result demonstrates robust
environment interaction and multi-step exploration capabilities.




                                                       7
                                                                                               Youtu-Agent




  Figure 4. Performance comparison on WebWalkerQA, including both training-free and trained agent approaches.


GAIA (Text-only Subset). GAIA [4] (466 questions) tests real-world question answering requiring reasoning,
multimodal understanding, web browsing, and tool-use proficiency. Since we use text-only models, we
evaluate on the text-only subset. Beyond web tools, we provide document parsing and code execution
capabilities to handle file attachments. Youtu-Agent achieves 72.8% pass@1 accuracy, demonstrating effective
tool selection and deep reasoning abilities that validate our framework’s design for general-purpose agent
applications.

These results establish Youtu-Agent as a competitive open-source baseline without requiring proprietary
APIs or closed-source systems.



3.2     Automated Generation Effectiveness

We evaluate the practical utility of Youtu-Agent’s automated generation mechanisms through quantitative
metrics and a qualitative case study.



3.2.1   Evaluation Framework


Given the absence of established benchmarks for automated agent generation, we construct AgentGen-80, a
benchmark consisting of 80 diverse task descriptions ranging from simple information retrieval to complex
multi-step automation. We assess generation quality across three dimensions:


   • Configuration Validity (CV): Whether the generated YAML configuration is structurally valid and
     semantically complete.


                                                      8
                                                                                            Youtu-Agent


   • Tool Executability (TE): Whether synthesized tools compile and execute successfully with expected
     functionality.
   • Task Completion (TC): End-to-end effectiveness—whether the generated agent successfully completes
     the specified task.



3.2.2   Comparative Results


We compare the Workflow mode and Meta-Agent mode on AgentGen-80. Table 1 presents the results.

        Table 1. Performance comparison of Workflow and Meta-Agent generation modes on AgentGen-80.


                              Generation Mode         CV         TE           TC
                              Workflow Mode          100%     81.25%     65.00%
                              Meta-Agent Mode       98.75%    82.50%     68.75%


The Workflow mode achieves 100% configuration validity, demonstrating the robustness of its deterministic
four-stage pipeline. The Meta-Agent mode achieves 98.75% validity—the occasional failures occur when the
final create_agent_config tool call fails to produce well-formed output. For Tool Executability (TE), both
modes use the same tool synthesis module, achieving 81.25% and 82.50% respectively with no significant
difference. For Task Completion (TC), we manually test the generated agents through dialogue to verify
expected behavior, yielding 65.00% and 68.75% completion rates. The Meta-Agent mode shows slightly
better end-to-end effectiveness.



3.2.3   Case Study


We illustrate the Meta-Agent mode with a concrete example. For the user query “Summarize today’s trending
papers on multi-agent system and download PDFs,” the Architect Agent first calls search_tool to search the
existing library, finding the arxiv toolkit with paper download capabilities. Finding no existing tool for
fetching daily paper updates, it calls create_tool to synthesize a new tool fetch_daily_papers. Finally, it
calls create_agent_config to assemble the configuration file shown below:
agent:
  name: Papers_Analyzer_Agent
  instructions: |
    You are a specialized research assistant focused on analyzing
    daily papers with expertise in agent technologies.
    ...
toolkits:
  search: {"activated_tools": ["search", "web_qa"]} # retrieved from library
  arxiv: {"activated_tools": ["download_papers"]} # retrieved from library
  fetch_daily_papers: {} # synthesized tool



Within the create_tool invocation, a subagent queries the web to retrieve related API documentation, then
implements the tool in Python. The core implementation is shown below, and the synthesized tool is exposed
via MCP (Model Context Protocol) to the generated agent, enabling seamless integration with the execution
loop.
def fetch_daily_papers(date: str) -> str:
    """Crawl daily papers from aggregation site. Return paper infos in str.



                                                      9
                                                                                               Youtu-Agent



   Args:
       date (str): date in format YYYY-MM-DD
   """
   papers = list_daily_papers(date=date)
   return "\n".join([f"{asdict(paper)}" for paper in papers])




3.3    Agent Practice Module Results

As introduced in Section 2.3, the Agent Practice module integrates Training-free GRPO to enable low-
cost agent improvement through experience accumulation without parameter updates. We validate its
effectiveness on challenging mathematical reasoning benchmarks AIME 2024 and AIME 2025 [5], using
Mean@32 for robust measurement.

Experimental Setup. Our evaluation is based on ReAct [6] with a code interpreter tool. During the learning
stage, we randomly sample 100 problems from the DAPO-Math-17K [7] dataset and run 3 epochs with group
size 5 and temperature 0.7. For online testing, the temperature is set to 0.3.

Table 2. Performance comparison on AIME 2024 and 2025 (Mean@32). Training-free GRPO achieves +2.7% and +5.4%
absolute improvements over the ReAct baseline with only 100 training examples and zero gradient updates.

 Method                                      Learning Cost      Model                     AIME24      AIME25
 ReAct [6]                                         -            Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct        29.6        23.1
 ZeroTIR [8]                                   ≈ $20, 000       Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct        56.7        33.3
 SimpleTIR [9]                                 ≈ $20, 000       Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct        59.9        49.2
 ReTool [10]                                   ≈ $10, 000       Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct        67.0        49.3
 AFM [11]                                      ≈ $10, 000       Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct        66.7        59.8
 ReAct [6]                                          -           DeepSeek-V3.1-Terminus      80.0        67.9
 + Training-Free GRPO (w/o ground truths)         ≈ $18         DeepSeek-V3.1-Terminus      80.7        68.9
 + Training-Free GRPO (w/ ground truths)          ≈ $18         DeepSeek-V3.1-Terminus      82.7        73.3

As shown in Table 2, when ground truths are available for the training samples, Training-free GRPO achieves
+2.7% on AIME 2024 and +5.4% on AIME 2025 compared to ReAct, demonstrating the effectiveness of learned
experiences. Notably, the variant without ground truths still achieves strong results, validating applicability
to domains where labeled data is scarce. Compared to RL methods requiring 10,000+ training samples and
approximately $10,000 for fine-tuning a 32B model, Training-free GRPO achieves better performance with
only 100 samples and approximately $18 learning costs, offering a highly effective and accessible pathway
for real-world applications. Furthermore, as shown in Figure 5, both learning and validation performance
improve steadily across epochs, and the average number of tool calls is decreasing, which indicates that the
agent learns more efficient problem-solving strategies.



3.4    Agent RL Training Results

As introduced in Section 2.4, our Agent RL module proposes modifications to both infrastructure and
algorithm implementation of Agent-Lightning [3] to enable scalable and stable end-to-end RL training. The
effectiveness of our optimization is confirmed through both training efficiency and stability on multiple
benchmarks.




                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                Youtu-Agent


                           DAPO-100         AIME'24          AIME'25                                   DAPO-100          AIME'24          AIME'25
                      90
                                                                                               6.0
                      85


        Performance                                                             # Tool Calls
                                                                                               5.5
                      80
                      75                                                                       5.0

                      70                                                                       4.5
                      65                                                                       4.0
                           1     2   3 ReAct 1     2   3 ReAct 1   2   3                               1   2       3 ReAct 1   2   3 ReAct 1   2    3
                                           Learning Epoch                                                               Learning Epoch
                               Mean@3 (DAPO-100)         Mean@32 (ReAct)               Mean@32 (AIME'24)                   Mean@32 (AIME'25)



Figure 5. During the learning stage of Training-free GRPO, performance improves steadily while tool usage becomes
more efficient.




                                 (a) Time of an iteration step.                                      (b) Time of the rollout generation part.

     Figure 6. The comparison of our Agent RL module with the official Agent-Lightning in training efficiency.


Efficiency. Compared with the Agent-Lightning (v0.2.2 official version), our infrastructure optimizations
such as concurrency control, RESTful API wrapping, and hierarchical timeout logic reduce iteration time by
approximately 40%, enabling efficient scaling to 128 GPUs without timeout issues (see Figure 6).

Effectiveness. To ensure fair comparison, we perform RL training of Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct on two typical
tasks: 1) math/code for reasoning capabilities, and 2) search for information-seeking capabilities.

For the math/code task, we follow the experimental settings of ReTool [10] where a code interpreter
(sandbox) is prepared as an external tool for assistance of solving mathematic problems. As shown in
Figure 3, evaluation results confirm that the accuracy gains of 35% and 22% are respectively achieved on
AIME24 and AIME25.
Table 3. Results on Maths benchmarks (step 500). Qwen2.5-7B shows consistent improvements on AIME24 and AIME25
via our end-to-end RL module with Youtu-Agent.


                                                        Dataset        Before                  After           ∆
                                                        AIME24          0.10                   0.45        +0.35
                                                        AIME25          0.09                   0.31        +0.22


For the search task, we follow the experimental settings of SearchR1 [12] where a local wikipedia-2018
retrieval service (E5-HNSW64 embeddings) is prepared as an external tool for solving general QA and multi-
hop QA problems. As shown in Table 4, consistent improvements are observed across all benchmarks with
accuracy gains of 17%, 19%, 21%, 8%, 17%, 13%, and 10% respectively on TriviaQA, PopQA, NatureQuestions,


                                                                           11
                                                                                               Youtu-Agent


MusiQue, HotpotQA, Bamboogle, and 2WikiMultiHop.

Table 4. Results on general QA and multi-hop QA benchmarks (step 200). Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct shows consistent
improvements across all benchmarks via our end-to-end RL module with Youtu-Agent.


                                Dataset               Before    After     ∆
                                TriviaQA               0.37     0.54    +0.17
                                PopQA                  0.16     0.35    +0.19
                                NaturalQuestions       0.24     0.45    +0.21
                                MuSiQue                0.06     0.14    +0.08
                                HotpotQA               0.21     0.38    +0.17
                                Bamboogle              0.23     0.36    +0.13
                                2WikiMultiHop          0.22     0.32    +0.10


Training Dynamics. Figure 7 illustrates the training dynamics for comparison with the official Agent-
Lightning release. After our improvements addressing “entropy explosion”, the actor’s KL divergence and
gradient norm remain stable. It can be observed that critic score increases steadily, which is in line with the
validation accuracy.

These experiments demonstrate that Youtu-Agent not only provides a robust execution framework but also
supports effective model training for building continuously improving agents.



4     Related Work

4.1   Agent Frameworks

Recent years have seen a proliferation of agent frameworks. MetaGPT [13], AutoGen [14], and ChatDev [15]
have popularized multi-agent collaboration, assigning static roles to LLMs to solve complex tasks. While
effective, these frameworks often rely on predefined roles and heavy prompt tuning. Youtu-Agent advances
this paradigm by automating the generation of agent configurations themselves, including executable tool
code and optimized prompts, rather than just orchestrating static roles.



4.2    Automated Agent Design

Research into automated agent design, such as ADAS [16] and AutoAgents [17], has explored generating
agents from high-level descriptions. Youtu-Agent distinguishes itself by not only generating the agent’s
design but also synthesizing the necessary tool code (Python) and providing a unified pipeline that extends
from automated generation to continuous optimization.



4.3    Agent Optimization and Learning

Optimizing agents typically involves either prompt optimization or parameter updates. Reflexion [18]
and ReAct [6] use verbal reinforcement and reasoning traces to improve performance without training.


                                                      12
                                                                                                         Youtu-Agent




                    (a) PPO KL Divergence                                (b) Policy Gradient Clip Fraction




                      (c) Gradient Norm                                          (d) Entropy Loss




                        (e) Critic Score                                     (f) Validation Accuracy

Figure 7. Training dynamics on ReTool dataset. Comparison between our optimized agent RL module and their official
v0.2.2 release. Our improvements ensure stable KL divergence, controlled gradient norm, steady critic score growth, and
consistent validation accuracy increase.




                                                          13
                                                                                              Youtu-Agent


On the training side, Toolformer [19] and Gorilla [20] focus on fine-tuning for tool use. Youtu-Agent
integrates both approaches: the Practice module enables low-cost, inference-time improvement through
experience accumulation, and the Agent RL module provides a full-scale RL pipeline for end-to-end
parameter optimization, addressing the stability issues often encountered in PPO/RLHF for agents.



5    Conclusion

We presented Youtu-Agent, a modular framework for automatic agent generation and continuous improve-
ment. The framework addresses two fundamental challenges in LLM-based agents: high configuration costs
and static capabilities.

Key Contributions. (1) A modular, YAML-based architecture that decouples environments, tools, and
context management for flexible agent composition. (2) Dual-paradigm automated generation through
workflow pipelines and meta-agent interaction. (3) An Agent Practice module for low-cost optimization
using small datasets without gradient updates. (4) An Agent RL module for scalable and stable end-to-end
reinforcement learning training.

Empirical Results. Youtu-Agent achieves 71.47% on WebWalkerQA and 72.8% on GAIA using only open-
source models. Our automated generation achieves over 81% tool executability and up to 68.75% task
completion. The Practice module improves AIME performance by +4.8%/+7.0% with only 100 samples and
$18 cost. The Agent RL module enables 40% speedup and stable 128-GPU scaling, improving Qwen2.5-7B
from 10% to 45% accuracy on AIME 2024.

Future Directions. We plan to expand the framework with more environment integrations, enhanced
multi-agent collaboration capabilities, and more sophisticated experience accumulation strategies.



6     Application

To make youtu-agent more accessible to end users, we present Tip, an on-device, multimodal desktop
assistant that keeps data local, integrates Youtu-Agent, and can directly drive a GUI agent. Key functions
include:


    • Youtu-Agent inside: load and run existing Youtu-Agent configs to handle bash commands, file man-
      agement or more complex tasks within a unified UI.
    • Proactive intent and context completion: automatically capture relevant screen/text context and surface
      intents, no manual copy/paste or typing needed.
    • GUI Agent with skills: automate desktop actions end to end, then save and replay “GUI skills” as
      reusable workflows for continual improvement.
    • On-device model support: run local models to keep data private and secure.


Tip let users ask at their fingertip without further tiresome operation while achieving complex goal smoothly,
locally and safely. We aim for this project to catalyze the development and practical adoption of the Agent
technology community in future.


                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                Youtu-Agent




          (a). Input box of the Tip app.                   (b). Chat window of the Tip app.                 (c). Youtu-agent in Tip can list directories,   (d). GUI agent supports simulating mouse and
                                                                                                           parse documents and support more features.       keyboard operations to complete related tasks.




 (e). User selects a screen area, Tip offers three      (f). By using vague questions, Tip can             (g). User selects a text paragraph, Tip offers      (h). By using vague questions, Tip can
 intent suggestions (“Explain bronze patterns”       understand the image the user is referring to.          intent suggestions (“Summarize the entry       understand the context the user is referring to.
       and two more) above the input box.                                                                   rules” and two more) above the input box.




                                                           Figure 8. Demonstrations of the Tip application.


Contributions

                                            1*                            1,2*†                       1*                         1*                            1,3†                            1
Authors Yuchen Shi      Yuzheng Cai      Siqi Cai   Zihan Xu                                                                              Lichao Chen      Yulei Qin   Zhi-
         1,2          1             1             1          1                                                                                     1             1
jian Zhou    Xiang Fei Chaofan Qiu Xiaoyu Tan Gang Li                                                                                     Zongyi Li   Haojia Lin    Guocan
    1          1               1       1♠           1Q
Cai Yong Mao      Yunsheng Wu     Ke Li     Xing Sun

                            1                                        2                                         3
Affiliations                    Tencent Youtu Lab                        Fudan University                          Xiamen University

* Equal Contribution †Work during Internship at Tencent                                                                ♠ Project Lead QCorrespondence: winfred-
sun@tencent.com



Acknowledgments We thank the teams behind Agent-Lightning for their open-source contributions that
enabled our scalable RL training experiments.



References
 [1] Yuzheng Cai, Siqi Cai, Yuchen Shi, Zihan Xu, Lichao Chen, Yulei Qin, Xiaoyu Tan, Gang Li, Zongyi Li,
     Haojia Lin, et al. Training-free group relative policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.08191, 2025.
 [2] Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng,
     Haibin Lin, and Chuan Wu. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. In Proceedings of the
     Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems, pages 1279–1297, 2025.

 [3] Xufang Luo, Yuge Zhang, Zhiyuan He, Zilong Wang, Siyun Zhao, Dongsheng Li, Luna K Qiu, and
     Yuqing Yang. Agent lightning: Train any ai agents with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2508.03680, 2025.
 [4] Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia: a


                                                                                                      15
                                                                                               Youtu-Agent


     benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2023.
 [5] AIME. Aime problems and solutions, 2025. URL https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/index.
     php/AIME_Problems_and_Solutions.
 [6] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
     React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international conference on
     learning representations, 2022.
 [7] Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian Fan,
     Gaohong Liu, Lingjun Liu, et al. Dapo: An open-source llm reinforcement learning system at scale.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14476, 2025.
 [8] Xinji Mai, Haotian Xu, Weinong Wang, Jian Hu, Yingying Zhang, Wenqiang Zhang, et al. Agent rl
     scaling law: Agent rl with spontaneous code execution for mathematical problem solving. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2505.07773, 2025.
 [9] Zhenghai Xue, Longtao Zheng, Qian Liu, Yingru Li, Xiaosen Zheng, Zejun Ma, and Bo An. Sim-
     pletir: End-to-end reinforcement learning for multi-turn tool-integrated reasoning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2509.02479, 2025.
[10] Jiazhan Feng, Shijue Huang, Xingwei Qu, Ge Zhang, Yujia Qin, Baoquan Zhong, Chengquan Jiang,
     Jinxin Chi, and Wanjun Zhong. Retool: Reinforcement learning for strategic tool use in llms. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2504.11536, 2025.
[11] Weizhen Li, Jianbo Lin, Zhuosong Jiang, Jingyi Cao, Xinpeng Liu, Jiayu Zhang, Zhenqiang Huang,
     Qianben Chen, Weichen Sun, Qiexiang Wang, et al. Chain-of-agents: End-to-end agent foundation
     models via multi-agent distillation and agentic rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.13167, 2025.
[12] Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and
     Jiawei Han. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516, 2025.
[13] Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang,
     Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent
     collaborative framework. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[14] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang,
     Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, et al. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversa-
     tions. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.
[15] Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen,
     Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, et al. Chatdev: Communicative agents for software development. In Proceedings
     of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
     15174–15186, 2024.
[16] Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic systems. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2408.08435, 2024.
[17] Guangyao Chen, Siwei Dong, Yu Shu, Ge Zhang, Jaward Sesay, Börje F Karlsson, Jie Fu, and Yemin Shi.
     Autoagents: A framework for automatic agent generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17288, 2023.
[18] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
     Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     36:8634–8652, 2023.
[19] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke
     Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach them-
     selves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:68539–68551, 2023.


                                                      16
                                                                                            Youtu-Agent


[20] Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model
     connected with massive apis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:126544–126565, 2024.




                                                    17
