                                                    A DAPTIVE ACCOUNTABILITY IN N ETWORKED MAS:
                                                 T RACING AND M ITIGATING E MERGENT N ORMS AT S CALE ∗


                                                                                           Saad Alqithami
                                                                 Computer Science Department, Al-Baha University, Al-Baha, Saudi Arabia
                                                                                      salqithami@bu.edu.sa




arXiv:2512.18561v3 [cs.MA] 19 Mar 2026
                                                                                                 A BSTRACT
                                                     Large-scale networked multi-agent systems increasingly underpin critical infrastructure, yet their
                                                     collective behavior can drift toward undesirable emergent norms such as collusion, resource hoarding,
                                                     and implicit unfairness. We present the Adaptive Accountability Framework (AAF), an end-to-
                                                     end runtime layer that (i) records cryptographically verifiable interaction provenance, (ii) detects
                                                     distributional change points in streaming traces, (iii) attributes responsibility via a causal influence
                                                     graph, and (iv) applies cost-bounded interventions—reward shaping and targeted policy patching—to
                                                     steer the system back toward compliant behavior. We establish a bounded-compromise guarantee: if
                                                     the expected cost of intervention exceeds an adversary’s expected payoff, the long-run fraction of
                                                     compromised interactions converges to a value strictly below one. We evaluate AAF in a large-scale
                                                     factorial simulation suite (87,480 runs across two tasks; up to 100 agents plus a 500-agent scaling
                                                     sweep; full and partial observability; Byzantine rates up to 10%; 10 seeds per regime). Across 324
                                                     regimes, AAF lowers the executed compromise ratio relative to a Proximal Policy Optimization
                                                     baseline in 96% of regimes (median relative reduction 11.9%) while preserving social welfare (median
                                                     change 0.4%). Under adversarial injections, AAF detects norm violations with a median delay of 71
                                                     steps (interquartile range 39–177) and achieves a mean top-ranked attribution accuracy of 0.97 at
                                                     10% Byzantine rate.

                                         Keywords multi-agent systems · AI accountability · ethical AI · security · governance · reinforcement learning

                                         1       Introduction
                                         Multi-agent systems (MAS) increasingly underpin critical applications in transportation, smart-grid energy management,
                                         finance, and healthcare [58, 66]. By distributing decision making across many partly autonomous agents, these systems
                                         offer scalability, resilience to single-point failures, and rapid adaptation to non-stationary environments. Those benefits,
                                         however, come with interaction complexity: once deployed, the collective behavior can drift toward undesirable
                                         emergent norms that were never explicitly designed or anticipated [60, 51]. Identifying and correcting such norms is
                                         essential for ensuring fairness, security, and compliance with societal values.
                                         In large-scale networked MAS, responsibility is diffused across agents and time steps. Classical AI-accountability
                                         frameworks—often built for single models or clearly identifiable human decision makers—rely on static compliance
                                         checks or post-hoc audits [37, 27]. These approaches break down when no single node sees the full global state and
                                         harms can emerge from subtle feedback loops. Recent policy instruments, such as the EU Artificial Intelligence Act [17]
                                         and the U.S. NIST AI Risk-Management Framework [41], call for “collective accountability” in AI infrastructures but
                                         leave open the technical challenge of tracing and mitigating harmful norms online and in a decentralized fashion.
                                         Three established research threads touch on this challenge yet remain individually insufficient. Normative MAS studies
                                         formal norms and sanctions [4, 25] but typically assumes a central monitor with perfect state access. Multi-agent
                                         reinforcement learning (MARL) has produced sophisticated training algorithms [9, 19], but only recently has begun
                                         to explore equity, collusion, or convergence to harmful equilibria. Runtime assurance for cyber-physical systems
                                         proposes supervisory safety guards [48], yet seldom scales beyond a handful of agents or supports changing objectives.
                                             ∗
                                                 An early version of this paper was published in AAAI/ACM AIES 2025 [3]: https://doi.org/10.1609/aies.v8i1.36536
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


Consequently, the field still lacks a comprehensive method to detect, trace, and correct undesirable emergent norms
under partial observability and heterogeneous incentives.
This paper tackles four questions: (i) How can responsibility for distributed actions be continuously attributed when no
participant sees the entire trajectory? (ii) Can harmful emergent norms be detected online without halting operations or
requiring global state? (iii) Which local policy or reward interventions can steer a large MAS back toward socially
preferred outcomes while respecting resource and latency constraints? (iv) Do those interventions remain robust as the
number of agents, communication topology, or payoff structure changes?
We answer by proposing an Adaptive Accountability Framework that combines a lifecycle-aware audit ledger, decentral-
ized sequential hypothesis tests for online norm detection, and targeted reward-shaping or policy-patch interventions.
Our principal theoretical result—the bounded-compromise theorem—proves that when the expected cost of interven-
tions exceeds an adversary’s payoff, the steady-state fraction of compromised or collusive interactions converges to a
value strictly below one. The theorem formalizes the intuition that inexpensive, well-targeted corrections can prevent
persistent harmful norms even in strategic environments.
To evaluate the framework at realistic scale, we run a Q1-scale factorial simulation suite comprising 87,480 episodes (2
tasks; N ≤ 100 (plus a scaling sweep to N = 500 in resource_sharing); full and partial observability; Byzantine
rates up to 10%; 10 seeds per regime). Across 324 regimes, AAF reduces the executed compromise ratio relative to
PPO-only in 96% of regimes (median reduction 11.9%; p < 0.05 in 86.4%) while preserving social welfare (median
change 0.4%). Inequality effects are mixed, highlighting a tunable compromise–fairness trade-off (see §7.3). All code
and simulation scripts will be released to support replication.
The paper has the following main contributions:

      1. An accountability architecture that logs interaction events, tags causal chains, and maps evolving responsibility
         flows without centralized state.
      2. Online norm-detection algorithms based on decentralized sequential hypothesis testing.
      3. Adaptive mitigation protocols that apply graded local incentives or policy patches to realign global behavior.
      4. A high-fidelity implementation integrated with modern MLOps pipelines and illustrated through resource-
         allocation and collaborative-task case studies.
      5. Comprehensive large-scale evaluation demonstrating robustness and scalability across diverse operating
         conditions.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 surveys related work on MAS coordination, normative design,
and AI governance. Section 3 formalizes the problem setting. Section 4 details the proposed architecture, detection
tests, and intervention algorithms. Section 6 describes the software stack and deployment considerations. Section 7
reports empirical results, and Section 8 discusses their implications and limitations. Finally, Section 9 concludes with
directions for future research in ethically aligned MAS.

2     Background and Literature Review
Multi-agent systems consist of multiple autonomous entities that sense, decide, and act on local information while
exchanging limited signals with neighbors [66, 58]. Delegating control in this way yields scalability, fault tolerance,
and graceful adaptation, enabling real-world deployments in smart-grid scheduling [2], adaptive traffic control [50],
supply-chain optimization [40], cooperative robotics [8], distributed optimization on sensor networks [14], algorithmic
trading [61], and cross-hospital resource sharing [47]. What unites these domains is the need to reconcile local
incentives with global constraints under partial observability and stringent latency budgets.
Nonetheless, the same decentralization that confers robustness breeds interaction complexity. Agents are autonomous,
social, and both reactive and proactive [67]; even simple local rules can induce system-level phenomena that are hard to
predict, verify, or control [60]. Coordination grows more challenging as populations scale, links fluctuate, or objectives
diverge [13]. Emergent behaviors—benign or harmful—complicate formal safety guarantees in partially observable
settings [9].

2.1   Emergent Norms: From Descriptive Theory to Algorithmic Design

Classical emergence studies viewed norms as regularities not explicit in any single agent’s code [7]. Early mechanisms
included imitation and social learning [55], reinforcement-driven sanctioning [38], and top-down institutions with
explicit penalties [5, 49]. Recent work shifts from descriptive to constructive: Tzeng et al. [63] show that “soft-touch”


                                                            2
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


speech acts (tell, hint) enforce norms faster than pure sanction; Oldenburg and Zhi-Xuan [44] introduce Bayesian
rule-induction so newcomers infer latent norms on-line; Serramia et al. [56] formalize optimal consensus norms that
balance heterogeneous stakeholder utilities; Ren et al. [53] harness large language models to generate conflict-reducing
social norms in an artificial town; and Woodgate et al. [65] operationalization Rawls’ maximin principle, steering
emergent norms toward lower inequality. Together these papers recast norm formation as an algorithmic and ethical
design problem.

2.2   Distributed Accountability and Auditing

Standard artifacts—model cards [36] and fact sheets [6]—target monolithic models. Applied to MAS they fail to
address diffuse responsibility [18], continual policy drift [27], and aggregation of local harms. The recent explosion of
Large Language Model (LLM)-based multi-agent systems [32] has further exacerbated these challenges, as generative
agents exhibit complex emergent behaviors that are difficult to trace.
Recent research begins to fill this gap: Chan et al. [11] catalogue visibility tools for peer-to-peer deployments, trading off
informativeness and privacy; Mu and Oren [39] extend alternating-time temporal logic with quantitative responsibility
metrics; Gyevnar et al. [22] generate natural-language causal explanations via counterfactual roll-outs, boosting trust in
autonomous vehicles; and Chang and Echizen [12] treat provenance as a chain of custody for LLM-generated artifacts.
Ebrahimi and Asudeh [15] systematically survey LLM-based MAS through the “pillars of responsibility” (reliability,
transparency, accountability, and fairness), while Raza et al. [52] adapt the Trust, Risk, and Security Management
(TRiSM) framework specifically for agentic AI. Furthermore, Solomon et al. [59] propose LumiMAS, a comprehensive
framework for real-time monitoring and enhanced observability in multi-agent systems, highlighting the critical need
for runtime oversight.

2.3   Intervention and Governance Mechanisms

Detection alone is insufficient; an accountability layer must intervene. Beyond classic reward shaping, recent levers
include action-space restriction [43], monitored MDPs with human oracles [46], and sample-efficient opponent shaping
[20]. In the realm of safe MARL, constrained policy optimization and Lagrangian relaxation are widely used to enforce
safety constraints [1]. Similarly, Li et al. [31] explore Byzantine robust cooperative MARL, formulating the problem as
a Bayesian game to maintain coordination even when a fraction of agents act adversarially. Zheng et al. [68] further
rethink MAS reliability from the perspective of Byzantine fault tolerance, emphasizing the need for robust consensus
mechanisms in agentic systems. Model-based credit assignment with counterfactual imagination [10] shows promise
for scalable cooperation—although its computational cost remains high in large MAS.

2.4   Causal Tracing and Lifecycle Provenance

Effective intervention presupposes causal insight. Counterfactual credit assignment has long been used in MARL (e.g.,
COMA) [19], and more recent work extends causal effect decomposition to multi-agent sequential decision making [62].
In offline settings, Wang et al. [64] propose MACCA, a framework that assigns credit by analyzing causal relationships
in individual rewards. Time-uniform concentration bounds [26] and stochastic approximation theory [30] provide
rigorous guarantees for sequential detectors and adaptive thresholds such as those used in our framework.

2.5   Regulatory Impetus and Remaining Gaps

The EU AI Act and the NIST AI RMF (2023) explicitly flag collective emergent risk, yet supply no technical recipe for
tracing accountability in networked AI. Recent literature contributes building blocks—richer norm learning, quantitative
responsibility metrics, scalable intervention levers—but lacks an online, end-to-end pipeline that meets bandwidth
budgets and supplies audit-grade evidence. Three open needs persist:

      1. Continuous monitoring attuned to policy drift and lossy observations;
      2. Distributed attribution robust to adversarial spoofing;
      3. Low-latency interventions that safeguard global welfare while respecting local autonomy.

2.6   Positioning of the Present Work

The Adaptive Accountability Framework introduced next addresses all three needs. It combines a cryptographically
grounded Merkle ledger, time-uniform norm detectors, and cost-bounded interventions validated at 100-agent scale (and
up to 500 agents in a scaling sweep). The next sections detail the architecture (Section 4), furnish theoretical guarantees


                                                              3
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


(Section 5), and supply empirical evidence that the framework curbs harmful emergence even under adversarial
disturbance (Section 7).

3     Problem Definition and Research Questions
This section formalizes the accountability problem in large-scale networked multi-agent systems, frames the research
questions that guide our work, and states the operational assumptions under which any proposed solution must function.
The notation introduced here flows directly into the analytical guarantees of Section 5 and the implementation described
in Section 6.

3.1   Formalizing Accountability in Networked Multi-Agent Systems

System model:      We represent the MAS as a discrete-time, partially observable stochastic game
                                     G = S, {Ai }N          N             N
                                                 i=1 , {Ωi }i=1 , T, {Ri }i=1 , γ .
The global state space S may include physical variables (e.g. queue lengths, robot poses) and latent coordination artifacts
(e.g. shared plans). At each round t ∈ N the environment occupies st ∈ S. Agent Ai acquires a private observation
oi,t ∈ Ωi parameterized by a perceptual kernel P (oi,t | st , i); selects an action ai,t ∈ Ai via a history-dependent policy
               t+1
πi,t ∈ ∆(Ai )Ωi ; and receives an individual reward
                                                                private
                                        ri,t = Ri (st , at ) = ri,t     + λ rtsocial ,
where at = (a1,t , . . . , aN,t ) and λ ∈ [0, 1] trade off egoistic and collective incentives. The transition kernel T
yields st+1 ∼ T (st , at ); consequently, learning updates πi,t+1 ← Learn(πi,t , Di,t ) on local traces Di,t , imparting
non-stationarity to the joint dynamics T ◦Πt [24].

Communication substrate: Agents communicate over a time-varying graph Gt = (V, Et ) whose edge set changes
with failures or mobility. Each edge (i, j) carries at most Bmax bytes per step; messages are subject to random delay
δi,j ∼ Geo(pdrop ) and may be adversarially reordered. We model the aggregate channel as an ERASURE - AND - DELAY
network to capture practical wireless constraints in vehicular or drone swarms.

Event ledger and responsibility flow: Accountability demands a tamper-evident record of “who did what, when, and
with what effect”. We therefore maintain a rolling directed acyclic graph
                                                                           T
                                                                           [
                                                       
                                           LT = VT , CT ,           VT =         Et ,
                                                                           t=0

where each vertex e ∈ Et is an atomic event ⟨id, t, type, payload⟩ (actions, messages, external shocks). An edge
(ek → eℓ ) ∈ CT encodes empirical causal influence. Because full interventional data are unavailable online, we
approximate causality with rolling multivariate Granger tests on an h-step horizon and retain only edges whose F-
statistic exceeds a tunable significance level αGC ; this yields |CT | = O(hN deg+ (Gt )) and keeps storage linear in
T [57].
To quantify blame we adopt a Shapley-value-style responsibility rule
                                   X |S|! (N − |S| − 1)!                               
                        ρi (e) =                                 ϕ(e, S ∪ {i}) − ϕ(e, S) ,
                                                   N!
                                    S⊆V \{i}

where ϕ(e, S) equals 1 if e would still occur when only agents in S are allowed to influence upstream events and 0
otherwise. We compute ρi (e) via a Monte-Carlo kernel-SHAP proxy with at most K coalition samples per event,
keeping amortized overhead sub-quadratic in N .

Norms, violations, and emergent harm: System designers declare a finite set Φ = {ϕ(1) , . . . , ϕ(M ) } of norms, each
a predicate
                                     ϕ(m) : S × A1 ×. . .× AN −→ {safe, violate}.
Examples include fairness constraints (Gini < 0.3), no-collusion clauses (Q-statistic< τ ), or hard safety guards
(∥st −sunsafe ∥ > ϵ). We call a negative emergent norm any persistent pattern for which
                                            Pr ϕ(m) (st , at ) = violate > ε,
                                                                       
                                           t≥t0


                                                              4
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


even though no individual policy πi encodes violate. The accountability objective is twofold:
                                           CT                                    
                            min lim sup         s.t.   ∆Jsoc ≤ δperf , E Cost(σt ) ≤ cmax ,
                            {σt }   T →∞   T
where CT counts norm-violating events (above), δperf bounds acceptable performance loss, and σt are interventions
defined next.

Explicit Threat Model: We consider a networked MAS where a subset of agents may act adversarially or selfishly,
threatening system-level norms. Specifically, we assume:

      1. Byzantine Agents: Up to κ agents are Byzantine. They possess full knowledge of the system’s state and the
         accountability framework’s detection thresholds. They may deviate arbitrarily from their nominal policies πi,t ,
         collude to trigger false alarms, or attempt to stay just below the CUSUM detection threshold (stealthy attacks).
         However, they cannot break the cryptographic primitives securing the ledger.
      2. Rational Learners: The remaining N − κ agents are rational reward-maximizers. Their individual objective
         coefficients λ need not align with social welfare, creating the possibility of “lawful but awful” emergent
         behaviors (e.g., tragedy of the commons) even without malicious intent.
      3. Network Adversary: The communication substrate may drop up to a fraction pdrop of messages or reorder
         them, but it cannot forge cryptographic signatures or permanently partition the network. The graph Gt must
         remain (κ + 1)-vertex-connected on average.

Intervention model:     A supervisor (possibly distributed) deploys interventions σt = ⟨It , type, θt ⟩ with

       • type∈ {REWARD - SHAPING, POLICY- PATCH, LINK - THROTTLE},
                                                                       P
       • target set It ⊆ V selected by highest aggregate responsibility e∈Et−h:t ρi (e),
       • parameters θt (e.g. shaping potential Φ, patch weights, or edge weights).

Interventions incur cost Cost(σt ) that combines runtime (CPU/GPU), bytes transmitted, and any monetary or regulatory
penalty for altering incentives. Section 5 proves the bounded-compromise theorem: if the time-average intervention cost
satisfies E[Cost(σt )] > E[Adversary Gain], then there exists η ⋆ ∈ (0, 1) for which lim supT →∞ CTT ≤ η ⋆ almost surely,
irrespective of κ and graph topology, provided Gt stays (κ+1)-vertex-connected on average.

Complexity and storage bounds: Let dmax denote the maximum out-degree in Gt and h the causal horizon. Then
storing LT for T steps uses O(T (N + dmax h)) events and edges; computing K-sample kernel-SHAP scores incurs
Õ K |Et | per round. With K = 32 and dmax ≤ 8 (typical for traffic or drone mesh networks) the ledger fits comfortably
within 500 MB for T = 106 on-board an edge server.
The above formalism exposes every variable that the accountability layer must track, bounds algorithmic cost, and
states explicit performance–safety trade-offs. It therefore provides the analytical foundation for the architectural and
algorithmic choices detailed in Section 4.

3.2   Research Questions

The formalism above yields four research questions:

RQ1 – Responsibility tracing. Design an event ledger LT and allocation rule ρi (e) that remain accurate under partial
       observability, message loss, and non-stationary policies, yet scale to N ∼ 102 –103 agents [18].
RQ2 – Online norm detection. Develop sequential tests that flag emergent negative norms with low false-alarm
       rate using only streaming, decentralized data, achieving O(log T ) detection delay for i.i.d. deviations and
       acceptable power under temporal correlation [55].
RQ3 – Adaptive intervention design. Identify local interventions σt that minimize compromise CT and welfare
       loss ∆Jsoc subject to budget cmax ; analyze stability for reward shaping, model-patch injection, and network
       throttling [38].
RQ4 – Robustness and scalability. Assess whether the above mechanisms retain effectiveness as N , objective het-
       erogeneity, observability, or adversarial mix vary; our main factorial grid spans |V | ∈ {10, 50, 100} and we
       additionally run a scaling sweep up to |V | = 500.


                                                           5
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


3.3   Operational Assumptions and Constraints

The accountability layer must operate under four non-negotiable constraints that mirror conditions in fielded MAS
deployments.
Partial observability and stochasticity: No agent—and certainly no external auditor—enjoys global, noise-free visibility
of system state. Packet loss, clock drift, and privacy filtering mean every observation oi,t and every supervisory record is
only a stochastic sample of ground truth. The causal ledger therefore stores time-stamped tuples ⟨ŝt , âi,t , r̂i,t ⟩ governed
by an explicit error model (εloss , εdelay ). Detection thresholds and confidence bounds are derived so that false-alarm
probability remains below a chosen level α even when up to 20% of events are missing or mis-sequenced (Theorem
3, Section 5); this is essential because spurious interventions can be nearly as harmful as inaction in safety-critical
domains.
Bandwidth and compute budgets: City-scale traffic networks, drone swarms, and smart grids share a hard upper bound
on wireless throughput and require sub-second control latency. We cap per-edge traffic at Bmax = 128 bytes step−1
consistent with vehicular ad-hoc networks—and restrict each agent to devote at most 5 % of its CPU/GPU cycles to
accountability tasks. Raw data are compressed or hashed locally, and only digests plus occasional Bloom-filter proofs
traverse the network; Algorithm 2 (Section 4) keeps intervention latency below the 100 ms wall-clock budget of our
traffic-signal case study by relying on incremental CUSUM statistics and constant-time reward-patch look-ups.
Agent heterogeneity: Real deployments mix micro-controllers running tabular Q-learning, legacy rule-based agents, and
cloud hosts executing transformer-based deep RL. Because internal gradients or weights are not universally available, the
framework is algorithm-agnostic: it computes responsibility scores from observable events alone. Resource-constrained
nodes can run a 32 KB Rust reference kernel with O(1) per-step overhead, while more capable agents may optionally
expose richer telemetry (e.g. policy logits) that tighten attribution bounds without being required for correctness.
Regulatory and ethical context: Many target applications fall under the EU AI Act’s “high-risk” category. Each ledger
entry therefore carries a pseudonymized agent ID, a purpose-limited data tag, and a zero-knowledge proof attesting that
the log originates from certified software. This design satisfies GDPR data-minimization requirements yet still lets
external auditors reconstruct causal chains. Intervention records include plain-language rationales, effect sizes, and
parameter settings so that policymakers and domain experts can review system behavior without inspecting source code.
These deliberately pessimistic assumptions, i.e., lossy sensing, tight resource budgets, heterogeneous agents, and
stringent legal scrutiny, shape every design choice in Sections 4–7. By proving guarantees and demonstrating empirical
performance under such constraints, we strengthen confidence that the Adaptive Accountability Framework will
generalize to real-world MAS whose operating conditions may be even harsher than those evaluated here.

4     Proposed Framework: Adaptive Accountability in Networked Multi-Agent Systems
The Adaptive Accountability Framework (AAF) turns a networked MAS into a self-auditing socio-technical system. It
supplies three always-on capabilities: (i) tamper-evident event logging, (ii) fine-grained responsibility attribution, and
(iii) online detection and mitigation of harmful emergent norms. Each capability is engineered to respect the real-world
pressures outlined in Section 3.3: sub-second latency, sub-kilobyte bandwidth, heterogeneous on-board hardware, and
strict external auditability.

4.1   Architecture Overview

Figure 1 illustrates the stack, organized into four layers: agent, monitor, ledger, and governor plus a cross-cutting
security plane.
1. Agent layer: Each agent Ai runs its domain policy πi (e.g. PPO, tabular Q-learning, classical MPC). Agents exchange
application messages over Gt and expose a one-line RUST interface publish_event(e) to the monitoring layer. The
interface is isolated in a sandbox so that faulty or Byzantine agents cannot overwrite audit logic.
2. Monitoring layer: High-dimensional observations and actions are irreversibly compressed to 32-byte digests using
BLAKE3. Digests, reward scalars, and a two-byte nonce form a 40-byte record that is forwarded over a non-blocking
gossip channel capped at Bmax = 128 bytes step−1 . To keep within this budget the monitor batches up to two records
per step and drops additional events using an importance-weighted reservoir; dropped hashes are recoverable via local
ring buffers for post-mortem forensics.
3. Ledger layer: Gossip streams converge at edge servers that execute Merkle-DAG synthesis: new records extend a
Merkle prefix tree whose leaves reference prior sub-roots, forming a snapshotted Merkle DAG every Hsnap = 256
steps [35]. The root hash of each snapshot is signed with a rotating ECDSA key and broadcast back to agents for


                                                               6
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


                                                                                                               Governance Layer


                                                                                                       Governance & Oversight                 audit
                                                                                                            policies, budgets, audits


                                                       Accountability Layer                                                 policy / budget


      Norm / Anomaly Detection           alerts   Responsibility Attribution           scores         Intervention Orchestrator
        change-point tests, thresholds                counterfactuals / SHAP                              shaping, constraints, patches

                                                                                                      penalties / updates
                                                       Observability Layer


       Telemetry & Event Bus             stream   Logging & Feature Store              append                  Audit Ledger
          state, actions, messages                     event logs, aggregates                               immutable trail, hashes


                                                             Agent Layer


                Agent A1                  Agent A2                  Agent A3                    ···                    Agent AN


Figure 1: Adaptive Accountability Framework overview. Agents interact and learn locally while telemetry streams
events into a logging store and an immutable audit ledger. Detection identifies norm violations or anomalies, attribution
assigns responsibility, and the intervention orchestrator applies adaptive governance actions (e.g., shaping or constraints).
A governance layer sets policy and budget constraints and enables external auditing.


self-verification. The DAG design, adapted from block-lattice data stores, provides O(log V ) proof-of-inclusion while
avoiding the confirmation latency of Nakamoto consensus.
3. Governor layer: A lightweight supervisor (which may itself be replicated for fault tolerance) consumes ledger
updates, performs causal analysis, runs norm detectors, and dispatches interventions. To avoid central bottlenecks, the
governor is implemented as a CRDT-based service whose replicas hold disjoint shards of the ledger keyed by agent ID
modulo the replica count.
4. Security plane: Every inter-layer message carries (i) a monotone counter signed with a time-bounded session key,
(ii) a linkable ring signature for agent privacy, and (iii) an optional zero-knowledge proof of policy provenance for
high-assurance deployments. These cryptographic hooks are disabled in the low-power benchmark but included in the
public code base.

4.2   Secure Event Ledger and Causal Attribution

The accountability layer begins by turning every control-loop iteration into a tamper-evident, causally annotated record.
This subsection first walks through the data path—from on-board sensor reading to committed Merkle node—and then
formalizes how those records yield the responsibility scores analyzed in Section 5.
At the end of control step t an agent Ai produces the tuple
                                           e =    t, i, hash(oi,t ), hash(ai,t ), ri,t .
                                                        | {z } | {z }
                                                            16 B                16 B

The observation and action hashes are 16-byte BLAKE3 digests, and the full record is 40 bytes. A 64-bit S IP H ASH of
the byte string yields the unique identifier he = H(e) ∈ {0, . . . , 264 −1}.
Records propagate at most dmax hops—matching the communication degree bound in Assumption A2—before reaching
an edge server. Each hop uses non-blocking gossip with a 64-entry replay buffer so that transient link failures do not
stall the ledger.
On arrival, the record travels through three micro-stages: (i) local commit to the agent’s ring buffer, (ii) causal testing
against the most recent m=8 upstream events, and (iii) Merkle-DAG insertion. All three are captured in Algorithm 1.
Thus, the constant-time online update for each F -statistic uses the Sherman–Morrison rank-one identity, so the
sensor-to-ledger latency is < 0.3 ms on a Cortex-A55.


                                                                   7
     Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS



     Algorithm 1: LedgerUpdate & Causal-Edge Insertion (executed on every supervisor replica)
     Input: new event e = ⟨t, i, ho , ha , ri ⟩; ring length Lmax = 256; window m = 8; Granger horizon h; base threshold h0
     Output: updated ledger LT = (VT , CT ) and current Merkle root
 1 Phase 1: local append;
 2    append e to Ai ’s ring buffer Bi (evict oldest if |Bi | > Lmax );
 3    broadcast digest(e) to all in-neighbours of Ai ;
 4 Phase 2: causal testing;
 5    U ← C OLLECT R ECENT E VENTS(Ai , m);
 6    foreach u ∈ U do
 7         F ← I NCREMENTAL G RANGER F(u, e, h);
 8         if F > ht then
 9             CT ← CT ∪ {(u → e)};
                                    √
10    if t mod h = 0 then ht ← h0 + 2 log t;
11 Phase 3: Merkle-DAG maintenance;
12    VT ← VT ∪ {e};           
13    M ERKLE I NSERT digest(e) ;
14   return updated LT and Merkle root;



     Once the causal edge set CT has been updated, the server computes per-agent responsibility for the new event. Let Pi (e)
     denote all causal paths that start with an action by agent i and terminate at e, and let |p| be the path length. We define
                                                                     |p|
                                                         P
                                                           p∈P (e) β
                                           ρi (e) = PN P i                   ,   β = 0.8,
                                                                         |p|
                                                        j=1   p∈Pj (e) β

     so that proximal causes weigh more than distant ones yet long chains arePnever ignored. Because the denominator is
     cached per event, the update runs in O(deg− (e)) time. Section 5.2 proves i ρi (e) = 1 and shows that ρi (e) converges
     under 20% packet loss.
     Ledger snapshots are sharded Merkle DAGs sealed every Hsnap =256 steps with an ECDSA-P-384 signature and
     anchored to an append-only Immudb instance. Proof-of-inclusion queries therefore cost O(log | VT |) key–value reads,
     which enables sub-second reconstruction of any causal sub-graph requested by external auditors (see the drill-down UI
     in §6).

     4.3   Online Detection of Harmful Norms

     The ledger furnishes a stream of verifiable events so the next task is to decide in real time whether those events signal
     that the MAS is drifting toward an undesirable emergent norm. We treat norm detection as a sequential change–point
                                                                                                            (m)
     problem. For every active norm ϕ(m) ∈ Φ the governor computes a scalar diagnostic statistic Zt at each step t.
     Typical choices include
                                (ineq)
            • Inequity drift Zt          : instantaneous Gini index over individual rewards {ri,t }.
                                  (coll)
            •    Collusion pulse Zt : maximum pairwise mutual information among agents’ action streams in a sliding
              window.
                                 (load)
            • Throughput safety Zt      : queue length minus design capacity at a shared resource.
                (m)                                                                                                           (m)
     Each Zt    is fed into an adaptive CUSUM test that tracks positive drifts away from its baseline mean µ0 . A
     norm-specific offset δ (m) > 0 prevents hypersensitivity to small stochastic fluctuations.
     In Algorithm 2, lines 1–2 accumulate evidence that Zt has shifted upward so whenever the statistic S crosses the
     adaptive threshold h, an alarm is fired and S is reset (classical Page’s rule [45]). Lines 3–4 perform a Robbins–Monro
     stochastic approximation [54]: if the empirical alarm frequency exceeds the target α the threshold is gently raised, and
     vice-versa. Section 5.3 proves that this update drives the long-run false-alarm rate to α regardless of slow concept drift
     (Assumption A3).
     When many norms are monitored simultaneously, naïvely raising an alarm for every CUSUM excursion would flood the
     intervention scheduler. We therefore allocate a global alert budget ᾱ = 0.05 across norms by online mirror descent: if


                                                                      8
    Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS



    Algorithm 2: AdaptiveCUSUM Detector (executed at every supervisor replica)
  Input: stream Zt , baseline µ0 , slack δ, false-alarm budget α
  Output: binary alarm flag alertt
  Initialize :S ← 0; h ← h0 ; gain schedule ηt = t−0.6
1 for t = 1, 2, . . . do                                                              // executed every control step
2      S ← max{0, S + Zt − µ0 − δ};
3      if S ≥ h then                                                           // raise alarm, then reset statistic
4           alertt ← 1;
5           S ← 0;
6      else
7           alertt ← 0;
8         h ← h + ηt (alertt − α)                                                             // Robbins–Monro update



                                                                       (m)
    norms m and n both spike, the one whose running FP-budget α̂t is lower wins the alert slot, and the loser’s threshold
                                   (m)   (n)                                           p
    is increased by ∆h = ξ log α̂t /α̂t . Appendix D derives the regret bound RT ≤ 2 T log |Φ|, guaranteeing that
    the allocator never starves a chronically violated norm.
    With a statistically calibrated, resource-light detector in place, the framework can raise alarms fast enough to allow the
    bounded-cost interventions of Section 4.4 to curb harmful norms before they compromise system-level objectives—a
    guarantee formalized in Theorem 5 and validated experimentally in Section 7.


    4.4    Adaptive Intervention Mechanisms

    Once the detector of §4.3 raises an alarm alertt = 1, the governor must act quickly yet economically: the corrective
    signal has to arrive within the 100 ms domain deadline while keeping the expected cost below cmax so that Theorem 5
    applies. The intervention pipeline therefore unfolds in three stages responsibility ranking, playbook selection, and
    actuation—all executed inside the same event loop that hosts Algorithm 2.

    Stage 1: Responsibility heap: The governor queries the ledger for all events that contributed to the alarm’s CUSUM
    statistic during the look-back horizon
                                    P      [t−H, t] with H = 25. Each event’s responsibility vector ρ(e) is summed to
    obtain a windowed score ρei = e∈[t−H,t] ρi (e). These pairs form a max-heap Ht = {(i, ρei ) | ρei > 0} that can be
    popped in O(log N ) time to identify the top-k most culpable agents.

    Stage 2: Three-tier playbook:       Interventions escalate through three increasingly intrusive tiers:

            1. Reward shaping (default): Each culpable agent receives an additive penalty ∆ri,t = −λ ρei for H steps. The
               penalty weight λ = cmax /H satisfies the budget dominance requirement in Assumption A4 by construction.
            2. Policy patching (moderate): If an agent has triggered two penalties within the past 100 s it is considered
               recalcitrant so the governor hot-loads a “safety head”—a two-layer 128-unit ReLU MLP compiled to We-
               bAssembly—that clamps logits violating the norm predicate. Average load time is 12 ms (P95 = 15 ms).
                                                                                                                           
            3. Link throttling (aggressive): For suspected collusion, edges (i, j) are re-weighted by wij ← wij 1 − ρei ρej for
               H steps, attenuating high-responsibility communication channels while leaving the global bandwidth budget
               intact.

    Stage 3: System-wide failsafe: If three non-overlapping alert regions fire within a 300 s sliding window, the governor
    enters a yellow-flag mode: learning rates αi are frozen, policy gradients are clipped to 0.1, and a Grafana dashboard
    renders a causal heat-map so that a human operator can intervene. Yellow-flag mode clears automatically once the
    compromise ratio CT /T falls below its 7-day moving average.
    The supervisory spend per step is bounded by E[Cost(σt )] ≤ λ + cpatch α + cthrottle α2 , where α is the false-alarm
    budget and the last two terms account for patch and throttle operations that occur only on alerts. Since λ > gmax by
    design, Theorem 5 ensures lim supT →∞ CT /T ≤ η ⋆ . In §7 we evaluate this ceiling empirically; across a broad grid of
    regimes, AAF reduces executed compromise relative to PPO while preserving welfare.


                                                                   9
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


4.5        Scalability and Fault Tolerance

At runtime, the ledger is materialized as a Merkle directed-acyclic graph (Merkle DAG) whose nodes are addressed by
the cryptographic hash of their content [35]. Every 256-step snapshot is edge-partitionable: we shard by the first 16 bits
of the event hash he , creating 216 disjoint key ranges that can be balanced across the edge tier. Each shard is replicated
onto f +1 servers; read and write clients contact a quorum, i.e., a strict majority of replicas, so the system tolerates
f crash failures without sacrificing linearizable semantics [21]. Any two quorums overlap in at least one live replica,
eliminating the need for a global lock or leader election.

Resource complexity. Let h denote the causal horizon (8 in our deployment) and dmax the bounded out-degree from
Assumption A2. A simple amortized analysis (Appendix E) yields

                                                                                            
                                 Bandwidth = O N + dmax h ,        Storage = O T (N + dmax h) ,

in perfect agreement with Proposition 2. Concretely, for N = 100, h = 8, and a run length T = 106 steps the entire
ledger occupies ≈ 492 MB—comfortably within the 16 GB RAM of commodity edge boxes—and streams across the
wire at < 80 KB s−1 , well under the 1 Gbit s−1 budget of the deployment network.
These figures demonstrate that AAF’s cryptographically protected audit history scales to hundred-agent regimes without
exotic hardware or networking-fabric requirements, while the quorum-replicated shards ensure continued availability in
the face of routine server failures.

4.6        Lifecycle Integration

In offline calibration, designers simulate worst-case scenarios (50% packet loss, 10% Byzantine agents) to grid-search
             (m)
baselines µ0 , offsets δ (m) , attenuation β, and initial threshold h0 . The best configuration is promoted to a shadow
governor that runs for 48 h beside the production system; any latency > 100 ms or throughput drop > 2% triggers an
automatic rollback.
In online adaptation, after go-live, CUSUM thresholds ht are tuned by mirror descent, ECDSA2 keys rotate every
24h, and new norms can be hot-enabled without downtime because the ledger schema is append-only and therefore
backward-compatible.
Every intervention writes a triple ⟨normID, timestamp, rationale⟩ to the ledger. External auditors can query re-
sponsibility flows, intervention rationales, and performance metrics via the FoundationDB snapshot API exposed in
§6.
Taken together, adaptive interventions, edge-partitioned storage, and a blue–green deployment strategy create an
accountability layer that is auditable, bandwidth-frugal, and robust to non-stationary, partially observable, and adversarial
MAS dynamics. The next section derives theoretical bounds that underpin these claims, and Section 7 empirically
validates AAF on heterogeneous benchmarks with up to N = 100 agents and high packet-loss regimes.


5         Theoretical Analysis and Guarantees

This section formalizes the statistical and game–theoretic properties that underpin the Adaptive Accountability Frame-
work (AAF). We proceed in four logical stages:

            1. Ledger soundness: We show that responsibility scores converge and causal edges respect a time–uniform
               false-positive (FP) budget under lossy communication.
            2. Detector reliability: We derive finite-sample FP and detection-delay bounds for the adaptive CUSUM test fed
               by ledger statistics.
            3. Intervention efficacy: We prove a bounded-compromise theorem: whenever per-step supervisory cost domi-
               nates adversarial gain, the long-run fraction of compromised events remains below a designer-chosen η ⋆ .
            4. Resource complexity: We bound storage, communication, and computational cost, validating the feasibility
               claims from Section 4.
      2
          Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm [28].


                                                              10
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


5.1   Preliminaries and Standing Assumptions

We work on a filtered probability space (Ω, F , {Ft }t≥0 , P) where Ft is generated by the global MAS trajectory up to
time t [24]. Indicators, expectations, and probabilities are taken with respect to P unless stated otherwise. Throughout
we invoke four assumptions—justified empirically in Section 3.3—to isolate the essential trade-offs:

A1 Lossy channel: Each event tuple is independently dropped with probability εloss ≤ 0.2 and delayed by at most
       εdelay ≤ 3 steps.
A2 Bounded degree: The time-varying communication graph satisfies supt deg(Gt ) ≤ dmax = O(1).
A3 Vanishing non-stationarity: Policy updates obey ∥πi,t+1 − πi,t ∥1 ≤ κt−ξ with ξ > 12 .
A4 Budgeted adversary: Byzantine agents harvest at most gmax expected utility per step; the supervisor’s cost budget
      honors cmax > gmax .

5.2   Ledger Soundness

A reader may wonder: What exactly is stored in the audit ledger, how are causal claims derived, and why do
responsibility scores behave like probabilities? This subsection therefore proceeds in three steps. We (i) introduce
precise definitions for the ledger structures and the responsibility rule, (ii) prove that those scores are well-normalized
and converge even when packets are lost, and (iii) establish a time-uniform bound on spurious causal edges. The
notation follows Section 3.1; assumptions A1–A3 remain in force.
                                                                                              (t)   (t)
Definition 1 (Event ledger) Each control step t produces a finite set Et = {e1 , . . . , e|Et | } of atomic events—actions,
message sends/receives, reward reveals, exogenous shocks. The ledger up to time T is the directed acyclic graph
                                                                                 T
                                                                                 [
                                                       
                                           LT = VT , CT ,                VT =          Et ,
                                                                                 t=0

whose edge set CT is produced by Algorithm 1: (ek → eℓ ) is inserted when the rolling m-lag Granger F-statistic exceeds
threshold ht . The DAG property follows because algorithmic inserts never point backward in time.

Definition 2 (Causal path and attribution weight) A causal path from agent i to an event e is any directed sequence
p = ⟨ek0 , . . . , ekm = e⟩ with ek0 ∈ Eact (i) (an action by i) and (ekj−1 → ekj ) ∈ CT . Let Pi (e) collect all such paths.
Given a discount factor β ∈ (0, 1), the attribution weight of p equals β |p| ; shorter paths contribute more heavily than
longer ones.

Definition 3 (Responsibility score) The responsibility score of agent i for event e is
                                                     X
                                                           β |p|
                                                        p∈Pi (e)
                                           ρi (e) =   N
                                                                               ∈ [0, 1].
                                                      X     X
                                                                         |q|
                                                                     β
                                                      j=1 q∈Pj (e)

If Pi (e) = ∅ we set ρi (e) = 0 by convention.

The ledger DAG gives a tamper-evident who-influenced-what map; the β |p| discount keeps distant, low-credence
influences from dominating local, high-credence ones. The next lemma shows the rule is well-normalized, so ρi (e) can
be treated probabilistically.
                                                       PN
Lemma 1 (Normalization) For any event e ∈ VT ,            i=1 ρi (e) = 1 almost surely.

                                                                                               N
Proof 1 Because CT isSa DAG, every causal path has a unique originating agent. The sets Pi (e) i=1 therefore form
a partition of P(e) = i Pi (e). Summing the numerator over i reproduces the denominator, giving unity.

Stability under lossy communication. Even with 20% packet loss (A1) we require that responsibility scores stabilise
as the ledger grows.


                                                             11
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


Theorem 2 (Ledger convergence) Assume A1–A3
                                              and fix 0 < β < 1. For any agent i and any event sequence
{eT }T ≥0 with bounded age supT T − t(eT ) < ∞,
                                                              a.s.
                                                   ρi (eT ) −−−−→ ρ∞
                                                                   i (e),
                                                            T →∞
where ρ∞
       i (e) is a finite limit.

Proof 2 (Proof sketch) Packet drops Bernoulli-sample edges with retention probability 1−εloss . Under bounded degree
(A2) and finite path length (ring buffer 256) only a finite number of causal paths can affect e. The first Borel–Cantelli
lemma then guarantees that every path is eventually observed. Together with the square-summable policy drift (A3) this
yields almost-sure convergence; see Appendix A.2 for the full argument.

Guarding against spurious edges. Because Granger tests operate on noisy, finite data, we must bound the false
causal edges that slip into CT .
                                                                           √
Theorem 3 (Time-uniform false-positive control) Fix m = 8 and ht = h0 + 2 log t in Algorithm 1. Under the
null hypothesis of no causal influence,
                                 h                                i            2
                             Pr ∃ t ≥ 1 : (ek → eℓ ) inserted at t ≤ α, α = e−h0 /2 .

Proof 3 (Sketch) Apply the Chernoff–Ville inequality to the self-normalized stream of F-statistics and union-bound
over time [26]. Full derivation in Appendix A.3.
                                                 p
Corollary 1 (Design rule for h0 ) Choosing h0 = 2 log(1/αmax ) achieves a ledger-wide FP probability ≤ αmax ;
e.g., h0 = 4.89 bounds FP risk at 10−5 .
Lemma 1 tells us ρi (e) behaves like a probability distribution over agents; Theorem 2 assures reviewers that these
probabilities stabilize despite 20% packet loss; and Theorem 3 ensures we can tune the threshold sequence so that,
with overwhelming probability, no non-existent causal link ever pollutes the audit trail. Together, the results certify
the soundness of the ledger as a statistical substrate for the downstream detector and intervention logic analyzed in
Sections 5.3–5.4.

5.3   Detector Reliability

We now show that the adaptive CUSUM detector introduced in Algorithm 2 meets two core requirements of a deployable
alarm system:
      1. the false-alarm rate is capped at a designer-chosen level α, and
      2. the detection delay grows at most linearly with the decision threshold, matching the classical Page–Lorden
         benchmark [45, 33].
Throughout this subsection we assume the null hypothesis H0 (“no drift”) holds until an unknown change-point τ ⋆ ,
after which the monitored statistic’s mean increases by ∆ > 0. Let St be the one-sided Page statistic,
                                             
                                 St = max 0, St−1 + Zt − µ0 − δ ,            S0 = 0,
and let ht be its adaptive threshold, updated by the Robbins–Monro recursion
                                                                         ηt = t−0.6 .
                                                                 
                                 ht+1 = ht + ηt 1{St < ht } − α ,
Line 4 of Algorithm 2 raises an alarm whenever St ≥ ht and then resets St to zero; the binary alarm flag is denoted
alarmt .

A. False-alarm control:
Theorem 4 (Long-run false-positive rate) For step size ηt = t−0.6 and the threshold recursion above,
                                                 T
                                             1X                   
                                    lim sup         Pr alarmt = 1 = α.
                                      T →∞  T   t=1

Proof 4 (Sketch) Define f (h) = PrH0 (S ≥ h) − α. Since f is continuous and strictly decreasing, the P          Robbins–Monro
                                                                       ⋆
update
P 2      constitutes a stochastic approximation   to the unique root h   of f .  The  standard SA  conditions—    t ηt = ∞ and
                                ⋆
   t η t < ∞—ensure     h t → h   almost surely [54, 30]. Stationarity of (S t , ht ) under H 0 then yields the desired long-run
frequency; Appendix A.4 details the coupling argument.


                                                              12
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


B. Detection delay.

Corollary 2 (Lorden bound with adaptive threshold) Let a permanent drift of size ∆ > 0 occur at time τ ⋆ , and
recall the slack variable δ > 0. Then
                                                                                    h⋆
                                    sup Eτ ⋆ Talarm − τ ⋆   Talarm > τ ⋆
                                                                          
                                                                               ≤       ,
                                    τ⋆                                             ∆−δ
where h⋆ = limt→∞ ht . The bound is identical to the classical Lorden delay [33] except that h⋆ is learned online
rather than fixed a priori.

Proof 5 (Sketch) Conditional on ht → h⋆ , the adaptive scheme behaves like a standard fixed-threshold CUSUM;
Lorden’s analysis applies verbatim once δ < ∆. Appendix A.4 provides the full argument.

C. Computational footprint. Updating (Zt , St , ht ) for |Φ| = 3 norms requires 38 ± 4 µs on a 2.2 GHz Xeon Silver
and 0.27 ± 0.02 ms on an ARM Cortex-A55—well below the five-per-cent budget stipulated in §6. Memory cost is
O(1) per norm because only the current CUSUM state and adaptive threshold are stored.

D. Practical interpretation. Theorem 4 guarantees that—even under 20% packet loss and bounded observation
delay—the overall false-positive rate will not exceed the chosen budget α in the long run. The Lorden-type delay in
Corollary 2 shows that detection speed scales linearly with the learned threshold h⋆ and inversely with drift magnitude,
matching the best-known bounds for fixed CUSUM schemes and confirming that adaptivity does not introduce extra
latency. Empirical results in Section 7 (9-step median, 17-step 95th percentile) agree closely with these analytical
predictions.
Collectively, the results certify that the detector is both statistically reliable and computationally lightweight, thereby
satisfying the real-time governance requirements of large-scale networked MAS.

5.4   Intervention Efficacy

The final analytical step is to prove that the supervisory playbook of §4.4 actually delivers the headline promise:
once a harmful norm is detected, inexpensive penalties keep the long-run fraction of compromised events below a
designer-chosen ceiling η ⋆ without eroding overall social welfare. The analysis casts the closed-loop system as a
renewal–reward process whose renewal epochs are the beginnings of intervention windows.

                                                                                          PT
Notation recap. Let Yt = 1{ϕ(st , at ) = violate} indicate a compromised step and CT = t=1 Yt the cumulative
count of violations. Denote by Jsoc the long-run average social reward and let ∆Jsoc be its shortfall relative to an
                                                                                          private
unattainable, perfectly norm-compliant oracle benchmark. Private rewards are bounded by |ri,t     | ≤ ∆max .

Main result.

Theorem 5 (Bounded-compromise) Suppose Assumptions A1–A4 hold. After every alarm the supervisor imposes a
penalty ∆ri,t = −λ ρi (e• ) for H consecutive steps, where e• is the sentinel event. If the penalty satisfies λH ≥ gmax +ε
for some ε > 0, then
                                          CT                                   αH
                                  lim sup       ≤ η ⋆ a.s.,        η⋆ =                  .
                                    T →∞ T                                λH − gmax
In addition, the cumulative welfare shortfall obeys
                                                             αH ∆max
                                                 ∆Jsoc ≤              .
                                                            λH − gmax

Proof 6 (Sketch) Partition time into i.i.d. cycles that start immediately after an intervention window ends and finish
at the next alarm. During a window the adversary’s expected net gain is at most gmax H − λH, which is negative by
construction. Consequently, the marked point process that counts compromises forms a super-martingale with negative
drift during interventions and non-positive drift otherwise. Doob’s optional stopping theorem bounds its stationary
mean, yielding the compromise ratio. Bounding the cumulative loss of private reward by ∆max per step gives the
welfare bound. Details—including the derivation of the renewal reward kernel—appear in Appendix A.5.


                                                            13
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


Practical tuning and trade-offs. Equation η ⋆ = αH/(λH − gmax ) highlights two dials available to system designers:

       • Penalty amplitude λ: Raising λ tightens the compromise ceiling η ⋆ but increases per-step supervisory cost and
         the risk of over-penalizing honest but noisy agents.
       • Window length H: Longer windows amortize communication overhead but slow the feedback loop. Empirical
         results in §7 suggest H = 25 balances these factors well for 100-agent traffic control.

Minimum viable penalty.

Proposition 1 (Optimal penalty magnitude) Fix H and target η ⋆ . The smallest penalty achieving the bound in
Theorem 5 is
                                                  gmax + αH
                                          λmin =                .
                                                     H η⋆

Proof 7 Rearrange η ⋆ = αH/(λH − gmax ) for λ.

Connection to reward shaping. The intervention rule can be viewed as a potential-based reward shaper [42] where
the shaping term is the scaled responsibility score. Potential-based shaping is known to preserve the set of optimal
policies in single-agent MDPs; our theorem extends the intuition to multi-agent settings with partial observability by
showing that undesirable equilibria become transient once shaping makes them strictly sub-optimal.

Empirical validation. In Section efsec:experiments we empirically validate that the observed compromise ratios
remain bounded and that AAF consistently improves the compromise–welfare trade-off across the full parameter sweep.
Taken together, Theorem 5, Proposition 1, and the accompanying empirical evidence show that inexpensive, localized
penalties are enough to keep emergent harm on a tight statistical leash while preserving aggregate welfare.

5.5   Resource Complexity

The analytical guarantees of the previous subsections are meaningful only if the accountability layer can run on finite
hardware. Proposition 2 quantifies the asymptotic cost of storage and network traffic, while the subsequent paragraph
converts those asymptotics into concrete numbers for the deployment profile of Section 4. We conclude with a brief
remark on CPU overhead, completing the cost picture.

Proposition 2 (Storage and bandwidth) Let h be the causal horizon, T the total number of control steps, and dmax
the bounded out-degree from Assumption A2. Then, for a population of N agents,
                                                                                              −1
                                                                                 
                Storage = O T (N + dmax h) ,              {z } = O N + dmax h bytes step .
                                                      |Bandwidth
                | {z }
               on edge servers                             across network


Proof 8 (Sketch) Each step generates O(N ) 40-byte event records; each record spawns at most dmax h causal-
edge inserts because the Granger window is bounded by h. Storage per step is therefore O(N + dmax h), yielding
O(T (N + dmax h)) total. The same count bounds gossip traffic because every record travels exactly one hop per
communication edge.

Concrete deployment cost.        For the experimental parameter set ⟨N = 100, h = 8, dmax ≤ 8, T = 106 ⟩:

       • Storage (order-of-magnitude): assuming 40 B per event record, the log volume is on the order of T (N +
         dmax h) × 40 B; for ⟨N = 100, h = 8, dmax ≤ 8, T = 106 ⟩ this is ≈ 492 MB.
       • Bandwidth (order-of-magnitude): per-step gossip is O((N + dmax h) × 40) B; at 50 Hz this corresponds to
         ≈ 80 KB s−1 under the same parameterization.
       • Compute: the per-step detector and attribution updates are linear in the local window h with small constants;
         we record wall-clock runtimes in the exported summaries for completeness.

Synthesis. Together with Theorems 3–5, the above bounds confirm that AAF achieves auditable accountability
at bounded cost: statistical guarantees hold under policy drift and moderate Byzantine behavior, while the resource
footprint is linear in N and T . Section 7 corroborates these analytic predictions across 87,480 simulation runs, sweeping
population size, penalty_factor, redistribution α, observability, and Byzantine rates.


                                                           14
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


6     Implementation Details
We provide a self-contained simulation artifact that implements the Adaptive Accountability Framework (AAF) end-to-
end and reproduces all tables and figures in §7. The implementation is intentionally lightweight: all components are
written in Python and run on either CPU or a single GPU (optional) using PyTorch for the learning baselines.

6.1   Code organization

The artifact is organized as a small Python package (aaf_q1/) plus a set of reproducibility scripts (scripts/):

       • aaf_q1/envs: the resource_sharing and public_goods environments.
       • aaf_q1/agents: PPO and baseline variants.
       • aaf_q1/aaf: detector, attribution, and intervention modules.
       • scripts/make_grid.py: generate JSONL experiment grids.
       • scripts/run_grid.py: execute grids with multiprocessing and optional sharding.
       • scripts/aggregate.py:                       materialize          analysis/all_runs_flat.csv                  and
         analysis/final_summary.csv.
       • scripts/make_latex.py and scripts/make_figures.py: produce paper-ready tables and figures.
       • scripts/stats.py: seed-matched paired tests.

6.2   Logging

Each run writes a config.json (exact hyperparameters) and a summary.json (scalar metrics). When
log_mode=steps, we additionally export step_logs.csv (time-series traces used for learning-curve plots).

6.3   Reproducibility

The full pipeline is driven by explicit command-line scripts; the repository README contains the exact commands
used to produce the results in this manuscript, including sharded execution for multi-node runs. Our aggregated results
and statistical tests are derived only from the exported CSV/JSON logs, so third parties can re-run the analysis without
access to hidden state.

6.4   Mapping to deployment

The full AAF design in §4 assumes an append-only audit ledger and trustworthy message delivery. In our simulation
artifact we model this ledger as an append-only event log and evaluate the statistical (detection/attribution) and control
(intervention) components. Cryptographic signing and distributed storage are orthogonal engineering choices and can
be layered into a deployment without changing the learning or detection logic.

7     Experimental Setup and Case Studies
This section empirically evaluates the Adaptive Accountability Framework (AAF). We (i) describe the simulation
environment and parameter grid, (ii) state the evaluation metrics and baselines, and (iii) report quantitative and
qualitative results that validate the analytical guarantees of Section 5. All experiments are fully reproducible using
the released artifact: we provide explicit scripts to generate the experiment grid, execute runs, aggregate metrics, and
regenerate all tables and figures (see the repository README at https://github.com/alqithami/AAF).

7.1   Simulation Environment

We evaluate AAF in two stylized multi-agent benchmarks that exhibit emergent norms under self-interested learning
and admit clear notions of “policy compromise”.

Resource-sharing game. Agents repeatedly request a divisible resource subject to a shared capacity C. At time
                                                                                                    exec
t, each agent i proposes a requested quantity qi,t ∈ [0, rmax ]; an environment scheduler executes qi,t  such that


                                                           15
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


     exec                                                          exec
P
  i qi,t  ≤ C.
             We flag a norm violation (“greedy” request) when qi,t      ≥ γrmax , and apply a penalty scaled by
penalty_factor. Each agent’s reward combines private utility and a social term,
                          private                  private    exec
                  ri,t = ri,t     + λrtsocial ,   ri,t     = qi,t  − penalty_factor · ⊮[violationi,t ],

where the scalar λ ∈ [0, 1] controls the trade-off between egoistic and collective incentives. Observations include the
agent’s current allocation and local neighbourhood statistics on the communication graph; when partial_obs=1 we
additionally provide a noisy scalar summary of the global queue length.

Public-goods game. EachPagent contributes ci,t ∈ [0, E] from an endowment E to a common pot. All agents receive
a shared return rett = m · i ci,t /N (multiplier m > 1), and the private payoff is
                             private
                            ri,t     = (E − ci,t ) + rett − penalty_factor · ⊮[ci,t < cmin ],
penalising “free-riding” below a minimum contribution cmin . Rewards again add a social term λ · rett . When
partial_obs=1, agents receive an additional noisy public signal of mean contribution.

Communication overhead. Each step includes a small control-plane message (e.g., a signed action log or lightweight
telemetry); AAF augments this with minimal provenance and detector metadata needed for accountability. We measure
total bytes as bandwidth_overhead_bytes in our evaluation logs.

7.2   Experimental Design and Parameters

Factorial grid and seeds. We evaluate AAF with a Q1-scale full-factorial design over: (i) two benchmark tasks
(resource_sharing and public_goods), (ii) three population sizes N ∈ {10, 50, 100}, (iii) episode length T =
2000, (iv) three norm-penalty levels penalty_factor ∈ {0.05, 0.20, 0.35}, (v) three redistribution parameters
α ∈ {0, 0.25, 1.0}, (vi) full vs. partial observability (partial_obs∈ {0, 1}), and (vii) Byzantine fractions ρ ∈
{0, 0.05, 0.10} injected at t0 = 200 when ρ > 0. For each regime we run 10 random seeds, yielding 2 × 3 × 3 × 3 × 2 ×
3×10 = 3240 episodes per baseline and 29,160 total runs across the 9 baselines/ablations above (with three independent
replications per seed, totaling 87,480 runs). We additionally run a focused scaling sweep on resource_sharing with
N ∈ {10, 50, 100, 200, 500} (10 seeds; 200 runs) to probe larger populations.

Baselines and ablations. We compare AAF against three learning baselines and one rule-based oracle, and include
four ablations to isolate each component:

       • PPO-only: standard Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) with no accountability layer.
       • Static-guard (oracle): a non-learning safety clamp that hard-limits unsafe actions, yielding zero executed
         compromises by construction.
       • Constrained PPO: PPO with a Lagrangian penalty on norm-violation events (no provenance or attribution).
       • Fair PPO: PPO with a Gini regularizer on allocations.
       • AAF-full: online change-point detection (adaptive cumulative sum (CUSUM)), responsibility scoring, and
         interventions (reward shaping + targeted policy patching).
       • Ablations: detector-only, shaping-only, patch-only, and no-attribution.
                                                                                                                   P
Metrics and statistical testing. We report (i) compromise ratio (attempted and executed), (ii) social welfare i Ri ,
(iii) allocation inequality via the Gini index, (iv) alarm count and detection delay (for methods with detectors), and (v)
attribution accuracy (top-1 and recall@k) under Byzantine injections. For grid-level comparisons we run seed-matched
paired tests (10 pairs per regime) between AAF-full and PPO-only. We report the fraction of regimes significant at
Holm–Bonferroni corrected p < 0.05 across the 324 regimes, as well as median relative effects.

7.3   Quantitative Results

Grid-level effects (324 regimes). Across the full factorial sweep (2 tasks × 3 scales × 3 penalties × 3 α values × 2
observability modes × 3 Byzantine rates), AAF-full reduces the executed compromise ratio relative to PPO-only in
96% of regimes, and this reduction is significant at p < 0.05 in 86.4% of regimes (paired, seed-matched tests; 10 pairs
per regime; Holm–Bonferroni corrected). The median relative reduction is 11.9%. Social welfare is preserved (median
change 0.4%) and improves in 93% of regimes (significant in 78.1%).


                                                            16
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


Table 1: Baseline comparison on resource_sharing in the canonical setting (T = 2000, penalty_factor = 0.2,
α = 1.0, full observability, ρ = 0). We report mean ± 95% CI over 10 seeds with 3 independent replications per seed
(n = 30 runs). Lower is better for Compromise and Gini; higher is better for Welfare.

                                       Compromise ratio ↓   Social welfare ↑   Gini (Alloc.) ↓     Gini (Reward) ↓
          N          Baseline
                                              (executed)
                     AAF (Full)            0.411 ± 0.007    12.918 ± 0.001     0.203 ± 0.003        0.154 ± 0.003
                     PPO Only              0.520 ± 0.009    12.896 ± 0.002     0.206 ± 0.004        0.156 ± 0.003
          10         Constrained PPO       0.519 ± 0.009    12.896 ± 0.002     0.206 ± 0.004        0.156 ± 0.003
                     Fair PPO              0.520 ± 0.009    12.896 ± 0.002     0.206 ± 0.004        0.156 ± 0.003
                     Static Guard          0.000 ± 0.000    13.000 ± 0.000     0.161 ± 0.007        0.124 ± 0.005
                     AAF (Full)            0.626 ± 0.005     2.475 ± 0.001     0.156 ± 0.002        0.109 ± 0.001
                     PPO Only              0.754 ± 0.007     2.449 ± 0.001     0.141 ± 0.002        0.103 ± 0.002
          50         Constrained PPO       0.752 ± 0.007     2.450 ± 0.001     0.142 ± 0.003        0.104 ± 0.002
                     Fair PPO              0.754 ± 0.007     2.449 ± 0.001     0.141 ± 0.003        0.103 ± 0.002
                     Static Guard          0.000 ± 0.000     2.600 ± 0.000     0.103 ± 0.003        0.079 ± 0.003
                     AAF (Full)            0.634 ± 0.005     1.173 ± 0.001     0.167 ± 0.002        0.109 ± 0.001
                     PPO Only              0.706 ± 0.007     1.159 ± 0.001     0.159 ± 0.002        0.108 ± 0.001
          100        Constrained PPO       0.700 ± 0.007     1.160 ± 0.001     0.161 ± 0.003        0.109 ± 0.002
                     Fair PPO              0.700 ± 0.007     1.160 ± 0.001     0.160 ± 0.002        0.108 ± 0.001
                     Static Guard          0.000 ± 0.000     1.300 ± 0.000     0.093 ± 0.003        0.072 ± 0.002


Table 2: AAF ablation on resource_sharing under the same canonical setting as Table 1. Values are mean ± 95%
CI over 10 seeds with 3 independent replications per seed (n = 30 runs).

                                               Compromise ratio ↓    Social welfare ↑   Mean Gini (alloc.) ↓
                N        Variant
                                                      (executed)
                         AAF (Full)                 0.411 ± 0.007    12.918 ± 0.001              0.203 ± 0.003
                         AAF (-Attribution)         0.520 ± 0.009    12.896 ± 0.002              0.206 ± 0.004
                10       AAF (+Detect Only)         0.520 ± 0.009    12.896 ± 0.002              0.206 ± 0.004
                         AAF (+Patch Only)          0.411 ± 0.007    12.918 ± 0.001              0.203 ± 0.003
                         AAF (+Shaping Only)        0.520 ± 0.009    12.896 ± 0.002              0.206 ± 0.004
                         AAF (Full)                 0.626 ± 0.005      2.475 ± 0.001             0.156 ± 0.002
                         AAF (-Attribution)         0.754 ± 0.007      2.449 ± 0.001             0.141 ± 0.002
                50       AAF (+Detect Only)         0.754 ± 0.007      2.449 ± 0.001             0.141 ± 0.002
                         AAF (+Patch Only)          0.627 ± 0.005      2.475 ± 0.001             0.156 ± 0.002
                         AAF (+Shaping Only)        0.754 ± 0.007      2.449 ± 0.001             0.141 ± 0.002
                         AAF (Full)                 0.634 ± 0.005      1.173 ± 0.001             0.167 ± 0.002
                         AAF (-Attribution)         0.706 ± 0.007      1.159 ± 0.001             0.159 ± 0.002
                100      AAF (+Detect Only)         0.706 ± 0.007      1.159 ± 0.001             0.159 ± 0.002
                         AAF (+Patch Only)          0.630 ± 0.005      1.174 ± 0.001             0.169 ± 0.002
                         AAF (+Shaping Only)        0.708 ± 0.008      1.158 ± 0.002             0.158 ± 0.003



Canonical baseline comparison (resource sharing, no Byzantines). Table 1 reports a head-to-head comparison
on resource_sharing under a canonical setting (T = 2000, penalty_factor = 0.2, α = 1.0, full observability,
ρ = 0). AAF-full consistently reduces executed compromises relative to PPO-only across scales, with small welfare
changes. Static-guard provides an oracle lower bound on executed compromise (zero by construction) but does not
produce attribution signals.

Ablation (what matters). Table 2 isolates each AAF component. In this benchmark, patching accounts for the bulk
of compromise reduction; detector-only and shaping-only variants largely match PPO-only on executed compromise,
while patch-only recovers most of the safety gain.

Compromise–inequality trade-off. Figure 3 visualizes the Pareto frontier between executed compromise and mean
allocation inequality (Gini) for N = 50 in the canonical setting. AAF interventions shift the system left (fewer
compromises) but can increase inequality; penalty_factor and α act as tuning knobs for this trade-off.


                                                            17
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS




      Figure 2: Executed compromise ratio by baseline (resource_sharing, N = 50, canonical setting, ρ = 0).




Figure 3: Trade-off between executed compromise and mean allocation Gini across baselines (resource_sharing,
N = 50, canonical setting, ρ = 0).


Byzantine detection and attribution. Under adversarial injections (ρ ∈ {0.05, 0.10}, t0 = 200), AAF triggers
alarms and assigns responsibility. Across all adversarial runs, the median detection delay is 71 steps (IQR 39–177);
Figure 5(a) reports the full CDF on resource_sharing. In the 10% Byzantine setting, AAF achieves mean top-1
attribution accuracy of 0.97 (conditional on a non-missing attribution score), as shown in Figure 5(b).

7.4   Scaling Analysis

To probe scalability beyond the main factorial grid (N ≤ 100), we run an additional scaling sweep on
resource_sharing with N ∈ {10, 50, 100, 200, 500} and ρ ∈ {0, 0.05} under the canonical setting (T = 2000,
penalty_factor=0.2, α = 1.0, full observability). Figure 7(a) shows that AAF’s compromise reduction persists as N
grows. At N = 200, AAF reduces executed compromise by 6.2% (ρ = 0) and 9.3% (ρ = 0.05) relative to PPO-only;
at N = 500 the relative reduction is 1.5% and 4.1%, respectively, while welfare remains comparable. Figure 7(b) and
Figure 7(c) report wall-clock runtime and communication cost; both scale approximately linearly in N , consistent with
Proposition 2.

7.5   Public Goods Benchmark

To demonstrate the generality of the framework, we evaluate AAF on the public_goods environment, where agents
must balance individual contributions against collective returns. Table 3 reports the main results across scales. Consistent
with the resource sharing domain, AAF-full achieves the lowest executed compromise ratio among all learning baselines
across all scales (N = 10, 50, 100), while maintaining or slightly improving social welfare.
Figure 8 visualizes the compromise reduction across baselines. The relative safety advantage of AAF is particularly
pronounced at N = 50, where it reduces the executed compromise ratio from 0.311 (PPO-only) to 0.268. Notably, the


                                                            18
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS




Figure 4: Mean allocation Gini vs. norm-penalty level for AAF-full (resource_sharing, N = 50, α = 1.0, ρ = 0).
Bars report mean ± 95% CI over 10 seeds.




Figure 5: Detection and Attribution Performance on resource_sharing. (a) Empirical CDF of detection delay under
Byzantine injections (ρ ∈ {0.05, 0.10}, t0 = 200). The median delay is 71 steps. (b) Attribution accuracy (Top-1,
Recall@3, Recall@5) across Byzantine fractions ρ. Error bars denote 95% CI.


reward Gini coefficient remains stable across all baselines, indicating that the norm enforcement mechanisms do not
inadvertently create severe reward disparities in this domain.
Under adversarial conditions, AAF detects Byzantine injections in the public goods setting with a median delay of 65
steps (IQR 47–93), demonstrating that the sequential hypothesis testing mechanism transfers effectively to different
reward structures and interaction topologies without requiring domain-specific tuning.

7.6   Qualitative Case Study

We also examined representative trajectories to validate that AAF’s numerical improvements correspond to interpretable
behavioral shifts. In a typical resource_sharing episode (N = 50, T = 2000, penalty_factor = 0.2, α = 1.0,
full observability), a coalition of agents repeatedly issued near-maximal requests, producing a visible rise in executed
compromises. AAF’s adaptive CUSUM detector raised an alarm shortly after the coalition’s behavior became statistically
distinguishable from the baseline, and the intervention pipeline (reward shaping + targeted patching) reduced the
coalition’s marginal incentive to over-request. Within a few hundred steps, the episode transitioned back toward a
lower-compromise regime. The logged responsibility graph provides a post-hoc audit trail: agents ranked as most
responsible typically coincide with injected Byzantine agents when ρ > 0 (see §7.3).

7.7   Reproducibility Checklist
       • Code & data: Public GitHub repository: https://github.com/alqithami/AAF. The accompanying
         artifact bundle includes the aggregated CSVs and the scripts used to regenerate all tables and figures.
       • Environment: Python (tested with 3.12) and pinned dependencies in requirements.txt.


                                                          19
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS




Figure 6: Learning curves under Byzantine injection (resource_sharing, N = 50, ρ = 0.05, t0 = 200). Solid lines
show the median across 10 seeds with IQR shading for executed compromise rate (top), allocation Gini (middle), and
social welfare (bottom). The dashed vertical line marks attack start and the dotted line marks the median first-alarm
time (AAF).




Figure 7: Scaling Analysis on resource_sharing under canonical settings (λ = 0.20, α = 1.0). (a) Compromise
ratio vs. network size (N ). AAF maintains its advantage at scale. (b) Runtime overhead vs. network size. AAF’s
computational cost scales linearly. (c) Communication bandwidth vs. network size. AAF’s ledger and attribution
messages scale linearly with the number of agents.



      • Running experiments: scripts/make_grid.py generates JSONL grids; scripts/run_grid.py executes
        them (supports multi-process runs and sharding via –shard_id / –num_shards); scripts/aggregate.py
        produces         analysis/all_runs_flat.csv               and        analysis/final_summary.csv;
        scripts/make_latex.py, scripts/make_figures.py, and scripts/stats.py generate paper-
        ready assets.

      • Randomness: Each run records its seed in config.json; paired tests are seed-matched.


                                                         20
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS



Table 3: Results on the Public Goods environment. Values are mean ± standard error across all hyperparameter regimes
and seeds. Bold indicates best among learning baselines (excluding Static Guard). ↓ = lower is better; ↑ = higher is
better.
               N     Baseline           Compromise ↓     Social Welfare ↑   Gini (Reward) ↓    Det. Delay
                     AAF (Full)          0.160 ± 0.000    1.450 ± 0.001      0.072 ± 0.000    77 [57–686]
                     PPO Only            0.196 ± 0.001    1.440 ± 0.001      0.073 ± 0.000         —
               10    Constrained PPO     0.194 ± 0.001    1.442 ± 0.001      0.073 ± 0.000         —
                     Fair PPO            0.196 ± 0.001    1.440 ± 0.001      0.073 ± 0.000         —
                     Static Guard        0.000 ± 0.000    1.577 ± 0.002      0.073 ± 0.000         —
                     AAF (Full)          0.268 ± 0.001    1.337 ± 0.001      0.071 ± 0.000     69 [51–98]
                     PPO Only            0.311 ± 0.002    1.325 ± 0.001      0.073 ± 0.000         —
               50    Constrained PPO     0.294 ± 0.002    1.339 ± 0.001      0.073 ± 0.000         —
                     Fair PPO            0.311 ± 0.002    1.325 ± 0.001      0.073 ± 0.000         —
                     Static Guard        0.000 ± 0.000    1.562 ± 0.002      0.070 ± 0.000         —
                     AAF (Full)          0.241 ± 0.001    1.375 ± 0.001      0.076 ± 0.000     48 [40–67]
                     PPO Only            0.271 ± 0.002    1.363 ± 0.001      0.077 ± 0.000         —
               100   Constrained PPO     0.258 ± 0.002    1.373 ± 0.001      0.078 ± 0.000         —
                     Fair PPO            0.271 ± 0.002    1.363 ± 0.001      0.077 ± 0.000         —
                     Static Guard        0.000 ± 0.000    1.550 ± 0.002      0.068 ± 0.000         —




Figure 8: Executed compromise ratio by baseline across scales on the public_goods environment (ρ = 0.0). Bars
report mean ± standard error.


Empirical evidence supports the analytical intuition: across the full grid, AAF reduces executed compromise relative to
PPO in 96% of regimes (median reduction 11.9%), preserves welfare (median change 0.4%), and detects adversarial
norm shifts with median delay 71 steps.

8     Discussion
The preceding experiments demonstrate that an end-to-end accountability layer built on cryptographic provenance,
online sequential tests, and cost-bounded interventions can markedly suppress collusion and hoarding without sacrificing
collective reward. We now interpret these results, dissect residual weaknesses, connect the work to current regulatory
and ethical debates, and sketch avenues for extension.

8.1   Why the Results Matter

Continuous oversight beats episodic audits: Because detection and intervention are online, AAF reacts on the same
time scale as the norm shift itself. In our Byzantine-injection experiments (t0 = 200), the median detection delay is
71 steps (IQR 39–177). After intervention, the executed-compromise rate typically decreases rather than persisting
at the elevated post-attack level, supporting the case for continuous accountability in fast time-scale domains where
retrospective audits may arrive too late. This empirical finding strongly supports the theoretical arguments for real-time
observability recently advanced by Solomon et al. [59].


                                                           21
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


Local penalties suffice for global goals: The bounded-compromise theorem (Thm. 5) predicted that a local, Shapley-
weighted penalty would globally stabilize the system once λH > gmax . Empirically, we observed ηemp within one
standard error of the analytic ceiling, even when 5% of agents behaved adversarially. This corroborates the long-standing
conjecture that potential-based shaping [42] scales from single- to multi-agent settings when augmented with causal
attribution, aligning with recent advances in causal credit assignment [64] and constrained policy optimization for safe
RL [1].

8.2   Limitations and Threats to Validity

Finite parameter sweep: Our main factorial grid spanned {10, 50, 100} agents and three penalty magnitudes, and we
additionally ran a scaling sweep up to N = 500 in resource_sharing. A 5000-agent swarm, or penalty factors close
to unity, might stress the message bus or saturate the intervention budget. Future work should stress-test the framework
under orders-of-magnitude larger populations and adversaries who actively spoof causal edges.

Synthetic workload: The resource-sharing game abstracts energy dispatch and cloud bandwidth, but real grids
include AC power-flow constraints, non-convex unit-commitment costs, and legal market rules. Porting AAF to such
domains may require domain-specific norm predicates and rate-limited interventions to satisfy physical safety margins.

Compute footprint: Although the prototype meets a 5% CPU budget on EPYC and Cortex-A55 cores, embedded
PLCs in industrial control may offer only tens of MHz of head-room. A tiny-ML re-implementation or a hardware
cryptographic accelerator could mitigate this concern.

8.3   Ethical, Legal, and Social Implications

Privacy and surveillance. Recording every agent action invites secondary use risks. AAF mitigates the danger via
keyed-hash digests, AES-SIV pseudonyms, and an escrowed identity table (§6). Nonetheless, deployers should carry
out a data-protection impact assessment under GDPR Art. 35 and delete raw ring buffers once digests are anchored.

Over-deterrence and chilling effects. Reward penalties can skew agents toward risk-averse behavior, potentially
lowering innovation in financial-market MAS [16]. A human-in-the-loop override—triggered by the yellow-flag
dashboard—helps balance safety with exploration.

Procedural fairness. By design, Shapley-style attribution apportions blame according to marginal causal contribution.
If agents differ in observability or computing power, this may correlate with protected attributes, leading to distributive
inequity [37]. Auditors should therefore scrutinize ρi (e) distributions for disparate impact.

8.4   Relevance to Emerging AI Governance

The EU AI Act (2024) and the NIST AI Risk-Management Framework (2023) both highlight collective emergent
risks —but offer few technical recipes for tracing responsibility in networked AI systems. AAF operationalizes these
policy aspirations by (i) anchoring an immutable event ledger; (ii) providing real-time statistical tests with formal
α-level guarantees [26]; and (iii) linking those tests to proportionate, auditable interventions. By addressing the core
pillars of responsibility—reliability, transparency, and accountability [15]—and providing a concrete implementation of
trust and risk management principles [52], the framework can serve as a reference architecture for regulators drafting
sector-specific codes of practice.

8.5   Future Directions

Scalable cryptography: Replacing Merkle DAG anchoring with succinct zero-knowledge roll-ups (e.g., Halo 2)
could compress the storage footprint by an order of magnitude while enabling selective disclosure proofs.

Meta-norm adaptation: Current norms are fixed at deployment. An interesting extension is a meta-controller that
tunes α, λ, and even the set Φ via constrained Bayesian optimization, subject to fairness and throughput SLAs.

Human-aligned explanations: While the Grafana DAG explorer provides low-level proofs, policy operators may
prefer natural-language rationales. Coupling the ledger to an LLM-based explainer guarded by the event digests to
prevent hallucination could bridge the accountability-interpretability gap [29].


                                                           22
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


Cross-domain generalization: Finally, deploying AAF in safety-critical cyber-physical systems, autonomous driving
rings, or drone swarms where communication is intermittent and hard real-time deadlines exist would test the limits of
the bounded-compromise theorem under severe timing jitter.
AAF demonstrates that cryptographically verifiable, statistically rigorous, and computationally light accountability is
attainable in contemporary MAS. Yet translating the prototype into industrial and societal infrastructure requires careful
attention to privacy guarantees, domain constraints, and human governance processes. These themes set the stage for
interdisciplinary collaborations that we outline in the conclusion.

9   Conclusion and Future Work
This paper introduced an Adaptive Accountability Framework (AAF) that transforms a networked multi-agent system
(MAS) into a self-auditing socio-technical organism. By uniting a tamper-evident Merkle ledger, Shapley-style
responsibility scores, time-uniform sequential tests, and cost-bounded interventions, AAF provides—both in theory
(Section 5) and practice (Section 7)—formal assurances that harmful emergent norms can be detected within a handful
of control steps and suppressed below any designer-chosen ceiling η ⋆ .

Key takeaways:

      1. Causal tracing at scale: Cryptographically hashed event digests and constant-time Granger updates enable
         real-time provenance without saturating bandwidth: a 100-agent deployment needs only ≈ 80 KB s−1 .
      2. Statistical robustness: An adaptive CUSUM calibrated by Robbins–Monro maintains a system-wide false-alarm
         rate of exactly α, even under 20% packet loss and non-stationary policies—extending classical Page–Lorden
         theory to decentralized MAS.
      3. Cost-effective mitigation: Local reward shaping proportional to responsibility scores is sufficient to bound
         compromise and welfare loss, confirming the bounded-compromise theorem and eliminating the need for
         heavy global resets or retraining.
      4. Practical viability: A production-grade reference stack, i.e., Python 3.11 + Rust/WASM + FoundationDB +
         Kafka, runs inside a 5% CPU budget on both EPYC and ARM Cortex-A55 hardware, paving the way for real
         deployments.

Limitations. Experiments focused on N ≤ 100 agents in a stylized resource-sharing domain. Larger swarms,
adversaries that spoof ledger messages, or safety-critical cyber-physical loops with sub-10 ms deadlines may breach
current design margins. Moreover, the privacy model–keyed BLAKE3 hashes plus AES-SIV pseudonyms–assumes
regulators can access the escrowed identity table; sectors with stronger secrecy requirements (healthcare, defense) will
need stronger privacy-preserving ledgers (e.g. verifiable encrypted logs).

Roadmap for future work:

      1. Learning-aware detectors: Integrate representation-learning or graph neural networks to flag coordinated drift
         that eludes low-dimensional statistics.
      2. Zero-knowledge provenance: Replace Merkle anchoring with succinct zero-knowledge roll-ups (Halo 2,
         PlonK) so third-party auditors can verify norm violations without accessing raw hashes.
      3. Human-aligned explanations: Couple the ledger to LLM-based explainers bounded by cryptographic proofs,
         producing natural-language rationales that satisfy emerging “AI-act notice” clauses.
      4. Sector pilots: Field trials in power-grid balancing, hospital bed exchange, or high-frequency trading could
         surface domain-specific constraints (e.g., HIPAA data retention, MiFID II latency caps) and inform regulator
         guidance.
      5. Ultra-large MAS: For N ≥ 104 agents, delta-encoding, probabilistic sketches, and edge-aggregated detection
         will be needed; preliminary work suggests a 100-fold compression with Count-Min sketches and HyperLogLog
         without losing detection power.

Recent policy instruments—from the EU AI Act to NIST’s AI RMF—stress continuous, distributed oversight. AAF
offers a concrete, open-source blueprint for that ambition: mathematically principled, cryptographically verifiable,
computationally lean, and already validated on non-trivial MAS workloads. We hope the framework catalyzes
interdisciplinary collaboration among control theorists, cryptographers, economists, and policy-makers as autonomous
agents scale from dozens to millions in the infrastructures of tomorrow.


                                                           23
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


Appendix A. Detailed Proofs
This appendix provides full technical proofs for the results stated in Section 5. We restate the operational assumptions
for ease of reference.

A1 Packet loss and delay: Each event tuple is dropped independently with probability εloss ≤ 0.2 and, if delivered, is
       delayed by at most εdelay ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3} control steps.
A2 Bounded degree: The time-varying communication graph satisfies
                                                   max deg(Gt ) ≤ dmax < ∞,
                                                     t

         independent of the population size N .
A3 Diminishing learning rate: For every agent i the total-variation drift of its policy obeys ∥πi,t+1 − πi,t ∥1 ≤ κ t−ξ
      with exponent ξ > 12 .
A4 Budgeted adversary: Adversarial agents harvest at most gmax expected utility per step, whereas the supervisor may
      spend up to cmax > gmax .

Unless noted otherwise, all expectations and probabilities are taken with respect to the joint probability space that
realizes environment dynamics, stochastic policies, packet loss, and observation noise.

A.1 Proof of Lemma 1
                                                               PN
Statement recap:     For any event e recorded in the ledger,     i=1 ρi (e) = 1 almost surely.

Proof 9 (Detailed proof.) Write P(e) for the set of all directed source–to-e paths in the causal-edge DAG and let
Pi (e) ⊆ P(e) denote those whose first edge originates from an action of agent i. Because the DAG has no directed
cycles, every path in P(e) has precisely one distinct originating agent; thus the sets (Pi (e))N
                                                                                               i=1 form a disjoint partition
of P(e). Then
                             N              N                |p|                       |p|
                                               P                    P P
                                                  p∈Pi (e) β          i    p∈Pi (e) β
                            X              X
                                ρi (e) =        P           |q|
                                                                 =    P            |q|
                                                                                           = 1,
                            i=1            i=1     q∈P(e) β              q∈P(e) β

where the final equality follows because the disjoint union of the Pi (e) is P(e).                                       □

A.2 Proof of Theorem 2

Statement recap: Under A1–A3 and fixed 0 < β < 1 the responsibility estimate ρi (eT ) converges almost surely to a
limit ρ∞
       i (e) whenever the index of eT satisfies T − t(eT ) = O(1).

Proof 10 (Detailed Proof.) Step 1: Eventual observation of edges. Fix an event e and a causal path p =
⟨ek0 , . . . , ekm = e⟩ of length m ≤ ℓmax ; in our implementation ℓmax = 256 equals the ring-buffer length. Be-
cause every edge traversal triggers at most one Granger test, edge (ekj−1 → ekj ) is attempted exactly once. Under A1
the probability that the edge’s record is available when the test is performed is 1 − εloss . Hence all m edges in p are
detected with probability (1 − εloss )m ≥ (1 − εloss )ℓmax > 0. The Bernoulli trials for distinct attempts are independent,
so the indicator that any given edge is never observed has geometric tail. Let Xp = 1{p never fully observed}.
Step 2: Borel–Cantelli. Because deg(Gt ) ≤ dmax (A2) and m ≤ ℓmax , the number of candidate paths affecting e is
bounded above by M = dℓmaxmax
                              < ∞. We have P[Xp = 1] ≤ εmloss for each p, so
                                     X
                                                               ℓmax
                                           P[Xp = 1] ≤ M εloss      < ∞.
                                         p∈P(e)

The first Borel–Cantelli lemma therefore implies P[Xp = 1 infinitely often] = 0, i.e. every causal path is eventually
observed almost surely (a.s.).
Step 3: Convergence of numerator and denominator. For each agent i define Ni,T = p∈Pi (e) β |p| 1{p observed by T }.
                                                                                 P
                                                          P                     P
By Step 2, Ni,T → Ni,∞ a.s. as T → ∞. Similarly DT = j Nj,T → D∞ = j Nj,∞ a.s. and D∞ > 0 because
at least one source agent acted. Consequently ρi (eT ) = Ni,T /DT → ρ∞     i (e) = Ni,∞ /D∞ almost surely by the
continuous-mapping theorem.                                                                                        □


                                                            24
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


A.3 Proof of Theorem 3
                                                 √
Statement recap: With threshold ht = h0 +            2 log t (h0 > 0), the probability that a spurious causal edge is ever
                           2
inserted is at most α = e−h0 /2 .

Proof 11 (Detailed proof.) Under H0 the m-lag Granger residual–variance ratio has exact F distribution
F (m, n−m)/m with n = m + 1 degrees-of-freedom [34, 26]. Let Ut = 1{Ft > ht }. Then, by the Chernoff
                                   2         2
bound for χ2 tails, P[Ut = 1] ≤ e−ht /2 = e−h0 /2 t−1 . Taking the union bound over t ≥ 1 yields
                                                    ∞
                                                    X    2             2
                                                      e−h0 /2 t−1 = e−h0 /2 ,
                                                
                                   P ∃ t : Ut = 1 ≤
                                                         t=1
                        p
as desired. Setting h0 = 2 log(1/α) recovers any target α ∈ (0, 1).                                                    □

A.4 Proof of Theorem 4

Statement recap: With gain sequence ηt = t−0.6 the adaptive CUSUM maintains long-run false-alarm frequency α.

Proof 12 (Detailed Proof.) Define f (h) = PH0 (S ≥ h) − α. The process {ht } satisfies the Robbins-Monro recursion
ht+1 = ht − ηt f (ht ) + ηt ϵt+1 with martingale difference ϵt+1 = Zt+1 − PH0 (S ≥ ht ). Because    St has bounded
increments, ϵt+1 is square integrable with E ϵt+1 = 0 and supt E ϵ2t+1 < ∞. Assumption t ηt2 < ∞ ensures the
                                                                                           P
Kushner-Clark condition, so ht → h⋆ a.s. where f (h⋆ ) = 0 [30]. Ergodicity of the CUSUM statistic under H0 implies
 1
   PT             ⋆                  ⋆
T    t=1 1{St ≥ h } → PH0 (S ≥ h ) = α, and dominated convergence gives the required limit for ht .              □

A.5 Proof of Theorem 5

Statement recap:     If λH ≥ gmax + ε the long-run compromise ratio satisfies
                                           lim sup CT /T ≤ η ⋆ = λH−g
                                                                   αH
                                                                      max
                                            T →∞

almost surely.

Proof 13 (Proof.) Let Yt = 1{ϕ(st , at ) = violate} and define the compensated process Yet = Yt − η ⋆ . Consider the
                                                              Pτn +H−1 e
random times τn at which interventions start and write ∆n = t=τ     n
                                                                        Yt . During window n the adversary can at
most recover gmax H utility, whereas the supervisor spends λH. The net drift is therefore
                                      E[∆n | Fτn ] ≤ αH − (λH − gmax ) < 0.
            Pt               
Define Mt = k=1 Yek − α . Between interventions Mt has zero drift, and in mitigation windows it has negative drift;
hence Mt is a super-martingale. Applying Doob’s optional stopping at T and dividing by T yields E[CT /T ] ≤ η ⋆ .
Azuma–Hoeffding on bounded increments tightens this to almost-sure convergence.
Let the adversary invest exactly gmax utility per step and cease activity during interventions. Renewal-reward arguments
then show the ratio approaches η ⋆ from below as λH ↓ gmax , proving the bound is tight up to O(ε−1 ).

A.6 Discussion of Assumption Sharpness
    A2 (Bounded degree): The proofs rely only on summability of path counts. A slowly growing degree bound, e.g.
       deg(Gt ) = O(log N ), merely multiplies the constants in Lemma 1 and Theorem 2 by log N ; the qualitative
       guarantees survive.
    A3 (Diminishing learning rate): The exponent ξ > 12 guarantees t ∥πi,t+1 − πi,t ∥ < ∞, which is sufficient for
                                                                  P

       the bounded-difference martingale arguments. Empirically, RL schedulers such as Adam with a t−1 decay
       meet this requirement.
    A4 (Budget dominance): If gmax ≥ cmax an adversary can match or exceed the supervisor’s corrective power,
       allowing CT /T → 1 in the worst case; no bounded-cost policy can prevent systemic capture. Thus the
       assumption is information-theoretically tight.

The lemmas and theorems above rigorously ground the empirical claims in Section 7: the ledger converges despite 20%
packet loss, the detector maintains a 5% false-alarm rate, and inexpensive interventions provably cap long-run harm.


                                                            25
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


A.7 Proof of Corollary 2(Lorden Bound for Adaptive CUSUM)

Statement recap. For a persistent drift ∆ > 0 starting at τ ⋆ we must show
                                                                           h⋆
                                sup Eτ ⋆ Talarm − τ ⋆ Talarm > τ ⋆ ≤
                                                                  
                                                                              ,
                                 τ⋆                                      ∆−δ
where h⋆ = limt→∞ ht .

Proof 14 Conditional on ht → h⋆ (Theorem 4) the adaptive rule behaves like a fixed-threshold CUSUM with threshold
h⋆ . Page’s original result [45] bounds the expected delay by h⋆ /(∆ − δ) when the post-change mean is µ0 + δ + ∆.
Taking the supremum over τ ⋆ yields the worst-case delay, completing the proof.                                 □

A.8 Proof of Proposition 1 (Minimal Penalty Magnitude)

Statement recap.     For fixed window H and target compromise ceiling η ⋆ the minimal penalty magnitude satisfies
                                                       gmax + αH
                                              λmin =               .
                                                          Hη ⋆
Proof 15 The upper bound in Theorem 5 reads η ⋆ = αH/(λH − gmax ). Solving for λ gives λ = (gmax + αH)/(Hη ⋆ ).
Monotonicity in λ implies this value is minimal.                                                           □

A.9 Proof of Proposition 2 (Resource Complexity)
                                                      
Statement recap.     Storage grows as O T (N + dmax h) and bandwidth as O(N + dmax h) bytes per step.

Proof 16 Each control step generates N event records
                                                     (40 B each) plus at most dmax h causal-edge insertions (32 B
hashes). Hence per-step storage is O N + dmax h , giving the stated total after T steps. Gossip traffic forwards each
record exactly once along each outgoing edge, bounding bandwidth by the same term. Constants are absorbed into the
big-O.                                                                                                             □

Appendix B. Hyper-parameter Grid and HPC Job Script
       • Grid definition: JSON file experiments/grid.json enumerates all ⟨N, penalty, obs, α, seed⟩ tuples.
       • Slurm launcher: Bash script run_slurm.sh submits an array job with $SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID indexing
         the JSON grid.

Appendix C. Micro-benchmark of Critical Kernels

                             Kernel                       EPYC 7742 (µs)    Cortex-A55 (µs)
                             BLAKE3 hash (40 B)                 0.38              2.9
                             Incremental Granger (m=8)          4.10             27.4
                             Merkle insert (depth 16)           1.22              9.8
                             CUSUM update (3 norms)             0.07             0.27
                             Responsibility recompute           0.44              3.1

All numbers are medians over 105 iterations. Full benchmark code is in benchmarks/kernel_bench.rs and
benchmarks/kernel_bench.py.

Appendix D. Mirror-Descent Alert Budget Allocator

We model the per-norm false-positive budget as a simplex wt ∈ ∆|Φ| updated by entropic mirror descent:
                                                           wt exp(−ηzt )
                                                  wt+1 =                  ,
                                                                ∥·∥1
                                                                                                 p
where zt is the zero-one loss vector of fired alerts. Standard analysis [23] yields regret RT ≤ 2 T log |Φ|; substituting
|Φ| = 5 and T = 106 gives RT ≈ 10−2 , hence the global alert budget ᾱ = 0.05 is never exceeded by more than 0.01
in our runs.


                                                           26
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


Appendix E. Derivation of Bandwidth and Storage Constants
Using the 40-byte record and 32-byte hash constants, the leading constant in Proposition 2 equals 40N + 32dmax h
bytes per step. With N = 100, dmax = 8, h = 8 this evaluates to 40 · 100 + 32 · 8 · 8 = 79 KB step−1 , matching the
empirical figure reported in §7.

References
 [1] Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In Proceedings
     of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
     Research, pages 22–31. PMLR, 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/achiam17a.html.
 [2] Mehdi Ahrarinouri, Mohammad Rastegar, and Ali Reza Seifi. Multiagent reinforcement learning for energy
     management in residential buildings. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 17(1):659–666, 2021. doi:
     10.1109/TII.2020.2977104.
 [3] Saad Alqithami. Adaptive accountability in networked multi-agent systems. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM
     Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, volume 8, pages 127–137, Oct. 2025. doi: 10.1609/aies.v8i1.36536. URL
     https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AIES/article/view/36536.
 [4] Giulia Andrighetto, Cristiano Castelfranchi, Eunate Mayor, John McBreen, Maite López-Sánchez, and Simon
     Parsons. (social) norm dynamics. In Giulia Andrighetto, Guido Governatori, Pablo Noriega, and Leendert W. N.
     van der Torre, editors, Normative Multi-Agent Systems, volume 4 of Dagstuhl Follow-Ups, pages 135–170. Schloss
     Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2013. ISBN 978-3-939897-51-4. doi: 10.4230/DFU.Vol4.12111.135.
 [5] Giulia Andrighetto, Guido Governatori, Pablo Noriega, and Leendert W. N. van der Torre, editors. DFU, Volume
     4, Normative Multi-Agent Systems, volume 4 of Dagstuhl Follow-Ups. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum
     für Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2013. ISBN 978-3-939897-51-4. doi: 10.4230/DFU.Vol4.12111. URL
     https://drops.dagstuhl.de/entities/document/10.4230/DFU.Vol4.12111.
 [6] M. Arnold, R. K. E. Bellamy, M. Hind, S. Houde, S. Mehta, A. Mojsilović, R. Nair, K. Natesan Ramamurthy,
     A. Olteanu, D. Piorkowski, D. Reimer, J. Richards, J. Tsay, and K. R. Varshney. Factsheets: Increasing trust in
     ai services through supplier’s declarations of conformity. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 63(4/5):
     6:1–6:13, 2019. doi: 10.1147/JRD.2019.2942288.
 [7] Mark Bedau. Downward causation and the autonomy of weak emergence. Principia: an international journal of
     epistemology, 6(1):5–50, 2002. doi: 10.5007/1808-1711.2002v6n1p5.
 [8] Manuele Brambilla, Eliseo Ferrante, Mauro Birattari, and Marco Dorigo. Swarm robotics: A review from the
     swarm engineering perspective. Swarm Intelligence, 7(1):1–41, 2013. doi: 10.1007/s11721-012-0075-2.
 [9] Lucian Buşoniu, Robert Babuška, and Bart De Schutter. A comprehensive survey of multiagent reinforcement
     learning. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C: Applications and Reviews, 38(2):156–172,
     2008. doi: 10.1109/TSMCC.2007.913919.
[10] Jiajun Chai, Yuqian Fu, Dongbin Zhao, and Yuanheng Zhu. Aligning credit for multi-agent cooperation via
     model-based counterfactual imagination. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Autonomous
     Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS ’24, page 281–289, Richland, SC, 2024. International Foundation for
     Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. ISBN 9798400704864. doi: 10.5555/3635637.3662876.
[11] Alan Chan, Carson Ezell, Max Kaufmann, Kevin Wei, Lewis Hammond, Herbie Bradley, Emma Bluemke,
     Nitarshan Rajkumar, David Krueger, Noam Kolt, Lennart Heim, and Markus Anderljung. Visibility into ai agents.
     In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT 2024), pages
     958–973. ACM, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3630106.3658948.
[12] Ching-Chun Chang and Ichiro Echizen. The chronicles of foundation ai for forensics of multi-agent provenance.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12612, 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2504.12612.
[13] Daniel D Corkill. Collaborating Software: Blackboard and Multi-Agent Systems & the Future. In Proceedings of
     the International Lisp Conference, New York, New York, October 2003. URL http://mas.cs.umass.edu/
     paper/265.
[14] Ali Dorri, Salil S. Kanhere, and Raja Jurdak. Multi-agent systems: A survey. IEEE Access, 6:28573–28593, 2018.
     doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2831228.
[15] Sana Ebrahimi and Abolfazl Asudeh. A survey on reliability, transparency, accountability, and fairness in LLM-
     based multi-agent systems through the responsibility lens. Preprint, 2025. doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.31600.32001.


                                                        27
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


[16] Florian Ederer and Gustavo Manso. Is pay for performance detrimental to innovation? Management Science, 59
     (7):1496–1513, 2013. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.1120.1683.
[17] European Parliament and the Council of the European Union. Regulation (eu) 2024/1689 of 13 june 2024 laying
     down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intelligence act), 2024. URL https://eur-lex.
     europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj/eng. OJ L, 2024/1689, 12.7.2024.
[18] Ferdinando Fioretto, Enrico Pontelli, and William Yeoh. Distributed constraint optimization problems and
     applications: A survey. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 61:623–698, 2018. doi: 10.1613/jair.5565.
[19] Jakob N. Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli, and Shimon Whiteson. Counter-
     factual multi-agent policy gradients. In Proceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
     (AAAI-18), pages 2974–2982. AAAI Press, 2018. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v32i1.11794.
[20] Kitty Fung, Qizhen Zhang, Chris Lu, Jia Wan, Timon Willi, and Jakob Foerster. Analysing the sample complexity
     of opponent shaping. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
     Systems, AAMAS ’24, page 623–631, Richland, SC, 2024. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
     Multiagent Systems. ISBN 9798400704864.
[21] David K. Gifford. Weighted voting for replicated data. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM Symposium on Operating
     Systems Principles (SOSP), pages 150–162, 1979. doi: 10.1145/800215.806583.
[22] Balint Gyevnar, Cheng Wang, Christopher G. Lucas, Shay B. Cohen, and Stefano V. Albrecht. Causal explanations
     for sequential decision-making in multi-agent systems. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
     on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2024), pages 771–779. International Foundation for
     Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2024. doi: 10.5555/3635637.3662930.
[23] Elad Hazan. Introduction to online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends® in Optimization, 2(3-4):157–
     325, 2016. ISSN 2167-3888. doi: 10.1561/2400000013. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2400000013.
[24] Pablo Hernandez-Leal, Bilal Kartal, and Matthew E Taylor. A survey and critique of multiagent deep reinforcement
     learning. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 33(6):750–797, 2019. doi: 10.1007/s10458-019-09421-1.
[25] Christopher D. Hollander and Annie S. Wu. The current state of normative agent-based systems. Journal of
     Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 14(2):6 (pp. 1–6), 2011. doi: 10.18564/jasss.1750.
[26] Steven R Howard, Aaditya Ramdas, Jon McAuliffe, and Jasjeet Sekhon. Time-uniform chernoff bounds via
     nonnegative supermartingales. Probability Surveys, 17:257–317, 2020. doi: 10.1214/18-PS321.
[27] Anna Jobin, Marcello Ienca, and Effy Vayena. The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines. Nature Machine
     Intelligence, 1(9):389–399, 2019. doi: 10.1038/s42256-019-0088-2.
[28] Don Johnson, Alfred Menezes, and Scott Vanstone. The elliptic curve digital signature algorithm (ecdsa).
     Int. J. Inf. Secur., 1(1):36–63, August 2001. ISSN 1615-5262. doi: 10.1007/s102070100002. URL https:
     //doi.org/10.1007/s102070100002.
[29] Joshua A. Kroll, Joanna Huey, Solon Barocas, Edward W. Felten, Joel R. Reidenberg, David G. Robinson, and
     Harlan Yu. Accountable algorithms. University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 165(3):633–705, 2017. ISSN
     0041-9907. URL https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/penn_law_review/vol165/iss3/3/.
[30] H. Kushner and G.G. Yin. Stochastic Approximation and Recursive Algorithms and Applications. Stochastic
     Modelling and Applied Probability. Springer New York, 2003. ISBN 9780387008943. doi: 10.1007/b97441.
     URL https://books.google.com.sa/books?id=EC2w1SaPb7YC.
[31] Sai Li, Shangding Guo, et al. Byzantine robust cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning as a Bayesian
     game. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. arXiv:2305.12872.
[32] Xinyi Li, Sai Wang, Shuo Zeng, Yan Wu, and Yi Yang. A survey on LLM-based multi-agent systems: workflow,
     infrastructure, and challenges. Vicinagearth, 1(1):9, 2024. doi: 10.1007/s44336-024-00009-2. URL https:
     //doi.org/10.1007/s44336-024-00009-2.
[33] Gary Lorden. Procedures for reacting to a change in distribution. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 42(6):
     1897–1908, 1971. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177693055.
[34] Helmut Lütkepohl. New Introduction to Multiple Time Series Analysis. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005. ISBN
     978-3-540-26239-8. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-27752-1.
[35] Ralph C. Merkle. A certified digital signature. In Gilles Brassard, editor, Advances in Cryptology — CRYPTO’ 89
     Proceedings, pages 218–238, New York, NY, 1990. Springer New York. ISBN 978-0-387-34805-6.


                                                         28
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


[36] Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson, Elena
     Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. Model cards for model reporting. In Proceedings of the
     Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAT* ’19, page 220–229, New York, NY, USA,
     2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450361255. doi: 10.1145/3287560.3287596. URL
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287596.
[37] Brent Mittelstadt. Principles alone cannot guarantee ethical AI. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(11):501–507,
     2019. doi: 10.1038/s42256-019-0114-4.
[38] Andreasa Morris-Martin, Marina De Vos, and Julian Padget. Norm emergence in multiagent systems: a viewpoint
     paper. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 33(6):706–749, November 2019. ISSN 1387-2532. doi:
     10.1007/s10458-019-09422-0. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10458-019-09422-0.
[39] Chunyan Mu and Nir Oren. Measuring responsibility in multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00887,
     2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2411.00887. Under review.
[40] Arun Sukumaran Nair, Tareq Hossen, Mitch Campion, Daisy Flora Selvaraj, Neena Goveas, Naima Kaabouch,
     and Prakash Ranganathan. Multi-agent systems for resource allocation and scheduling in a smart grid. Technology
     and Economics of Smart Grids and Sustainable Energy, 3(15), 2018. doi: 10.1007/s40866-018-0052-y.
[41] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Artificial intelligence risk management framework (ai rmf 1.0).
     Technical Report NIST AI 100-1, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), January 2023. URL
     https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ai/nist.ai.100-1.pdf.
[42] Andrew Y. Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations: Theory and
     application to reward shaping. In ICML, pages 278–287, 1999. doi: 10.5555/645528.657613.
[43] Michael Oesterle, Tim Grams, Christian Bartelt, and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. Raise the bar: Restriction of action
     spaces for improved social welfare and equity in traffic management. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
     Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS ’24, page 1492–1500, Richland, SC, 2024.
     International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. ISBN 9798400704864.
[44] Ninell Oldenburg and Tan Zhi-Xuan. Learning and sustaining shared normative systems via bayesian rule
     induction in markov games. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
     Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2024), pages 1510–1518. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
     Multiagent Systems, 2024. doi: 10.5555/3635637.3663011.
[45] E. S. Page. Continuous inspection schemes. Biometrika, 41(1/2):100–115, 1954. doi: 10.1093/biomet/41.1-2.100.
     URL https://doi.org/10.1093/biomet/41.1-2.100.
[46] Simone Parisi, Montaser Mohammedalamen, Alireza Kazemipour, Matthew E. Taylor, and Michael Bowling.
     Monitored markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Autonomous
     Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2024), pages 771–779. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents
     and Multiagent Systems, 2024. doi: 10.5555/3635637.3663015.
[47] Torsten Paulussen, Armin Heinzl, and Christian Becker. Multi-agent based information systems for patient
     coordination in hospitals. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS 2013),
     2013. URL https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2013/proceedings/HealthcareIS/2.
[48] Jon Perez-Cerrolaza, Jaume Abella, Markus Borg, Carlo Donzella, Jesús Cerquides, Francisco J Cazorla, Cristofer
     Englund, Markus Tauber, George Nikolakopoulos, and Jose Luis Flores. Artificial intelligence for safety-critical
     systems in industrial and transportation domains: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 56(7):1–40, 2024. doi:
     10.1145/3626314.
[49] Jeremy Pitt, Julia Schaumeier, and Alexander Artikis. Axiomatization of socio-economic principles for self-
     organizing institutions: Concepts, experiments and challenges. ACM Transactions on Autonomous and Adaptive
     Systems (TAAS), 7(4), December 2012. ISSN 1556-4665. doi: 10.1145/2382570.2382575. URL https:
     //doi.org/10.1145/2382570.2382575.
[50] K.J. Prabuchandran, Hemanth A.N. Kumar, and Shalabh Bhatnagar. Multi-agent reinforcement learning for traffic
     signal control. In Proceedings of the 17th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems
     (ITSC), pages 2529–2534, 2014. doi: 10.1109/ITSC.2014.6958095.
[51] Iyad Rahwan, Manuel Cebrian, Nick Obradovich, Josh Bongard, Jean-François Bonnefon, Cynthia Breazeal,
     Jacob W. Crandall, Nicholas A. Christakis, Iain D. Couzin, Matthew O. Jackson, Nicholas R. Jennings, Ece
     Kamar, Isabel M. Kloumann, Hugo Larochelle, David Lazer, Richard McElreath, Alan Mislove, David C. Parkes,
     Alex “Sandy” Pentland, Margaret E. Roberts, Azim Shariff, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Michael Wellman. Machine
     behaviour. Nature, 568(7753):477–486, 2019. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1138-y.


                                                         29
Adaptive Accountability in Networked MAS


[52] Shaina Raza, Ranjan Sapkota, Manoj Karkee, and Christos Emmanouilidis. Trism for agentic ai: A review of
     trust, risk, and security management in llm-based agentic multi-agent systems, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
     org/abs/2506.04133.
[53] Siyue Ren, Zhiyao Cui, Ruiqi Song, Zhen Wang, and Shuyue Hu. Emergence of social norms in generative agent
     societies: Principles and architecture. In Kate Larson, editor, Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-24), pages 7895–7903. International Joint Conferences on Artificial
     Intelligence Organization, 8 2024. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2024/874. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.
     2024/874. Human-Centred AI.
[54] Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
     22(3):400–407, 1951. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177729586. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177729586.
[55] Sandip Sen and Stephanie Airiau. Emergence of norms through social learning. In Proceedings of the 20th
     International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI 2007), pages 1507–1512, 2007. doi: 10.5555/
     1625275.1625519.
[56] Marc Serramia, Natalia Criado, and Michael Luck. Multi-user norm consensus. In Proceedings of the 23rd
     International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2024), pages 1683–1691.
     International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2024. doi: 10.5555/3635637.3663029.
[57] Jack Sherman and Winifred J. Morrison. Adjustment of an inverse matrix corresponding to a change in one element
     of a given matrix. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 21(1):124–127, 1950. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177729898.
     URL https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177729898.
[58] Yoav Shoham, Robert Powers, and Trond Grenager. If multi-agent learning is the answer, what is the question?
     Artificial Intelligence, 171:365–377, 2007. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2006.02.006.
[59] Ron Solomon, Yarin Yerushalmi Levi, Lior Vaknin, Eran Aizikovich, Amit Baras, Etai Ohana, Amit Giloni,
     Shamik Bose, Chiara Picardi, Yuval Elovici, and Asaf Shabtai. Lumimas: A comprehensive framework for
     real-time monitoring and enhanced observability in multi-agent systems, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2508.12412.
[60] Peter Stone and Manuela Veloso. Multiagent systems: A survey from a machine learning perspective. Autonomous
     Robots, 8(3):345–383, 2000. doi: 10.1023/A:1008942012299.
[61] Leigh Tesfatsion. Agent-based computational economics: A constructive approach to economic theory. In Leigh
     Tesfatsion and Kenneth L. Judd, editors, Handbook of Computational Economics, volume 2, pages 831–880.
     North-Holland, 2006. doi: 10.1016/S1574-0021(05)02016-2.
[62] Stelios Triantafyllou, Aleksa Sukovic, Yasaman Zolfimoselo, and Goran Radanovic. Counterfactual effect
     decomposition in multi-agent sequential decision making, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.12539.
[63] Sz-Ting Tzeng, Nirav Ajmeri, and Munindar P. Singh. Norm enforcement with a soft touch: Faster emergence,
     happier agents. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
     Systems (AAMAS 2024), pages 1837–1846. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
     Systems, 2024. doi: 10.5555/3635637.3663046.
[64] Ziyan Wang, Yali Du, Yudi Zhang, Meng Fang, and Biwei Huang. MACCA: Offline multi-agent reinforcement
     learning with causal credit assignment. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2025. ISSN 2835-8856.
     URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=gwUOzI4DuV.
[65] Jessica Woodgate, Paul Marshall, and Nirav Ajmeri. Operationalising rawlsian ethics for fairness in norm-learning
     agents. In Proceedings of the 39th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2025), pages 26382–26390.
     AAAI Press, 2025. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v39i25.34837.
[66] Michael Wooldridge. An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems. John Wiley & Sons, 2nd edition, 2009. doi:
     10.1002/9780470519462. URL https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470519462.
[67] Michael Wooldridge and Nicholas R. Jennings. Intelligent agents: Theory and practice. The Knowledge
     Engineering Review, 10(2):115–152, 1995. doi: 10.1017/S0269888900008122.
[68] Lifan Zheng, Jiawei Chen, Qinghong Yin, Jingyuan Zhang, Xinyi Zeng, and Yu Tian. Rethinking the reliability of
     multi-agent system: A perspective from byzantine fault tolerance, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.
     10400.




                                                          30
