                                         Preprint. Under review.




                                         SCOPE: Prompt Evolution for Enhancing Agent Effectiveness

                                              Zehua Pei1 , Hui-Ling Zhen2 , Shixiong Kai2 , Sinno Jialin Pan1 ,
                                             Yunhe Wang2 , Mingxuan Yuan2 , Bei Yu1
                                             1 The Chinese University of Hong Kong    2 Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd




                                                                                  Abstract

                                                   Large Language Model (LLM) agents are increasingly deployed in envi-




arXiv:2512.15374v2 [cs.AI] 28 May 2026
                                                   ronments that generate massive, dynamic contexts. However, a critical
                                                   bottleneck remains: while agents have access to this context, their static
                                                   prompts lack the mechanisms to manage it effectively, leading to recur-
                                                   ring Corrective and Enhancement failures. To address this capability gap,
                                                   we introduce Self-evolving Context Optimization via Prompt Evolution
                                                   (SCOPE). SCOPE frames context management as an online optimization
                                                   problem, synthesizing guidelines from execution traces to automatically
                                                   evolve the agent’s prompt. We propose a Dual-Stream mechanism that
                                                   routes guidelines between tactical memory (immediate error correction)
                                                   and strategic memory, which is continuously refined through conflict reso-
                                                   lution, subsumption pruning, and consolidation. To maximize strategy cov-
                                                   erage, Perspective-Driven Exploration evolves multiple parallel prompts
                                                   guided by distinct optimization perspectives. Experiments on the HLE
                                                   benchmark show that SCOPE improves task success rates from 14.23% to
                                                   38.64% without human intervention. We make our code publicly available
                                                   at https://github.com/JarvisPei/SCOPE.


                                         1     Introduction

                                         The core functionality of a Large Language Model (LLM) agent is to perceive and react to
                                         context. Whether interpreting a user’s ambiguous instruction, analyzing a screen full of
                                         code, or deciphering a traceback from a failed tool execution, the agent’s success depends
                                         entirely on its ability to process this incoming information and decide on the next action. As
                                         agents are tasked with increasingly complex problems, the volume and complexity of this
                                         context grow exponentially, such as in deep research (OpenAI, 2025; Google, 2025; Wei et al.,
                                         2025; Zhang et al., 2025b; Team et al., 2025) and agentic coding (Anthropic, 2025; Jimenez
                                         et al., 2023). Consequently, the definition of a capable agent is shifting from one that simply
                                         knows facts to one that can effectively manage and navigate complex contexts.
                                         However, current research in agentic systems has predominantly focused on the availability
                                         of context rather than how agents manage it. Innovations such as Retrieval-Augmented
                                         Generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020) or infinite context windows (Team et al., 2024) focus
                                         on feeding more data to the agent. We argue that there is a fundamental gap between
                                         possessing context and dealing with context. Even recent test-time learning methods like
                                         DC (Suzgun et al., 2025) or ACE (Zhang et al., 2025a), which attempt to bridge this gap,
                                         operate at task-level granularity and cannot adapt during execution. Without an evolved
                                         internal strategy to interpret these signals, an agent flooded with context is merely an agent
                                         flooded with noise. Figure 1 illustrates this gap: agents receive actionable information in
                                         their context but fail to leverage it effectively.
                                         In this paper, we first substantiate this gap through an extensive analysis of over 1.5
                                         million lines of execution logs from standard agents. Our observations reveal that static
                                         prompts fail to adapt to dynamic context needs, leading to two distinct failure modes. First,
                                         agents suffer from Corrective Failures: when errors occur, agents treat error logs as generic
                                         alarms (signals to retry) rather than actionable feedback containing the solution. In severe
                                         cases, agents fabricate data to proceed rather than managing uncertainty. Second, agents


                                                                                       1
Preprint. Under review.




Figure 1: Two failure modes and how SCOPE addresses them. (a) Corrective Failure:
The agent treats errors as generic alarms, entering error loops despite the error message
containing the solution. SCOPE synthesizes a corrective guideline and integrates it into the
prompt, enabling recovery. (b) Enhancement Failure: The agent persists with suboptimal
strategies (e.g., single-term search) when no error is raised. SCOPE proactively analyzes
successful traces to synthesize optimization guidelines.

exhibit Enhancement Failures: even when operating without errors, agents miss opportunities
to optimize, persisting with suboptimal strategies because their static prompts lack the
mechanism to learn from execution patterns.
These failures are magnified in modern agentic systems, which are composed of special-
ized agents (e.g., coder, browser, analyzer) engaging in long, multi-turn interactions. The
complexity of these systems and the sheer volume of execution steps render static, one-size-
fits-all prompts obsolete. Yet this structure also creates an opportunity: since agents are
invoked repeatedly, their prompts can evolve online.
To address this gap, we propose Self-evolving Context Optimization via Prompt Evolution
(SCOPE), a framework that transforms context management from a manual engineering
task into an automatic optimization process. SCOPE operates on the insight that the agent’s
own execution trace serves as the perfect training signal. Through Trace-Based Guide-
line Synthesis, SCOPE analyzes these traces online to generate guidelines that teach the
agent how to handle specific context patterns. A Dual-Stream Routing mechanism routes
guidelines to tactical (task-specific) or strategic (persistent) memory, where a Memory
Optimization pipeline consolidates, prunes, and resolves conflicts to maintain a compact,
high-quality guideline set. Finally, Perspective-Driven Exploration evolves multiple par-
allel prompts guided by distinct perspectives, maximizing strategy coverage. Empirically,
61% of SCOPE’s synthesized guidelines are proactive enhancements rather than reactive
corrections, confirming that SCOPE functions primarily as an optimizer.
Our contributions are as follows:
       • We systematically study agent failures in modern agentic systems. We identify two
         failure modes, i.e. Corrective Failures and Enhancement Failures, supported by
         analysis of over 1.5 million lines of execution logs.
       • We propose SCOPE, a framework that synthesizes guidelines from execution traces,
         routes them via dual-stream routing with memory optimization, and explores
         diverse strategies through multiple perspectives.
       • We demonstrate that SCOPE significantly outperforms static baselines, raising task
         success rates on the challenging HLE benchmark from 14.23% to 38.64% and on
         GAIA from 32.73% to 56.97%.
2   Observations and Motivation

We analyzed over 1.5 million lines of execution logs from baseline agents on the GAIA (Mi-
alon et al., 2023) and DeepSearch (Chen et al., 2025) benchmarks. Our findings reveal that
agents often have the information needed to succeed, but their static prompts lack the
mechanism to learn from execution feedback. We categorize failures into two modes based
on their trigger: Corrective Failures occur when errors provide explicit signals that agents fail
to act upon, while Enhancement Failures occur when agents miss opportunities to optimize


                                               2
Preprint. Under review.

                                                                                      Tactical Stream

                                Synthesis & Selection

                                                    Best-of-N                                Tactical
        Execution   Guideline        Candidates     Selector                                 Memory
          Trace     Generator



                                                                                 Optimizer
                                                                                                        Optimized
                                                                    Classifier
                                                                                                         Prompt


                                                    Optimal                              Strategic
                                                    Guideline                            Memory




                                                                                     Strategic Stream


Figure 2: Overview of the SCOPE Framework. The Generator (πϕ ) synthesizes candidate
guidelines from execution traces. A Selector (πσ ) chooses the best guideline, which is
then routed by the Classifier (πγ ) to either Tactical (task-specific) or Strategic (persistent)
memory. The Optimizer (πω ) consolidates the strategic memory.

even in the absence of errors. Figure 1 illustrates both failure modes and how SCOPE
addresses them through trace-based guideline synthesis.


2.1   Failure Modes in Agentic Systems

Corrective Failures. When errors occur, execution traces contain explicit signals (error
messages, stack traces, valid argument lists) that should guide correction. However, static
agents treat these as generic “alarms” rather than actionable feedback. We observed over
70 instances where agents misused tools despite the error message explicitly listing valid
usage, creating error loops where agents acknowledge failures but repeat the same action.
In severe cases, agents respond to errors by fabricating data (e.g., “Let’s assume the file
contains...”), i.e. a catastrophic failure to manage uncertainty.
Enhancement Failures. A subtler failure mode occurs when agents miss optimization
opportunities even without explicit errors. Agents demonstrate rigid behavior: when
search results are poor, context often implies synonyms would help (e.g., “base on balls” vs.
“walks”), yet agents persist with single keywords. We also observed silent quality issues,
where agents misinterpreting domain concepts (e.g., confusing Eulerian and Hamiltonian
paths) because static prompts provide no mechanism for additional verification.
Complexity of Modern Agentic Systems. Modern benchmarks demand long, multi-
role interactions: successful GAIA trajectories average 16.4 steps, with complex tasks
exceeding 30 turns. Furthermore, systems comprise specialized sub-agents (e.g., browser,
analyzer) with distinct failure patterns, e.g. the Web Search agent drives suboptimal strategy
errors while the Analyzer accounts for silent quality issues. This heterogeneity implies
optimization must be agent-specific. However, this structure also creates an opportunity:
agents are invoked repeatedly, forming a natural loop for online learning if lessons can
be encoded into their prompts. A detailed taxonomy of failure patterns is provided in
Appendix A.


2.2   From Limitations to Solution

Existing Methods and Their Limitations. Prior work on improving agent performance falls
into three categories, each with fundamental limitations for modern agentic systems.
Memory-augmented methods accumulate strategies into a playbook incorporated into the
solver’s prompt. Examples include Dynamic Cheatsheet (DC) (Suzgun et al., 2025), Agentic
Context Engineering (ACE) (Zhang et al., 2025a), and ReasoningBank (Ouyang et al., 2025).
These methods are designed for single-query question answering with custom solvers.
They operate at task-level granularity, i.e. reflecting after each task attempt to update the
playbook. This means an agent cannot adapt during a difficult task; if it fails at step 5 of a
30-step task, it must complete (or abandon) the entire task before learning. Furthermore,
they maintain a one-for-all playbook that mixes strategies across scenarios and agent roles.


                                                                3
Preprint. Under review.




In-context correction methods feed errors and self-generated feedback back into the agent’s
context to guide future steps. Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) is a classical example, with
related approaches including Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023) and ReAct (Yao et al., 2022).
These mechanisms can be adapted to agent systems. However, feedback is appended to
the conversation history rather than integrated into the agent’s instructions. The agent
must infer corrections from this feedback, which often leads to error loops where the agent
acknowledges mistakes but repeats them. We characterize this as an alarm-based approach:
the agent is alerted to errors but not taught how to fix them.
Offline prompt optimization methods search for better prompts before deployment using
training sets or evolutionary algorithms. Classical examples include OPRO (Yang et al.,
2023), DSPy (Khattab et al., 2023), and GEPA (Agrawal et al., 2025). While these methods
create strong initial prompts, the resulting prompt remains static during inference. If the
agent encounters novel contexts or error patterns not represented in the training set, it
cannot adapt.
Notably, all existing methods operate at task-level granularity: offline methods (OPRO,
DSPy) optimize before deployment, while online methods (DC, ACE) update only between
tasks. None adapts the agent’s prompt during execution, nor provides mechanisms for
memory quality control or strategy diversification.
Our Insight: Prompt Evolution for Agents. We propose a fundamentally different ap-
proach that leverages the structural properties of agentic systems. Rather than accumulating
external strategies (memory-augmented), relying on in-context inference (alarm-based),
or optimizing offline (static), we treat the agent’s prompt as an evolvable parameter that
improves from execution traces online. Since agents are invoked repeatedly, their prompts
can evolve throughout execution, where each invocation is an opportunity to apply learned
guidelines. Guidelines synthesized from traces are integrated directly into each agent’s
prompt, teaching the agent how to handle specific situations rather than hoping it infers
corrections. This approach naturally enables step-level adaptation, where the prompt is
updated during execution to allow recovery from mid-task failures, and per-agent opti-
mization, where each agent role evolves its own prompt based on role-specific patterns.
Empirical validation of these design choices is provided in Appendix G.
Problem Formulation. We formalize this as a prompt optimization problem. Consider
an agent whose behavior is governed by a prompt θ. The execution generates a trace
τt containing actions and observations. We treat τt as a learning signal, i.e. similar to
how gradients guide optimization, where errors and suboptimal behaviors indicate how
θ should be updated. Since the prompt space is discrete, we cannot compute gradients
directly. Instead, we synthesize a natural language guideline gt from the trace τt :
                                      θ t +1 = θ t ⊕ g t                                 (1)
where θt is the current prompt, gt is the synthesized guideline, and ⊕ denotes integration.
This formulation shifts from static prompt engineering to self-evolving prompts that enhance
agent effectiveness.


3     Methodology

We introduce Self-evolving Context Optimization via Prompt Evolution (SCOPE), a frame-
work that implements the prompt optimization formulated in Section 2. SCOPE evolves
the prompt θ in response to the execution trace τ, synthesizing guidelines that improve
agent effectiveness. Our framework, illustrated in Figure 2, consists of four components:
(1) Guideline Synthesis, (2) Dual-Stream Routing, (3) Memory Optimization, and (4)
Perspective-Driven Exploration. The complete procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1.

3.1   Guideline Synthesis

The core of SCOPE is synthesizing guidelines from the execution trace. We use a generator
πϕ to produce candidate guidelines, followed by a selector πσ to choose the best one.


                                              4
Preprint. Under review.




Corrective Synthesis. When the agent encounters an error, the generator analyzes the trace
using corrective rubrics Icorr (see Appendix F.1) to synthesize corrective guidelines:
                                     g = πϕ (τt , θt , Icorr ).                         (2)
Conditioning on θt avoids redundant updates (e.g., re-learning an existing guideline).
Enhancement Synthesis. When execution
succeeds but appears suboptimal, the gen-           Algorithm 1 SCOPE: Self-Evolving Prompt
erator uses enhancement rubrics Ienh (see           Optimization
Appendix F.1) to identify inefficiencies and
synthesize enhancement guidelines:                  Input: Task, Base Prompt θbase , Strategic Memory
                                                      Mstrat , Rubrics I
            g = πϕ (τt , θt , Ienh ).     (3)       Output: Completed Task, Updated Mstrat
                                                      Init Mtact ← ∅, θt ← θbase ⊕Mstrat
Best-of-N Selection. To reduce variance,              while Task not completed do
the generator produces N candidates G =                  Execute with θt , update τt
{ g1 , . . . , g N }. A selector πσ then chooses         if Error or Sub-task completion then
the best guideline according to selection                   // 1. Guideline Synthesis
rubrics Isel (see Appendix F.1):                            G ← πϕ (τt , θt , Icorr/enh )
                   g∗ = πσ ( G, θt , Isel ).  (4)           g∗ ← πσ ( G, θt , Isel )
                                                            // 2. Classification & Routing
                                                            (c, conf) ← πγ ( g∗ , θt , Icls )
3.2   Dual-Stream Routing                                   if c = Tact. OR conf < cthresh then
                                                                Mtact ← Mtact ∪ { g∗ }
After synthesis, each guideline g∗ is routed                else
to one of two memory streams based on                           Mstrat ← πω (Mstrat ∪{ g∗ })
its scope. We maintain a strategic memory                   end if
Mstrat = { g1 , g2 , . . .} for long-term guide-            // 3. Update Prompt
lines and a tactical memory Mtact for task-                 θt+1 ← θbase ⊕Mstrat ⊕Mtact
                                                         end if
specific guidelines.
                                                      end while
A classifier πγ evaluates the guideline’s gen-
erality and assigns a confidence score according to classification rubrics Icls (see Ap-
pendix F.2):
                                  (c, conf) = πγ ( g∗ , θt , Icls ),                  (5)
where c ∈ {Tactical, Strategic} and conf ∈ [0, 1].
Tactical Stream. Guidelines classified as tactical, or strategic with low confidence (conf <
cthresh ), are added to the tactical memory:
                                      Mtact ← Mtact ∪ { g∗ }.                             (6)
These guidelines are valid only for the current task.
Strategic Stream. High-confidence guidelines (conf ≥ cthresh ) identifying general principles
are added to the strategic memory:
                                  Mstrat ← Mstrat ∪ { g∗ }.                               (7)
These guidelines persist across tasks.
The prompt evolves by combining both memories:
                               θt+1 = θbase ⊕ Mstrat ⊕ Mtact ,                                    (8)
where θbase is the initial prompt before any guidelines are added.

3.3   Memory Optimization

Unconstrained growth of Mstrat can dilute the agent’s attention with redundant or conflict-
ing guidelines. We apply an optimizer πω , which is a multi-step pipeline (see Appendix F.3
for complete rubrics), to consolidate the memory:
                                Mstrat ← πω (Mstrat ∪ { g∗ }).                          (9)
The pipeline consists of three steps: (1) Conflict Resolution: merging contradictory guide-
lines. (2) Subsumption Pruning: removing specific guidelines covered by general ones. (3)
Consolidation: merging similar guidelines into comprehensive ones. See Appendix D.3 for
a concrete example.


                                                    5
Preprint. Under review.




3.4   Perspective-Driven Exploration

A single evolved prompt may converge to a strategy that works well on some tasks but
poorly on others. To increase coverage, we initialize K parallel streams with distinct “Per-
spectives” (e.g., Efficiency vs. Thoroughness), each evolving its own prompt θ k . At test time,
we select the best result:
                                 Success = max Eval(θ k , task),                             (10)
                                          k ∈{1..K }

where Eval(θ k , task) returns whether the agent with prompt θ k successfully completes the
task. This allows the system to leverage diverse strategies for different problem types.


4     Experiments

4.1   Experimental Setup

Baseline Agent System. We implement a hierarchical agent system with a planning agent
that delegates to specialized subordinate agents (web search, analyzer, browser), each
equipped with domain-specific tools. We use Gemini-2.5-Pro for the web search and analyzer
agents, and GPT-4.1 for the planning and browser agents. Details are in Appendix B.
Benchmarks. We evaluate on three benchmarks representative of the Deep Research
paradigm (OpenAI, 2025; Google, 2025), i.e. autonomous agents that perform multi-step web
research, tool use, and information synthesis: HLE (Phan et al., 2025) (2,500 expert-level ques-
tions), GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023) (165 multi-tool reasoning tasks), and DeepSearch (Chen
et al., 2025) (multi-hop retrieval and cross-document synthesis). Details are in Appendix C.
SCOPE Configuration. We configure SCOPE with N = 2 candidates for Best-of-N synthesis
and K = 2 parallel streams (Efficiency and Thoroughness) for global exploration. The
strategic memory is capped at 10 guidelines per domain, triggering consolidation when
exceeded, with a confidence threshold of 0.85 for promotion. All SCOPE components
(Generator, Selector, Classifier, Optimizer) utilize GPT-4.1. Additionally, we implement
Agent-Specific Optimization, step-level updates, and place Synthesized guidelines in the
system prompt (see Section 4.3 for ablation). Detailed hyperparameter settings are in
Appendix D.
Prompt Optimization Baselines. We compare SCOPE against two recent prompt optimiza-
tion methods: (1) Dynamic Cheatsheet (DC) (Suzgun et al., 2025): A test-time learning
framework that endows LLMs with persistent, evolving memory. We implement the DC-Cu
variant, which cumulatively updates memory after processing each input. (2) Agentic
Context Engineering (ACE) (Zhang et al., 2025a): A playbook-based learning approach
that maintains bullet-point strategies across predefined categories and updates them via a
reflector-curator loop. We implement ACE adapting it to our baseline agent system with
step-level granularity for fair comparison.

4.2   Overall Performance and Ablation

Table 1 and Table 2 present the main experimental results and component analysis. All
methods are evaluated with two independent runs per task; a task is considered solved if ei-
ther run succeeds (Pass@2). SCOPE establishes a new state-of-the-art across all benchmarks,
significantly outperforming both the static baseline and recent optimization methods like
DC (Suzgun et al., 2025) and ACE (Zhang et al., 2025a). On the expert-level HLE benchmark,
SCOPE more than doubles the baseline performance (38.64% vs. 14.23%).
The ablation study (Table 2) confirms that every component contributes to this success.
While the basic Guideline Generator provides the initial boost (+4.85%), the largest gain
comes from our Perspective-Driven Exploration (K = 2), which adds 10.91%. This un-
derscores that a single context management strategy is insufficient; maintaining diverse
optimization streams (Efficiency and Thoroughness) is critical for robust performance across
heterogeneous tasks.


                                                6
Preprint. Under review.

Table 1: Performance comparison on three                      Table 2: Ablation study on GAIA. Each row
challenging agent benchmarks.                                 adds a component cumulatively.

 Method                      HLE     GAIA    DeepSearch        Configuration               Acc. (%)     ∆
 Base Models
                                                               Baseline Agent (Static)      32.73       -
 GPT-4.1                     6.00     8.48      4.00           + Guideline Generator        37.58     +4.85
 Gemini-2.5-Pro              18.76   26.67     19.00
                                                               + Dual-Stream Routing        41.21     +3.63
 Agent Systems                                                 + Best-of-N Selection        44.24     +3.03
 Baseline Agent              14.23   32.73     14.00           + Memory Optimization        46.06     +1.82
 DC (Suzgun et al., 2025)    18.44   35.76     21.00           + Perspective Exploration    56.97     +10.91
 ACE (Zhang et al., 2025a)   23.72   38.18     23.00
 SCOPE                       38.64   56.97     32.00


4.3   Guideline Placement: System Prompt vs. User Prompt

Table 3 compares four placement strate- Table 3: Impact of guideline placement on
gies on GAIA: (1) all in system prompt, GAIA. All placements reduce errors vs. baseline
(2) all in user prompt, (3) split (strategic (15–42%), but system prompt achieves the best
in system, tactical in user), and (4) hy- accuracy.
brid (saved in system, online in user). A
counter-intuitive finding emerges: system      Placement         Acc. (%)   Errors     Max Steps Steps
prompt placement achieves the highest ac- Baseline                32.73      1,714       255     9,824
curacy (46.06%) despite more tasks hitting     (1) System Prompt  46.06   1,461 (-15%)   227     7,430
the step limit than user prompt (227 vs. (2)       User Prompt
                                               (3) Split
                                                                  41.21
                                                                  35.76
                                                                          1,000 (-42%)
                                                                          1,204 (-30%)
                                                                                         130
                                                                                         141
                                                                                                 7,408
                                                                                                 7,319
130). We hypothesize that system prompt        (4) Hybrid         43.64   1,109 (-35%)   139     6,620
guidelines act as implicit background guid-
ance, allowing the agent to internalize guidelines and explore more solution paths. Con-
versely, user prompt placement leads to over-compliance—the agent follows instructions
too strictly, terminating early rather than continuing exploration, which results in fewer
errors but lower task success. The split strategy performs worst (35.76%), as distributing
guidelines across both prompts creates conflicting priorities. Detailed analysis: Appendix H.

4.4   Model Choice and Computational Overhead

A practical deployment question is which model to use for SCOPE’s components (Generator,
Classifier, Optimizer). Since our baseline agent uses both GPT-4.1 and Gemini-2.5-Pro for
different roles, we evaluate three configurations: (1) all components use GPT-4.1, (2) all use
Gemini-2.5-Pro, and (3) each meta-agent uses the same model as the base agent it optimizes.
Table 4 reveals a surprising finding: all three configurations achieve nearly identical per-
formance (within 1.2%), despite Gemini generating 46% more guidelines than GPT-4.1.
This suggests that guideline quality matters more than quantity, i.e. SCOPE’s selection and
optimization mechanisms effectively filter for useful guidelines regardless of how many
candidates are generated. This robustness to model choice simplifies deployment, allowing
practitioners to select meta-agent models based on cost or latency rather than accuracy
concerns. Further analysis of guideline distribution patterns is provided in Appendix J.
Table 5 presents a detailed overhead analysis on 100 HLE samples. SCOPE adds only
4.2% more API calls compared to the baseline. While prompt tokens increase 152% due
to accumulated guidelines, completion tokens decrease by 38.6%, indicating fewer wasted
reasoning turns. Notably, SCOPE’s synthesis runs asynchronously, adding zero wall-clock
latency per step, unlike the reflection baseline, which adds ∼10s per step and uses 108%
more API calls yet scores only 16.00 vs. SCOPE’s 36.00, confirming that gains stem from
what is learned, not how much is computed.

4.5   SCOPE Enhances Robustness in Long-Horizon Domains

Figure 3 breaks down performance by subcategory. On HLE, the largest gains are in
knowledge-intensive domains: Biology/Medicine (14.9% → 43.2%) and Chemistry (14.1%
→ 50.3%), where specialized tool errors are common and SCOPE’s domain-specific guide-
lines enable recovery. On GAIA Level 3 tasks, i.e. the longest trajectories with most noise,
SCOPE achieves 30.8% vs 23.1%, confirming that dynamic prompts prevent error propaga-
tion and maintain coherence in long-horizon scenarios.


                                                          7
Preprint. Under review.

Table 4: Model choice for SCOPE’s                                                                                              Table 5: Computational overhead on 100 HLE sam-
meta-agents on GAIA.                                                                                                           ples.
 Meta-Agent Model                                Acc. (%)             Guidelines                  Avg. Len.                     Method                           HLE Acc.        API Calls   Prompt Tok.     Compl. Tok.         Synth. Lat.
 All GPT-4.1                                       46.06                     111                  380 chars                     Baseline                          15.00         1,119            4.9M           469K                  —
 All Gemini-2.5-Pro                                46.67                     163                  426 chars                     Baseline+Refl.                    16.00      2,331 (+108%)   14.9M (+203%)    432K (−8%)         ∼10s/step
 Same as Base Agent                                45.45                     108                  397 chars                     SCOPE                             36.00      1,166 (+4.2%)   12.4M (+152%)   288K (−38.6%)       +0s (async)



                                                               (a) HLE Benchmark                                                                                                       (b) GAIA Benchmark
                   60
                                                                                                                               Baseline                     80                                                               Baseline
                                                 50.3                                                                                                                        71.7
                   50                                                                                                          Ours                                                                                          Ours
                                 43.2                                                      44.8

                   40
                                                                                                          40.4                                              60                                        55.8



    Accuracy (%)                                                                                                                             Accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                      36.0
                                                                                                                                                                    47.2
                                                                                                                        31.3
                   30                                                        28.8
                                                               26.6                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30.8
                   20                                                                              17.7                                                                                      26.7
                          14.9                                                                                                                                                                                      23.1
                                          14.1                                      14.3
                                                         9.8                                                     10.0          11.2                         20
                   10                                                  5.5

                    0                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                       Level 1                  Level 2                Level 3
                   MeBiol
                                          y
                                        ist             /A I            eer i                 Ma
                                                                                                   th        ysics         Ot
                                                                                                                               r
                     dic ogy      em
                                            r      CS             Hu ng
                                                                 So man                                    Ph                he
                        ine /   Ch                             gin cia iti
                                                                      l S es/
                                                          En             ci.

Figure 3: Performance breakdown by subcategory on HLE (a) and GAIA (b). SCOPE (coral)
consistently outperforms the baseline (blue) across all domains.

Additional experiments confirm that SCOPE generalizes to single-agent coding (SWE-bench
Verified (Jimenez et al., 2023), +8.2 points; Appendix K.1) and scales with stronger frontier
models (GPT-5.4, +17.5 points; Appendix K.2).


5              Analysis

5.1                Mitigating Agentic Fragility via Dual-Mode Synthesis

A counter-intuitive finding in Table 1 is that the Baseline Agent underperforms raw Gemini-
2.5-Pro on HLE (14.23% vs. 18.76%) and DeepSearch (14.00% vs. 19.00%). While agentic
wrappers enable tool use, they introduce structural fragility: repeated tool errors or infinite
loops can cause a capable model to fail tasks it could answer zero-shot. Table 3 quantifies
this on GAIA: the baseline accumulates 1,714 errors across 165 tasks.
SCOPE addresses this fragility through two complementary synthesis modes: Corrective
(reactive error correction) and Enhancement (proactive optimization from successful pat-
terns). For instance, a NameError triggers a corrective guideline (“Define all variables in
code snippets”), while a successful search triggers an enhancement guideline (“Try search
term variants”). The corrective mode enables real-time “debugging”, where synthesizing
guidelines from failure traces reduces errors by 15–42% depending on placement strategy
(Table 3), explaining why SCOPE exceeds base model capabilities.
Crucially, Table 6 shows that enhancement guidelines constitute 61% of all synthesized
guidelines, demonstrating that SCOPE is predominantly an optimizer rather than merely an
error debugger. This prevalence of proactive guidelines explains why SCOPE continues to
improve even when error rates are low, i.e. it codifies successful patterns to prevent potential
failures before they occur.


5.2                Guideline Compliance: Do Agents Follow Synthesized Guidelines?

A critical question is whether synthesized guidelines actually influence agent behavior.
Figure 4 (Appendix) illustrates what we term language adoption: after SCOPE synthesizes
a guideline recommending “plausible label synonyms and phrase variants”, the agent’s
subsequent output incorporates this exact phrasing verbatim. This direct linguistic transfer
provides strong evidence that guidelines are actively integrated into the agent’s decision-
making, not merely stored. Beyond linguistic adoption, we observe immediate behavioral
changes (typically within seconds) following guideline synthesis, demonstrating real-time
adaptation within a single episode.


                                                                                                                                             8
Preprint. Under review.

Table 6: Distribution of synthesized guide- Table 7: Performance of individual perspec-
lines by mode and domain on GAIA. En- tives vs. Global Ensemble on GAIA. Low over-
hancement guidelines (61%) dominate.        lap (33.94%) validates diverse optimization.

 Domain                 Corrective   Enhancement   Total       Perspective       Lv.1    Lv.2    Lv.3    Total
 Analysis Methodology       9            22         31
 Tool Usage                15            13         28         Efficiency        60.38   40.70   26.92   44.85
 Data Validation            8            15         23         Thoroughness      60.38   47.67   11.54   46.06
 Efficiency                 2            16         18
 Error Handling             9             2         11         Intersection      49.06   32.56    7.69   33.94
 Total                  43 (39%)       68 (61%)    111         Global Ensemble   71.70   55.81   30.77   56.97


5.3      Perspective Divergence in Guideline Synthesis

Table 7 validates our Perspective-Driven Exploration design by analyzing the two perspec-
tives. While both streams achieve similar total accuracy (44.85% vs 46.06%), their intersection
is only 33.94%, i.e. approximately 23% of solved problems are unique to one perspective.
Notably, Efficiency outperforms on Level 3 tasks (26.92% vs 11.54%), suggesting concise
context management is more effective for complex, long-horizon tasks, while Thoroughness
excels at Level 2. Global Ensemble captures the union of strengths.
This quantitative divergence stems from fundamentally different guideline strategies. As
illustrated in Figure 5 (Appendix), when the browser agent encounters access denials (HTTP
403), the Efficiency stream learns to “fail-over fast” by escalating to the web search agent,
while the Thoroughness stream synthesizes guidelines to “find alternate sources” (e.g.,
Archive.org). This duality allows SCOPE to handle both time-constrained and deep retrieval
tasks. A detailed qualitative comparison is provided in Appendix I.


6     Related Work

Context Augmentation and Compression. The primary challenge in agentic workflows
is handling extensive information. Traditional approaches address this via retrieval and
compression. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020) fetches relevant
context, while methods like LLMLingua (Jiang et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2025) optimize effi-
ciency via compression. They focus on what context to provide, whereas SCOPE focuses on
how the agent processes context by evolving prompt.
Prompt Optimization. A significant body of work focuses on prompt engineering. Offline
methods like OPRO (Yang et al., 2023), DSPy (Khattab et al., 2023), and GEPA (Agrawal
et al., 2025) search for optimal prompts before deployment using training sets. While these
create strong initializations, the resulting prompt remains static during inference. SCOPE
complements these by enabling online adaptation: the prompt evolves during execution
based on step-level feedback.
Agent Memory and Learning. Recent work gives agents persistent memory to accumulate
experience. Memory-augmented methods like DC (Suzgun et al., 2025), ACE (Zhang et al.,
2025a), and ReasoningBank (Ouyang et al., 2025) build external strategy libraries. In-context
correction methods like Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) and Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023)
feed feedback into the context. As discussed in Section 2.2, they face limitations in agentic
settings: task-level granularity, one-for-all memory, and alarm-based correction. SCOPE
addresses these with step-level adaptation, per-agent optimization, and prompt evolution.


7     Conclusion

We introduced SCOPE, a framework that enables prompt evolution for enhancing agent
effectiveness. By treating execution traces as learning signals, SCOPE synthesizes guidelines
that are integrated directly into agent prompts, enabling step-level adaptation and per-
agent optimization. Experiments on HLE and GAIA demonstrate that SCOPE significantly
outperforms static baselines and existing methods, more than doubling success rates in
expert-level domains. Our findings suggest a new direction: rather than engineering static
prompts, we should enable agents to evolve their own prompts online.


                                                           9
Preprint. Under review.




References
Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-
  Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, et al. Gepa:
  Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2507.19457, 2025.
Anthropic. Claude code. 2025.
Kaiyuan Chen, Yixin Ren, Yang Liu, Xiaobo Hu, Haotong Tian, Tianbao Xie, Fangfu Liu,
  Haoye Zhang, Hongzhang Liu, Yuan Gong, et al. xbench: Tracking agents productivity
  scaling with profession-aligned real-world evaluations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13651,
  2025.
Google.       Deep research is now available on gemini 2.5 pro experimental.
 https://blog.google/products/gemini/deep-research-gemini-2-5-pro-experimental/, 2025.
Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. Llmlingua: Com-
 pressing prompts for accelerated inference of large language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2310.05736, 2023.
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and
  Karthik Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770, 2023.
Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam,
 Sri Vardhamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T Joshi, Hanna Moazam, et al.
 Dspy: Compiling declarative language model calls into self-improving pipelines. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2310.03714, 2023.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
  Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-
  augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 33:9459–9474, 2020.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe,
 Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative
 refinement with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:
 46534–46594, 2023.
Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom.
  Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2023.
OpenAI. Deep research system card. https://cdn.openai.com/deep-research-system-card.pdf, 2025.
Siru Ouyang, Jun Yan, I Hsu, Yanfei Chen, Ke Jiang, Zifeng Wang, Rujun Han, Long T Le,
  Samira Daruki, Xiangru Tang, et al. Reasoningbank: Scaling agent self-evolving with
  reasoning memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25140, 2025.
Long Phan, Alice Gatti, Ziwen Han, Nathaniel Li, Josephina Hu, Hugh Zhang, Chen
  Bo Calvin Zhang, Mohamed Shaaban, John Ling, Sean Shi, et al. Humanity’s last exam.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14249, 2025.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao.
 Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 36:8634–8652, 2023.
Weiwei Sun, Miao Lu, Zhan Ling, Kang Liu, Xuesong Yao, Yiming Yang, and Jiecao Chen.
 Scaling long-horizon llm agent via context-folding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11967, 2025.
Mirac Suzgun, Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. Dynamic
 cheatsheet: Test-time learning with adaptive memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07952,
 2025.


                                             10
Preprint. Under review.




Gemini Team, Petko Georgiev, Ving Ian Lei, Ryan Burnell, Libin Bai, Anmol Gulati, Garrett
 Tanzer, Damien Vincent, Zhufeng Pan, Shibo Wang, et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multi-
  modal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530,
  2024.
Tongyi DeepResearch Team, Baixuan Li, Bo Zhang, Dingchu Zhang, Fei Huang, Guangyu
  Li, Guoxin Chen, Huifeng Yin, Jialong Wu, Jingren Zhou, et al. Tongyi deepresearch
  technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24701, 2025.
Jason Wei, Zhiqing Sun, Spencer Papay, Scott McKinney, Jeffrey Han, Isa Fulford,
  Hyung Won Chung, Alex Tachard Passos, William Fedus, and Amelia Glaese. Browsec-
  omp: A simple yet challenging benchmark for browsing agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2504.12516, 2025.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and
 Xinyun Chen. Large language models as optimizers. In The Twelfth International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2023.
John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik R
  Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated
  software engineering. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15793.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and
  Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh
  international conference on learning representations, 2022.
Qizheng Zhang, Changran Hu, Shubhangi Upasani, Boyuan Ma, Fenglu Hong, Vamsid-
  har Kamanuru, Jay Rainton, Chen Wu, Mengmeng Ji, Hanchen Li, et al. Agentic con-
  text engineering: Evolving contexts for self-improving language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2510.04618, 2025a.
Wentao Zhang, Ce Cui, Yilei Zhao, Rui Hu, Yang Liu, Yahui Zhou, and Bo An. Agentorches-
 tra: A hierarchical multi-agent framework for general-purpose task solving. arXiv e-prints,
 pp. arXiv–2506, 2025b.




                                             11
Preprint. Under review.




Appendix Overview
This appendix provides supplementary materials organized as follows:

• Appendix A: Detailed Analysis of Baseline Failure Modes — Comprehensive taxonomy
  and examples of agent failures from over 1.5 million lines of execution logs.
• Appendix B: Baseline Agent System Details — Architecture and configuration of our
  hierarchical multi-agent system.
• Appendix C: Benchmark Details — Description of HLE, GAIA, and DeepSearch evalua-
  tion benchmarks.
• Appendix D: Hyperparameter Settings — Complete hyperparameters, domain cate-
  gories, optimization pipeline details, and a concrete memory optimization example.
• Appendix E: Perspective-Driven Exploration Details — Implementation of Efficiency
  and Thoroughness optimization streams.
• Appendix F: Complete System Prompts — Full rubrics for all meta-agents (Generator,
  Selector, Classifier, Optimizer).
• Appendix G: Per-Agent Specialization and Step-Level Updates — Empirical validation
  of per-agent and step-level design choices.
• Appendix H: Guideline Placement Analysis — Deep dive into system vs. user prompt
  placement effects.
• Appendix I: Qualitative Comparison of Perspective Streams — Detailed strategy pat-
  terns for Efficiency vs. Thoroughness streams.
• Appendix J: Model Choice for Meta-Agents — Detailed analysis of how different model
  choices affect guideline generation patterns.
• Appendix K: Additional Experiments — Single-agent evaluation (SWE-bench), stronger
  model evaluation (GPT-5.4), hyperparameter sensitivity (N, K, threshold), and step
  budget ablation.




A     Detailed Analysis of Baseline Failure Modes
In this appendix, we provide a more granular analysis of the failure patterns observed in the
baseline agent logs. Our dataset consists of over 1.5 million lines of execution traces from
the GAIA and DeepSearch benchmarks. We categorize these failures into two modes based
on their trigger: Corrective Failures (error-triggered) and Enhancement Failures (optimization
opportunities when no error occurs). Table 8 provides a summary taxonomy.

A.1     Corrective Failures: Systematic Error Repetition

A.1.1    Persistent Tool Misuse
A recurring pattern in our logs is the agent’s inability to internalize tool schema constraints
even after explicit feedback.

        • Incorrect Tool Identifiers: In 70 recorded instances, the agent attempted to call
          a tool using a generic name (e.g., final answer) instead of the specific identifier
          defined in the environment (e.g., final answer tool). Despite the environment
          returning an error message listing the valid tools, the agent failed to update its
          behavior in subsequent steps.
        • Parameter Hallucination: We observed 29 cases where the agent hallucinated
          parameters for planning tools. For example, it repeatedly passed a “notes” argument
          to a function that only accepted a task description, causing execution failures. The
          static prompt provided no mechanism to “remember” that this parameter was
          invalid.


                                              12
Preprint. Under review.




Table 8: Taxonomy of agent failures observed in over 1.5 million lines of baseline agent
logs. The agent often has the necessary information in its context but fails to translate it into
correct actions due to a static instruction set.

      C ATEGORY              FAILURE PATTERN           D ESCRIPTION                                                    C OUNT
                             Tool Misuse               Context shows instructions, but agent uses generic actions         >70
                             Constraint Neglect        Context lists allowed resources; agent ignores list and re-   Recurrent
      Corrective Failures
                                                       tries forbidden ones
                             Parameter Hallucination   Context defines arguments, but agent invents non-existent           29
                                                       ones
                             Error Loop                Context shows error message, agent repeats action without      Multiple
                                                       modification
                             Redundant Verification    Agent re-verifies facts already present and confirmed in             –
      Enhancement Failures                             context
                             Single-Term Bias          Context implies broad search needed; agent sticks to single   Recurrent
                                                       keyword
                             Generic Strategy          Agent persists with inefficient strategy despite context      Recurrent
                                                       clues
                             Data Fabrication          Agent invents data when retrieval context is empty/failed     Recurrent
      Severe Cases
                             Domain Misconception      Agent misinterprets technical context due to lack of do-      Recurrent
                                                       main guidelines




A.1.2      Ignored Environmental Constraints
The agent frequently encountered environment-specific restrictions (e.g., forbidden libraries)
but failed to learn from them.

        • Forbidden Imports: When the agent attempted to import restricted Python libraries
          (e.g., pandas), the environment returned a ModuleNotFoundError or a security ex-
          ception, often accompanied by a whitelist of allowed libraries (e.g., collections,
          re). In multiple traces, the agent ignored this whitelist and simply attempted to
          import a different forbidden library in the next step, demonstrating a complete lack
          of adaptation to the explicitly stated constraints.
        • Repeated Timeouts: In 310 instances, the agent reached the maximum step limit.
          Analysis of these traces reveals that the agent often entered infinite loops of “try-
          fail-retry” using the exact same parameters, rather than switching strategies after a
          timeout warning.

A.2      Enhancement Failures: Suboptimal Behavioral Patterns

A.2.1      Inefficiency and Redundancy
Even when the agent succeeded, its path to the solution was often highly inefficient.

        • Redundant Verification: The agent’s plans consistently included steps to “cross-
          check results” or “verify with an additional source”, even for simple retrieval
          tasks where the primary source was authoritative. This heuristic, likely derived
          from safety-focused pre-training, inflated token costs and execution time without
          improving accuracy.
        • Extreme Verbosity: We observed a tendency for the agent to wrap simple numeric
          or boolean answers in verbose explanations. In extreme cases, a single-digit an-
          swer was accompanied by over 1,000 tokens of methodological description and
          hypothetical context, wasting computational resources.
        • Sequential Querying Anti-Pattern: For tasks involving multiple similar entities
          (e.g., “Find salaries for Players A, B, and C”), the agent consistently executed N
          separate tool calls rather than a single batched query. This multiplied the latency
          and token costs linearly with the number of entities.

A.2.2      Search and Retrieval Bias
We identified a prevalent “Single-Terminology Bias” in the agent’s search strategy.


                                                              13
Preprint. Under review.




        • Keyword Rigidity: The agent frequently failed to use necessary synonyms or
          domain-specific variants. For example, when searching for baseball statistics, it
          used only “walks” and missed data indexed under “base on balls” or “BB”.
        • Monolingual Blindness: In cross-lingual tasks, the agent often searched only in
          English, neglecting native-script terms (e.g., using “Dai Wangshu” but not the native
          Chinese characters). This significantly reduced recall for region-specific queries.
        • Missing Fallback Protocols: Upon encountering dead links or blocked content,
          the agent rarely attempted to use archival services (e.g., archive.org) or alternative
          reputable sources, instead treating the block as a hard failure condition.

A.2.3    Context Contamination
In multi-turn sessions, we observed issues with context management.

        • Token Explosion: Without active context pruning, the agent carried the full history
          of long interaction chains, leading to input contexts exceeding 100,000 tokens. This
          not only increased latency but also degraded performance as relevant instructions
          became diluted in the context window.

A.3     Domain-Specific Knowledge Failures

Beyond mechanical errors, we identified a class of “knowledge-level” failures where the
agent operated syntactically correctly but relied on flawed reasoning or incorrect domain
knowledge.

        • Statistical Misconceptions: In scientific tasks, the agent frequently misinterpreted
          statistical concepts. For example, one trace shows the agent conflating a p-value
          of 0.04 with a “4% chance of the result being wrong”, revealing a fundamental
          misunderstanding of hypothesis testing that led to incorrect conclusions.
        • Technical Ambiguity: When faced with ambiguous technical terms, the agent
          often defaulted to incorrect definitions without verification. In a graph theory
          task, the agent confused “Eulerian circuits” (visiting every edge) with “Hamiltonian
          circuits” (visiting every vertex), leading to a mathematically valid but task-irrelevant
          solution.
        • Entity Conflation: In humanities tasks, the agent demonstrated a tendency to
          conflate related historical figures. For instance, it attributed a specific poem to Hu
          Shi (a proponent of the vernacular movement) instead of Dai Wangshu (the actual
          author), likely due to their semantic proximity in the training data.
        • Jargon Hallucination: Most deceptively, the agent occasionally fabricated plausible-
          sounding technical definitions. In one instance, it defined a “mean tangle” using
          sophisticated physics jargon (“average state of quantum entanglement in non-linear
          systems”), despite the term being non-existent in that context. These hallucinations
          are particularly dangerous as they can mislead non-expert users.

A.4     Efficiency Anti-Patterns

In addition to general verbosity, we observed specific operational patterns that needlessly
consumed steps and tokens.

        • Sequential Querying: When tasked with retrieving data for multiple entities (e.g.,
          salaries for three NBA players), the agent consistently performed sequential tool
          calls—waiting for one result before requesting the next—rather than batching them
          into a single parallel execution.
        • Unnecessary Tool Delegation: The agent frequently offloaded trivial operations to
          external tools. For example, we observed the agent invoking a Python interpreter
          tool solely to perform simple arithmetic (e.g., 1468.88 − 1430.08) that it could have
          computed internally, wasting a full execution turn.


                                                14
Preprint. Under review.




A.5     Severe Cases: Safety Risks and Hallucination

A.5.1    Fabrication under Uncertainty
The most critical safety finding from our analysis is the agent’s tendency to fabricate
information when tools fail.

        • Scenario: When the agent encountered unreadable files (e.g., corrupted PDFs or
          inaccessible URLs) and could not retrieve the necessary data.
        • Behavior: Instead of reporting a failure, the agent often generated a “hypothetical”
          analysis. For example, logs show the agent stating: “Since the automated tools cannot
          read the files... Let’s assume the applicant data contains...”
        • Outcome: The agent then proceeded to produce a confident, formatted final answer
          based entirely on this hallucinated data. This behavior poses a significant risk
          in real-world deployment, as the final output appears legitimate despite being
          grounded in fiction.

A.6     Environmental Barriers

A.6.1    CAPTCHA and Blocking Loops
The agent demonstrated poor adaptability to web access barriers.

        • Repetitive Retries: Upon encountering CAPTCHAs or “Access Denied” pages, the
          agent frequently attempted to “click” the verify button or refresh the page using
          the browser tool.
        • Failure to Pivot: In over 180 instances, the agent exhausted its retry limit on a
          blocked site without attempting to switch to an alternative data source (e.g., an
          archived version or a different domain), resulting in task failure.


B     Baseline Agent System Details

We implement a hierarchical multi-agent system as our baseline. The architecture consists
of a top-level planning agent that orchestrates task decomposition and delegates sub-tasks
to specialized subordinate agents.

B.1     Agent Specifications

                   Table 9: Agent configurations in our hierarchical system.

    Agent                  Model              Max Steps                  Tools
    Planning Agent         GPT-4.1                  20             Task delegation
    Web Search Agent       Gemini-2.5-Pro            3           Search API, Python
    Analyzer Agent         Gemini-2.5-Pro            3            Analysis, Python
    Browser Agent          GPT-4.1                   5       Browser automation, Python

Planning Agent. The planning agent serves as the top-level orchestrator. It receives the
original task, decomposes it into sub-tasks, and delegates them to appropriate subordinate
agents. The planning agent maintains a task queue and tracks completion status. It uses
GPT-4.1 and operates with a maximum of 20 planning steps.
Web Search Agent. The web search agent specializes in information retrieval from the
internet. It is equipped with search APIs for querying web content and a Python interpreter
for processing search results. The agent uses Gemini-2.5-Pro and operates with a maximum
of 3 steps per sub-task.


                                               15
Preprint. Under review.




Analyzer Agent. The analyzer agent performs systematic, step-by-step reasoning and
analysis. It handles tasks requiring mathematical computation, logical deduction, and
structured analysis. The agent uses Gemini-2.5-Pro with access to analysis tools and a
Python interpreter.
Browser Agent. The browser agent enables direct web page interaction and navigation. It
can click elements, fill forms, scroll pages, and extract content from dynamic web pages.
The agent uses GPT-4.1 and operates with a maximum of 5 steps to handle complex web
interactions.

C     Benchmark Details
C.1   Humanity’s Last Exam (HLE)

Humanity’s Last Exam (HLE) (Phan et al., 2025) is a comprehensive multi-modal benchmark
designed to evaluate the reasoning capabilities of large language models at an expert level.
The benchmark comprises 2,500 questions contributed by domain experts across diverse
fields.
Subject Distribution. HLE covers a broad spectrum of disciplines including:
• STEM: Mathematics (algebra, calculus, topology), Physics (quantum mechanics, thermo-
  dynamics), Chemistry (organic, inorganic), Biology (molecular, evolutionary), Computer
  Science (algorithms, complexity theory), Engineering
• Humanities: History, Philosophy, Literature, Linguistics
• Social Sciences: Economics, Psychology, Political Science

Question Format. The benchmark includes both multiple-choice and short-answer ques-
tions. A significant portion of questions require multi-modal understanding, incorporating
images, diagrams, equations, and tables. Questions are designed to test genuine under-
standing rather than pattern matching or memorization.
Difficulty Level. HLE questions are calibrated to be challenging even for domain experts.
The benchmark specifically targets the “last exam” frontier—problems at the boundary of
what current AI systems can reliably solve.

C.2   GAIA

GAIA (General AI Assistants) (Mialon et al., 2023) is a benchmark designed to evaluate AI
assistants on real-world tasks requiring multiple fundamental capabilities.
Task Characteristics. The benchmark comprises 466 questions (301 test, 165 validation).
In our experiments, we evaluate on the validation set since test set labels are not publicly
available. The tasks have the following characteristics:
• Multi-step reasoning: Tasks require chaining multiple logical steps
• Tool use: Effective use of web search, calculators, and other tools
• Multi-modality: Some tasks involve images, audio, or video content
• Web browsing: Information retrieval from live websites
• Real-world grounding: Tasks based on actual facts and current information

Difficulty Levels. GAIA organizes tasks into three difficulty levels:
• Level 1: Simple tasks requiring 1-2 steps
• Level 2: Moderate tasks requiring 3-5 steps
• Level 3: Complex tasks requiring extensive reasoning and tool use

Design Philosophy. A key insight from GAIA is that tasks conceptually simple for humans
can be remarkably challenging for AI systems. The benchmark emphasizes robustness and
reliability over raw capability.


                                             16
Preprint. Under review.




C.3   DeepSearch

DeepSearch (Chen et al., 2025) is a benchmark specifically designed to evaluate deep search
and information synthesis capabilities of AI systems.
Task Types. The benchmark includes:

• Multi-hop retrieval: Finding information that requires traversing multiple sources
• Cross-document synthesis: Combining information from disparate documents
• Temporal reasoning: Answering questions about events across time
• Comparative analysis: Comparing entities across multiple dimensions

Evaluation Metrics. Tasks are evaluated on both accuracy of the final answer and the quality
of the reasoning chain leading to the answer.

D     Hyperparameter Settings

Table 10 summarizes the hyperparameters used in our dynamic prompt evolution frame-
work.

                       Table 10: Hyperparameter settings for our method.

 Hyperparameter                    Value                       Description
 Best-of-N Selection
 N (candidates)                     2         Number of candidate guidelines generated
 Candidate models                 GPT-4.1        Models for guideline generation
 Selector model                   GPT-4.1        Model for selecting best candidate
 Classifier
 Classifier model                 GPT-4.1     Model for strategic vs tactical classification
 Guideline Management
 Optimization model               GPT-4.1   Model for guideline consolidation/subsumption
 Max guidelines per domain          10            Threshold triggering optimization
 Target count (post-opt)             8        Target guidelines after optimization (80%)
 Max iterations                      2              Maximum optimization passes
 Max guidelines per task            20           Limit on tactical guidelines per task
 Confidence Thresholds
 Strategic promotion               0.85            Min. confidence for strategic memory
 Auto-accept threshold             0.5              Min. confidence to apply guideline
 Analysis Settings
 Quality analysis freq.              1               Analyze every N successful steps


D.1   Guideline Domain Categories

We categorize learned guidelines into 7 semantic domains to facilitate organization and
optimization:

1. tool usage: Guidelines for correct tool invocation, argument formatting, and sequencing
2. data validation: Guidelines for validating inputs, outputs, and intermediate data
3. error handling: Strategies for error recovery, retries, and fallback mechanisms
4. efficiency: Optimizations for speed, cost, and resource utilization
5. analysis methodology: Core problem-solving strategies, verification methods, and scien-
   tific reasoning
6. safety: Guidelines for preventing harmful outcomes and maintaining reliability
7. general: High-quality guidelines that do not fit specific categories


                                              17
Preprint. Under review.




D.2   Guideline Optimization Pipeline

When the number of guidelines in a domain exceeds the maximum threshold (10), we
trigger an automatic optimization pipeline:

1. Analysis: Identify consolidation opportunities, subsumption relationships, and conflicts
2. Conflict Resolution: Resolve contradictory guidelines by synthesizing or selecting the
   better guideline
3. Subsumption Pruning: Remove specific guidelines that are covered by more general
   ones
4. Consolidation: Merge semantically similar guidelines into comprehensive ones

The optimization targets 80% of the maximum capacity (8 guidelines) to leave room for
future learning while maintaining a compact, high-quality guideline set.

D.3   Memory Optimization Example

We illustrate the memory optimization pipeline with a realistic example from the efficiency
domain.
Trigger Condition. Suppose the efficiency domain currently contains 10 guidelines (at
the limit). When a new guideline g∗ is synthesized and classified as strategic with domain
efficiency, the domain now has 11 guidelines, exceeding the maximum threshold of 10.
This triggers the optimization pipeline.
Before Optimization (11 guidelines).

   R1: Use batch operations instead of sequential queries when fetching multiple items.
   R2: When searching for multiple entities, combine them into a single query.
   R3: Avoid redundant API calls by caching results locally.
   R4: Cache intermediate results to avoid re-computation.
   R5: Prefer local computation over tool calls for simple arithmetic.
   R6: Do not invoke Python interpreter for basic math like addition or subtraction.
   R7: Limit verbose explanations in final answers to under 100 words.
   R8: Keep final outputs concise; avoid unnecessary elaboration.
   R9: When a search returns sufficient results, stop querying additional sources.
  R10: Use early termination when the answer is found; do not continue searching.
  R11: (new) Batch similar file reads into a single operation.

Step 1: Conflict Resolution. The analyzer identifies no direct conflicts in this set (guidelines
give consistent guidance).
Step 2: Subsumption Pruning. The analyzer identifies:

• R1 (general batch operations) subsumes R2 (specific to search queries) and R11 (specific
  to file reads).
• R5 (prefer local computation) subsumes R6 (specific to Python interpreter for math).

After verification, R2, R6, and R11 are removed. Remaining: 8 guidelines.
Step 3: Consolidation. The analyzer identifies consolidation opportunities:

• R3 and R4 both address caching → merged into a single guideline.
• R7 and R8 both address output conciseness → merged.
• R9 and R10 both address early termination → merged.

After Optimization (5 guidelines).


                                               18
Preprint. Under review.




      R1: Use batch operations instead of sequential queries when fetching multiple items.
      R2: Cache intermediate results and API responses to avoid redundant computation and calls.
      R3: Prefer local computation over tool calls for simple operations.
      R4: Keep final outputs concise (under 100 words); avoid unnecessary elaboration.
      R5: Use early termination when sufficient information is found; do not continue searching.



The optimization reduced 11 guidelines to 5, well below the target of 8, while preserving all
essential guidance. The remaining capacity allows continued learning without immediate
re-triggering of optimization.




E     Perspective-Driven Exploration Details


This appendix details the implementation of our Perspective-Driven Exploration. We
execute K = 2 parallel evolutionary streams, each guided by a distinct optimization persona
defined via the system prompt.



E.1    Stream 1: Efficiency Persona

The Efficiency Stream utilizes our efficiency-focused synthesis prompt (see Enhancement
Synthesis Prompt (Efficiency) in Appendix F), which optimizes for operational speed,
token economy, and conciseness. It specifically targets redundant tool calls and verbose
outputs.



E.2    Stream 2: Thoroughness Persona

The Thoroughness Stream utilizes our thoroughness-focused synthesis prompt (see Enhance-
ment Synthesis Prompt (Thoroughness) in Appendix F), designed to foster self-evolving
domain expertise. It prioritizes correctness, deep reasoning, and the acquisition of domain-
specific heuristics over raw speed.




F     Complete System Prompts


This appendix provides the full system prompts for all meta-agents used in our framework,
including the Generator, Classifier, and Guideline Optimizer agents.



F.1    Guideline Generator Prompts


Corrective Synthesis Prompt. This prompt is used to generate corrective guidelines when
the agent encounters an error.


                                                 19
Preprint. Under review.




   Corrective Synthesis Prompt

   You are a prompt engineering expert analyzing agent execution errors.

   Your task: Generate a SHORT, TARGETED system prompt addition (1-3 lines)
   that will help prevent this error in the future.

  Context:
  - Agent Name: {agent name}
  - Agent Role: {agent role}
  - Task: {task}
  - Error Type: {error type}
  - Error Message: {error message}

   Previous actions taken:
   {last step summary}

   Current system prompt (for reference, to avoid duplication):
   {current system prompt}

   Already applied rules (DO NOT duplicate these):
   {applied rules}

   Guidelines:
   1. Be SPECIFIC and ACTIONABLE - target the exact error cause
   2. Be BRIEF - max 1-3 lines
   3. Use imperative language ("Always...", "Never...", "When X, do Y...")
   4. Don’t repeat what’s already in the current system prompt
   5. Focus on formatting, structure, or procedure constraints

   Output ONLY valid JSON with this exact format:
   {{
   "update text": "The actual prompt addition text here",
   "rationale": "Brief 1-sentence why this helps",
   "confidence": "low|medium|high"
   }}




Enhancement Synthesis Prompt (Efficiency). This prompt is used for the Efficiency Stream
to optimize operational speed and conciseness.


                                           20
Preprint. Under review.




   Enhancement Synthesis Prompt (Efficiency)

   You are a prompt engineering expert analyzing agent execution quality.

   Your task: Analyze this successful step and determine if there are inefficiencies
   or areas for improvement. If found, generate a SHORT, TARGETED system prompt
   addition (1-3 lines).

  Context:
  - Agent Name: {agent name}
  - Agent Role: {agent role}
  - Task: {task}
  - Step Number: {step number}

   Step details:
   {last step summary}

   Current system prompt (for reference):
   {current system prompt}

   Already applied rules (DO NOT duplicate these):
   {applied rules}

   Analyze for:
   1. **Inefficient tool usage**: Multiple calls when one would suffice, redundant
   operations
   2. **Verbose outputs**: Unnecessarily long reasoning or outputs
   3. **Missing best practices**: Not following domain-specific best practices
   4. **Suboptimal approaches**: Using less efficient methods when better ones exist

  Guidelines:
  - Only suggest an update if there’s a CLEAR, ACTIONABLE improvement
  - Be SPECIFIC about what to improve
  - Be BRIEF - max 1-3 lines
  - Use imperative language ("Always...", "Prefer...", "When X, use Y instead of
  Z...")
  - Don’t repeat what’s already in the current system prompt

   Output ONLY valid JSON with this exact format:
   {{
   "update text": "The actual prompt addition text here (or empty string if no
   improvement needed)",
   "rationale": "Brief 1-sentence why this helps (or ’No improvement needed’)",
   "confidence": "low|medium|high"
   }}




Enhancement Synthesis Prompt (Thoroughness). This prompt is used for the Thorough-
ness Stream to foster self-evolving expertise and correctness.


                                            21
Preprint. Under review.




   Enhancement Synthesis Prompt (Thoroughness)

   You are a prompt engineering expert analyzing agent execution quality.

   Your task: Analyze this successful step and determine if there are inefficiencies
   or areas for improvement. If found, generate a SHORT, TARGETED system prompt
   addition (1-3 lines).

   [Context parameters same as above]

   Analyze for improvements in these dimensions:

   1. **Correctness & Logic**: Assumptions, edge cases, sound approach, validation
   checks.
   2. **Domain-Specific Strategies**: Terminology variants, authoritative sources,
   domain heuristics.
   3. **Strategic Planning & Approach**: Problem decomposition, simpler methods
   first, batch operations.
   4.    **Tool Usage Efficiency**: Consolidation, redundancy reduction, local
   computation.
   5. **Information Preservation**: Context tracking, evidence citation, intermediate
   results.
   6. **Robustness & Error Recovery**: Fallback strategies, retry logic, error
   anticipation.
   7. **Output Quality**: Verbosity control, structure, parseability.

  Guidelines:
  - PRIORITIZE correctness over efficiency
  - Only suggest if there’s a CLEAR, ACTIONABLE, GENERALIZABLE improvement
  - For domain rules: Include SPECIFIC terms/sources/values, not placeholders
  - Be BRIEF - max 1-3 lines
  - Use imperative language ("Always...", "Prefer...", "When X, do Y...")
  - Don’t repeat what’s already in the current system prompt
  - Look for PATTERNS that generalize beyond this single instance

   Output ONLY valid JSON with this exact format:
   {{
   "update text": "The actual prompt addition text here (or empty string if no
   improvement needed)",
   "rationale": "Brief 1-sentence why this helps (or ’No improvement needed’)",
   "confidence": "low|medium|high"
   }}




Best-of-N Selector Prompt. This prompt is used to select the best candidate update from
multiple generated options.


                                          22
Preprint. Under review.




      Selector Prompt

      You are a prompt engineering expert evaluating multiple candidate prompt updates.

      Your task: Select the BEST candidate update from the options below.

      Context:
      - Agent Name: {agent name}
      - Agent Role: {agent role}
      - Task: {task}
      - Issue Type: {issue type}

      Issue Details:
      {issue details}

      Current system prompt (for reference):
      {current system prompt}

      Candidate Updates:
      {candidates}

      Evaluation Criteria (in priority order):
      1. **Specificity & Relevance**: Most directly addresses the actual issue/error
      2. **Actionability**: Clear, implementable instructions that the agent can follow
      3. **Generalizability**: Useful beyond just this instance, but not too vague
      4. **Brevity**: Concise and clear without unnecessary words
      5. **Non-duplication**: Doesn’t repeat what’s already in the system prompt

      Select the candidate that best balances these criteria for the current situation.

      Output ONLY valid JSON with this exact format:
      {{
      "selected index": 0,
      "rationale": "Brief 1-2 sentence explanation of why this candidate is best"
      }}




F.2    Classifier Agent Prompt




This prompt is used to classify updates as Tactical or Strategic and check for duplicates.


                                               23
Preprint. Under review.




      Classifier Prompt

      You are a rule classifier. Analyze the proposed update and determine:

      1. **Is it a DUPLICATE/REDUNDANT?** Check if it’s already covered by existing
      strategic or tactical rules.
      2. **What is its SCOPE?**
      - STRATEGIC: General best practice that applies across different tasks (e.g.,
      "Always validate inputs", "Use batch operations when possible")
      - TACTICAL: Task-specific constraint for current task only (e.g., "This dataset
      has missing values in column X", "API rate limit is 100/min")
      3. **Refined CONFIDENCE**: Assess confidence (0.0-1.0) based on how actionable and
      useful this rule is.
      4. **DOMAIN**: If strategic, you MUST categorize it into ONE of the following
      allowed domains: {allowed domains}

      === PROPOSED UPDATE ===
      Update: {update text}
      Rationale: {rationale}
      Initial Confidence: {initial confidence}

      {all rules context}

      === YOUR ANALYSIS ===
      Respond in JSON format:
      {{
      "is duplicate": true/false,
      "scope": "strategic" or "tactical",
      "confidence": 0.0-1.0,
      "domain": "domain name" (only if scope is strategic, otherwise ""),
      "reason": "Brief explanation of your classification"
      }}




F.3    Guideline Optimization Prompts




Guideline Analyzer Prompt. Identifies optimization opportunities among existing guide-
lines.


                                              24
Preprint. Under review.




   Guideline Analyzer Prompt

   You are a rule optimization analyzer. Analyze these {count} rules and identify
   optimization opportunities.

   {rules text}

   Your task is to identify three types of optimization opportunities:

  1. **CONFLICTS**: Pairs of rules that give contradictory guidance.
  - PRIORITY: Highest - conflicts must be resolved first

  2.    **SUBSUMPTION**: Pairs where a specific rule is entirely covered by a
  more general rule.
  - Format: [general rule index, specific rule index]
  - PRIORITY: High - clear redundancy should be removed

  3.    **CONSOLIDATION**: Groups of rules that express similar concepts and
  can be merged into a single, more comprehensive rule.
  - PRIORITY: Medium - merge rules that address the same concern from different
  angles

   IMPORTANT PRIORITY RULES:
   1. If two rules CONFLICT, do NOT also mark them for consolidation or subsumption
   2. If one rule SUBSUMES another, do NOT also mark them for consolidation
   3. A rule pair should appear in AT MOST ONE category

   You MUST respond with ONLY valid JSON in this exact format:
   {{
   "consolidation": [[idx1, idx2], [idx3, idx4]],
   "subsumption": [[general idx, specific idx]],
   "conflicts": [[idx1, idx2]]
   }}



Consolidation Prompt. Merges similar guidelines into a single comprehensive guideline.


   Consolidation Prompt

   You are merging similar rules into one comprehensive rule.

   Original rules to merge:
   {rules text}

   Create a single, comprehensive rule that:
   1. Captures all the key guidance from the original rules
   2. Is clear and actionable
   3. Eliminates redundancy
   4. Maintains the original intent

   Also provide a brief rationale explaining what the merged rule accomplishes.

   Return JSON:
   {{
   "rule": "The merged rule text",
   "rationale": "Brief explanation of what this rule accomplishes"
   }}



Subsumption Verification Prompt. Verifies if a general guideline completely covers a
specific guideline.


                                          25
Preprint. Under review.




    Subsumption Verification Prompt

    Verify if the general rule subsumes the specific rule.

    General Rule: {general rule}
    Specific Rule: {specific rule}

    A rule is subsumed if:
    - Following the general rule AUTOMATICALLY means you follow the specific rule
    - The specific rule adds NO additional constraints or guidance
    - The specific rule is merely a special case or example of the general rule

    Does the general rule completely subsume the specific rule?              Answer with
    JSON:
    {{
    "subsumed": true or false,
    "reasoning": "Brief explanation"
    }}


Conflict Resolver Prompt. Resolves contradictory guidelines.

    Conflict Resolver Prompt

    You are resolving a conflict between two rules.

    Rule {idx1}:
    Text: {rule1 text}
    Rationale: {rule1 rationale}

    Rule {idx2}:
    Text: {rule2 text}
    Rationale: {rule2 rationale}

    These rules appear to conflict. Your task is to:
    1. Verify the conflict is real
    2. Synthesize a single rule that reconciles both OR pick the better rule with
    justification

    Return JSON:
    {{
    "rule": "The resolved rule text",
    "rationale": "Explanation of how this resolves the conflict"
    }}



G     Per-Agent Specialization and Step-Level Updates

This appendix provides empirical validation of two key design choices discussed in Sec-
tion 2.2: per-agent optimization and step-level updates.

G.1   Per-Agent Specialization

Table 11 shows how SCOPE’s per-agent optimization produces meaningfully different
guidelines across agent types. The browser agent accumulates the most guidelines (39), con-
centrated in efficiency guidelines for web-specific challenges (pagination, popups, batching).
The planning agent’s guidelines focus on tool usage (10 guidelines), reflecting its orchestra-
tion role. This specialization matters: a one-size-fits-all approach would force conflicting
guidelines across agents (e.g., browser inheriting “limit steps” guidelines that conflict with
its need for thoroughness). SCOPE’s step-level operation enables fine-grained attribution of
guidelines to the specific agent that benefits.


                                             26
Preprint. Under review.




Table 11: Distribution of guidelines across agents. Each agent develops distinct specialization
patterns reflecting its role.

          Agent             Method.          Tool        Valid.   Effic.   Error     Total
          Planning               4           10            5        5        3        27
          Browser               10            4           10       10        5        39
          Analyzer              10           10            7        2        2        31
          Web Search             7            4           1        1         1        14


G.2   Why Step-Level Updates Matter

Unlike task-level methods (DC, ACE) that update only after task completion, SCOPE
updates prompts at each step. This matters because errors occur early: among 49 error
events analyzed, over 40% occur at step 1. With task-level methods, an error at step 1 of a 15-
step task means 14 steps execute with the uncorrected prompt. SCOPE synthesizes corrective
guidelines within seconds (representative trace: error at 19:13:33, guideline accepted at
19:13:42, step 2 proceeds at 19:13:46). This step-level granularity enables mid-task recovery
that task-level methods cannot achieve.

H     Guideline Placement: Detailed Analysis

This appendix provides a deeper analysis of guideline placement strategies, extending
the results in Table 3. We examine behavioral patterns that explain why system prompt
placement outperforms alternatives.

H.1   Quantitative Behavioral Metrics

Table 12 presents additional metrics beyond accuracy that reveal distinct behavioral patterns
across placement strategies.

Table 12: Detailed behavioral metrics for guideline placement strategies on GAIA. System
prompt achieves best accuracy despite higher error tolerance; Hybrid achieves best efficiency
(accuracy/steps) with fewest total steps.

        Placement                      Acc. (%)          Errors   Timeouts   Steps     Eff.*
        Baseline (No Guidelines)         32.73           1,714      255      9,824     0.33
        (1) System Prompt                46.06           1,461      227      7,430     0.62
        (2) User Prompt                  41.21           1,000      130      7,408     0.56
        (3) Split                        35.76           1,204      141      7,319     0.49
        (4) Hybrid                       43.64           1,109      139      6,620     0.66
*Efficiency = Accuracy / Total Steps × 100


Key Observations.

• Baseline has highest errors (1,714) and timeouts (255): Without guidance, agents get
  stuck more often and make more mistakes.
• User prompt has lowest errors (1,000) and timeouts (130): This apparent “safety” does
  not translate to best accuracy, suggesting premature termination.
• System prompt tolerates more errors (1,461) but achieves best accuracy: Controlled
  risk-taking leads to better outcomes.
• All guideline placements improve efficiency: 24–33% reduction in total steps vs. base-
  line.


                                                    27
Preprint. Under review.




H.2   The “Background Guidance” vs. “Over-Compliance” Trade-off

Our analysis reveals a fundamental trade-off between how guidelines are internalized:
System Prompt: Constitutional Guidance. When guidelines are placed in the system
prompt, they act as implicit background context:

• Guidelines are “loaded” silently and shape behavior without explicit acknowledgment
• Agent maintains flexibility in interpretation, enabling adaptive exploration
• Higher error tolerance allows discovering successful paths that conservative agents miss
• Fewer explicit guideline checks per step reduces cognitive overhead

User Prompt: Direct Instructions. When guidelines are placed in the user prompt, they act
as explicit orders:

• Agent frequently acknowledges and re-states guidelines, creating verbose responses
• Guidelines accumulate over time, leading to longer contexts (up to 7,600+ tokens ob-
  served)
• Pressure for explicit compliance leads to conservative, risk-averse behavior
• Lower timeout rate (130 vs. 227) suggests premature task termination rather than thor-
  ough exploration

H.3   Guideline Dynamics Analysis

Table 13 shows how guideline management differs across placement strategies.

Table 13: Guideline dynamics across placement strategies. User prompt shows high guide-
line churn while system prompt maintains stable guidance.

         Placement          Guideline Updates       Strategic Guidelines Loaded
         System Prompt              1,379                         2,962
         User Prompt                1,648                         1,990
         Split                      1,416                         2,978
         Hybrid                     1,282                         2,804

Interpretation. User prompt placement generates the most guideline updates (1,648) but
loads fewer strategic guidelines (1,990). This indicates guideline churn—constant adjustment
rather than stable guidance. In contrast, system prompt loads more persistent strategic
guidelines (2,962) with fewer updates (1,379), suggesting more stable, internalized guidance.

H.4   Why Split Placement Fails

The split strategy (strategic guidelines in system prompt, tactical guidelines in user prompt)
performs worst at 35.76%, even below user-prompt-only placement. We hypothesize this
creates cognitive dissonance:

• Agent receives guidance from two sources with potentially conflicting priorities
• Ambiguity about whether to follow “background” strategic guidelines or “immediate”
  tactical guidelines
• Lowest error count (1,204) suggests over-caution from mixed signals, leading to missed
  opportunities

H.5   Theoretical Framework

Based on our analysis, we propose a framework for understanding guideline placement:


                                             28
Preprint. Under review.




             Table 14: Theoretical framework for guideline placement effects.

           Aspect           System Prompt (“Constitution”)       User Prompt (“Direct Orders”)
           Integration      Implicit, internalized               Explicit, acknowledged
           Flexibility      High (adaptive interpretation)       Low (literal compliance)
           Risk Tolerance   Higher (exploratory)                 Lower (conservative)
           Cognitive Load   Low (background)                     High (accumulating)
           Stability        Persistent across tasks              Frequent updates



Recommendation. Treating guidelines as constitutional principles (system prompt) rather
than direct orders (user prompt) produces superior performance by: (1) reducing cognitive
load per step, (2) enabling natural guideline internalization, (3) maintaining consistent
guidance, and (4) permitting adaptive behavior within guidelines.


I     Qualitative Comparison of Perspective Streams

This appendix provides a detailed qualitative comparison of the guidelines evolved by
the Efficiency and Thoroughness optimization streams. Figure 4 demonstrates guideline
compliance through language adoption, while Figure 5 illustrates the divergence between
the two perspective streams.

             Step 2: Successful Plan Created
             [19:13:46] Planning agent creates plan: ‘‘Compare axis labels...’’
             [Success] Utilization analysis triggered after successful step

                                ↓ SCOPE Guideline Synthesis (async) ↓
             Guideline Synthesized [Conf: 0.95]
             “Always list all plausible label synonyms and phrase variants when plan-
             ning extraction from figures or comparing articles.”

                                           ↓ Prompt Updated ↓
             Step 4: Language Adoption
            [19:17:54] Planning agent updates plan:
            “List all plausible label synonyms and phrase variants for the extracted axis label
             words...”


Figure 4: Compliance trace demonstrating language adoption. After SCOPE synthesizes a
guideline (blue), the agent’s output (coral) incorporates the exact phrasing (underlined).


I.1   Strategy Patterns by Scenario

Table 15 summarizes the distinct strategies that emerge from each perspective stream across
common failure scenarios.

Table 15: Qualitative comparison of guidelines evolved by the two perspective streams.
The Efficiency stream focuses on latency reduction and fast failure recovery, while the
Thoroughness stream prioritizes exhaustiveness and resilience.

       Scenario          Efficiency Stream Strategy        Thoroughness Stream Strategy
       Blocked Access    Switch Agent (Escalate)           Find Alternate Source (Archive.org)
       Tool Failure      Switch Tool (Escalate)            Fix Input / Manual Fallback
       Planning          Limit Steps (≤ 5)                 Exhaustive Case Enumeration
       Goal              Minimize Latency                  Maximize Success Rate & Auditability


                                                    29
Preprint. Under review.




             Context Trace: Execution Failure
             [Error] BrowserAgent:     HTTP 403 Forbidden (Access Denied) for
             URL...
                                  ↓ SCOPE Guideline Synthesis ↓
             Stream 1: Efficiency (Fail-Fast)
             Guideline: “If access is blocked, immediately escalate to Search Agent.
             Do not retry.”

             Stream 2: Thoroughness (Resilience)
             Guideline: “If access is blocked, attempt workarounds via Archive.org
             or Transcript Tools.”


Figure 5: Divergence in evolved guidelines. From the same error, Efficiency (blue) optimizes
for speed, while Thoroughness (coral) optimizes for success.


Blocked Access (HTTP 403/404). When the browser agent encounters access denials, the
two streams diverge significantly:

• Efficiency: Synthesizes guidelines to “fail-over fast” by immediately escalating to the
  web search agent, avoiding wasted retries on blocked resources.
• Thoroughness: Synthesizes guidelines to “find alternate sources” such as Archive.org,
  Wayback Machine, or transcript extraction tools, prioritizing information recovery over
  speed.

Tool Failures. For general tool execution errors:

• Efficiency: Favors immediate tool switching—if one tool fails, escalate to a different tool
  or agent rather than debugging.
• Thoroughness: Attempts input repair or manual fallback strategies, such as reformatting
  queries or trying alternative parameters.

Planning Strategy. The streams also differ in their approach to task planning:

• Efficiency: Generates guidelines limiting plan complexity (e.g., “Keep plans under 5
  steps”), favoring concise execution paths.
• Thoroughness: Generates guidelines encouraging exhaustive case enumeration and
  comprehensive validation before proceeding.

I.2   Complementary Strengths

This duality is why the Global Ensemble outperforms either individual stream. Efficiency
excels at time-constrained tasks and long-horizon scenarios (Level 3) where context bloat
is dangerous, while Thoroughness excels at tasks requiring deep retrieval and careful
validation (Level 2). By maintaining both streams and selecting the best outcome, SCOPE
adapts to heterogeneous task requirements without manual configuration.

J     Model Choice for Meta-Agents: Detailed Analysis

This appendix provides a detailed analysis of how different model choices for SCOPE’s
meta-agents (Generator, Classifier, Optimizer) affect the characteristics of evolved guidelines.
We compare three configurations on the GAIA benchmark: (1) all meta-agents use GPT-4.1,
(2) all use Gemini-2.5-Pro, and (3) each meta-agent uses the same model as the base agent it
optimizes.


                                                30
Preprint. Under review.




J.1   Guideline Generation Statistics

Table 16 provides comprehensive statistics on the guidelines generated by each configura-
tion.

Table 16: Detailed statistics of guidelines generated by different meta-agent model configu-
rations.

           Metric                           GPT-4.1      Gemini-2.5-Pro    Same Model
           Total Guidelines                   111                163              108
           Avg. Guideline Length (chars)     380.1              426.3            396.8
           Max Guideline Length (chars)      2,895              2,282            2,340
           Min Guideline Length (chars)       105                 82               94
           Avg. Confidence                   0.939              0.940            0.942
           Accuracy (%)                      46.06              46.67            45.45


A key finding is that Gemini generates 46% more guidelines than GPT-4.1, yet achieves
only marginally better performance (+0.61%). This strongly suggests that SCOPE’s effec-
tiveness stems from guideline quality rather than quantity—the Best-of-N selection and
memory optimization mechanisms effectively filter for useful guidelines regardless of how
many candidates are initially generated.

J.2   Category Distribution Analysis

Table 17 shows the distribution of guidelines across semantic categories for each configura-
tion.

Table 17: Guideline distribution by category. Each model exhibits distinct “personality” in
guideline generation patterns.

                Category                GPT-4.1       Gemini-2.5-Pro    Same Model
                Analysis Methodology       31              37               33
                Data Validation            23              24               25
                Tool Usage                 28              36               26
                Efficiency                 18              32               20
                Error Handling             11              26                4
                General                     0               6                0
                Safety                     0                2                0
                Total                      111             163             108


Gemini generates the most guidelines across nearly all categories, with notably more er-
ror handling guidelines (26 vs. 4–11 for others) and efficiency guidelines (32 vs. 18–20). It is
also the only model to generate safety-related guidelines (2). This suggests Gemini’s synthe-
sis tends toward comprehensive, verbose guidelines covering edge cases and operational
robustness.

J.3   Confidence Score Distribution

All three configurations achieve remarkably similar average confidence scores:

• GPT-4.1: 0.939
• Gemini-2.5-Pro: 0.940
• Same Model: 0.942

This consistency (∼0.94 across all settings) suggests that all models are capable of generating
guidelines they assess as reliable, regardless of their different generation patterns.


                                                 31
Preprint. Under review.




J.4   Implications for Deployment

The near-identical performance across configurations (within 1.2%) has important practical
implications:

1. Model-Agnostic Framework: SCOPE’s effectiveness is not tied to a specific meta-agent
   model, simplifying deployment across different infrastructure constraints.
2. Cost-Performance Trade-off: Practitioners can choose meta-agent models based on cost
   or latency rather than accuracy. For example, using a cheaper model for the Generator
   may reduce costs without impacting performance.
3. Quality Over Quantity: The 46% guideline generation difference between Gemini and
   GPT-4.1 without proportional accuracy gains validates SCOPE’s guideline management
   mechanisms—Best-of-N selection and memory optimization effectively filter for high-
   quality guidelines.
4. Consistent Guideline Quality: The similar average confidence scores (∼0.94) across all
   configurations suggest that both models are capable of generating guidelines they assess
   as reliable, regardless of their different generation patterns.

K     Additional Experiments

K.1   Single-Agent Evaluation: SWE-bench Verified

To verify that SCOPE generalizes beyond multi-agent systems, we adapted SCOPE to mini-
swe-agent v2 (Yang et al., 2024), a single-agent software engineering system, and evaluated
on SWE-bench Verified (Jimenez et al., 2023) with GPT-5-mini. The key requirement for
SCOPE is a natural step boundary (e.g., tool call completion), which virtually all agentic
systems provide.

Table 18: Single-agent evaluation on SWE-bench Verified. SCOPE provides consistent gains
(+8.2 points) in a coding setup with a completely different agent architecture.

                              Method                  SWE-bench Verified
                              Baseline                         54.2
                              Baseline + Reflection            54.8
                              SCOPE                            62.4


SCOPE provides a +8.2 point improvement, confirming that it is a framework-agnostic
prompt evolution layer. The Baseline+Reflection ablation (which adds per-step LLM reflec-
tion without guideline evolution) gains only +0.6, showing that extra compute alone does
not reproduce SCOPE’s gains.

K.2   Scaling to Stronger Models: GPT-5.4

A natural question is whether the failure modes SCOPE targets persist in stronger frontier
models. We evaluate SCOPE with GPT-5.4 on GAIA to test this.
Table 19: SCOPE with GPT-5.4 on GAIA. Despite being substantially stronger, GPT-5.4 still
accumulates 1,083 errors; SCOPE reduces them by 56% and improves accuracy by +17.5
points.

                                   Method              GAIA    Errors
                                   GPT-4.1             31.35    1,714
                                   GPT-4.1 + SCOPE     46.06    1,109
                                   GPT-5.4             49.80    1,083
                                   GPT-5.4 + SCOPE     67.30     473


GPT-5.4 is substantially stronger than GPT-4.1 (49.80 vs. 31.35), yet it still accumulates 1,083
errors across 165 tasks. SCOPE reduces these errors by 56% and improves accuracy by +17.5


                                                  32
Preprint. Under review.




points. The consistent relative gain across both models confirms that the failure modes are
structural limitations of static prompts, not artifacts of weaker models.

K.3   Hyperparameter Sensitivity: N and K

We study the sensitivity of the Best-of-N candidate count (N) and the number of parallel
perspective streams (K) on GAIA.

Table 20: Sensitivity to N (Best-of-N candi-            Table 21: Sensitivity to K (perspective
dates) with K = 2 fixed on GAIA.                        streams) with N = 2 fixed on GAIA.

      N                1       2       3                      K                       1        2
      GAIA Acc. (%)   53.38   56.97   57.85
      ∆                —      +3.59   +0.88
                                                              GAIA Acc. (%)          46.06    56.97
                                                              ∆                       —      +10.91

N = 2 captures most of the benefit over N = 1 (+3.59%); N = 3 adds only +0.88% at 50%
extra compute, justifying our choice of N = 2. For K, the gain from K = 1 to K = 2 is
+10.91%, reflecting strategy diversity rather than an extra selection opportunity: all methods
use Pass@2 (2 independent runs per task), so baselines run the same static prompt twice
while SCOPE runs 2 differently evolved prompts (Efficiency vs. Thoroughness) once each.

K.4   Step Budget Ablation

A potential confound is that SCOPE’s gains come from agents having insufficient steps. We
test this by giving the baseline 50% more steps.

Table 22: Impact of increasing step budget. 50% more steps yields negligible improvement,
confirming the root cause is systematic errors from static prompts, not insufficient budget.

                Method                         GAIA       DeepSearch    Step-limit hits
                Baseline                        32.73       14.00              255
                Baseline (50% more steps)       33.13       14.00              250
                SCOPE                           56.97       32.00              139

50% more steps yields only +0.40% on GAIA and zero on DeepSearch. Step-limit hits barely
change (255 to 250), showing the agent repeats the same errors regardless of budget. SCOPE
cuts step-limit hits by 45% while achieving better performance with fewer steps.

K.5   Classifier Threshold Sensitivity

The confidence threshold cthresh controls whether a guideline is promoted to strategic
memory (persistent) or kept as tactical (task-specific). We validate the choice of 0.85 through
a sensitivity experiment on GAIA.

Table 23: Classifier threshold sensitivity on GAIA. A clear peak at 0.85 indicates meaningful
routing decisions.

                Threshold               0.50       0.75      0.85      0.90      0.95
                GAIA Acc. (%)           47.87     53.93      56.97     51.51     46.66

The clear peak at 0.85 with degradation at both extremes validates the classifier: too low
(0.50) promotes noisy guidelines to strategic memory, while too high (0.95) prevents useful
guidelines from persisting. In practice, the classifier is highly selective: only 320 of 1,570
synthesis attempts (20.4%) are promoted to strategic memory, with 79.2% of rejections being
duplicate detection.


                                                   33
