                                        AgentStepper: Interactive Debugging of Software
                                        Development Agents
                                        ROBERT HUTTER, University of Stuttgart, Germany
                                        MICHAEL PRADEL, CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany
                                        Software development agents powered by large language models (LLMs) have shown great promise in au-
                                        tomating tasks like environment setup, issue solving, and program repair. Unfortunately, understanding and
                                        debugging such agents remain challenging due to their complex and dynamic nature. Developers must reason
                                        about trajectories of LLM queries, tool calls, and code modifications, but current techniques reveal little of this




arXiv:2602.06593v1 [cs.SE] 6 Feb 2026
                                        intermediate process in a comprehensible format. The key insight of this paper is that debugging software
                                        development agents shares many similarities with conventional debugging of software programs, yet requires
                                        a higher level of abstraction that raises the level from low-level implementation details to high-level agent
                                        actions. Drawing on this insight, we introduce AgentStepper, the first interactive debugger for LLM-based
                                        software engineering agents. By adapting established debugging practices to agents, AgentStepper enables
                                        developers to inspect, control, and interactively manipulate agent trajectories. AgentStepper represents tra-
                                        jectories as structured conversations among an LLM, the agent program, and tools. It supports breakpoints,
                                        stepwise execution, and live editing of prompts and tool invocations, while capturing and displaying interme-
                                        diate repository-level code changes. Our evaluation applies AgentStepper to three state-of-the-art software
                                        development agents, ExecutionAgent, SWE-Agent, and RepairAgent, showing that integrating the approach
                                        into existing agents requires minor code changes (39–42 edited lines). Moreover, we report on a user study with
                                        twelve participants, indicating that AgentStepper improves the ability of participants to interpret trajectories
                                        (64% vs. 67% mean performance) and identify bugs in the agent’s implementation (17% vs. 60% success rate),
                                        while reducing perceived workload (e.g., frustration reduced from 5.4/7.0 to 2.4/7.0) compared to conventional
                                        tools.

                                        1   Introduction
                                        Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in generating [9, 62],
                                        editing code [2, 18], and testing code [21, 31, 48, 53, 58]. The most recent LLM-based software engi-
                                        neering techniques are agents that go beyond single-step prompting by autonomously interacting
                                        with their environment. Such agents iteratively interact with their environment by generating
                                        LLM queries, interpreting the responses, invoking tools, and modifying code. Software engineering
                                        agents are increasingly effective, e.g., in setting up programming environments [6, 38], solving
                                        issues reported by users [54, 60], and fixing bugs via program repair [4]. For example, an agent
                                        may read an issue description, search for relevant code snippets, generate a patch, test the patch,
                                        and iterate until the issue is resolved.
                                           While software development agents hold great promise for reducing manual effort, creating and
                                        improving the agents themselves remains challenging. Developers of agents must design suitable
                                        prompts, implement the agent logic, and fix issues that arise during agent execution. As with
                                        any piece of software, understanding and debugging software development agents is crucial for
                                        their correctness and effectiveness. However, debugging such agents is particularly difficult due
                                        to the inherent non-determinism of LLMs and the complexity of an agent’s interaction with the
                                        development environment. In particular, developers are facing four key challenges when debugging
                                        software development agents:
                                         • C1: Prompt engineering. Designing effective prompts for LLMs is a complex task that often
                                           requires trial and error. Developers need to understand how different prompt formulations affect
                                           the agent’s behavior, and they want to receive quick feedback on prompt changes.
                                        Authors’ Contact Information: Robert Hutter, research@robert-hutter.de, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany;
                                        Michael Pradel, michael@binaervarianz.de, CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Stuttgart, Germany.
2                                                                       Robert Hutter and Michael Pradel


• C2: Understanding agent behavior. Software development agents typically proceed in a loop of
  prompting an LLM, interpreting the response, invoking a tool suggested by the LLM, and provid-
  ing the tool’s output back to the LLM. Agents targeted at complex software development tasks
  often use specialized tools, e.g., for code search, code editing, and testing. Typical trajectories
  involve dozens of iterations, during which hundreds of thousands of tokens are exchanged with
  the LLM [5], making it challenging to follow the agent’s reasoning.
• C3: Resolving bugs in the agent program. The agent program, also called scaffold, orchestrates the
  interaction between the LLM and the development environment. Like any software system, an
  agent program may contain bugs that lead to incorrect or suboptimal behavior, which agent
  developers must identify and fix.
• C4: Reviewing intermediate code changes. Software development agents often modify code in
  the target repository as part of their operation. To understand and debug the agent, developers
  need to review code changes made by the agent at different points during its executions, i.e., not
  only the final result.

   The probably most common, state-of-the-practice way of addressing these challenges is to
manually inspect the raw logs produced during agent execution. Unfortunately, such logs are often
unstructured and voluminous, making it difficult to extract relevant information. Log viewers,
e.g., offered by LLM platforms such as OpenAI [42] and LangChain [28], can help by providing
search and filtering capabilities to navigate these logs more easily. However, existing log viewers
do neither address the unique challenges of software development agents, such as challenge C4,
nor do they provide interactive debugging capabilities that allow developers to control the agent’s
execution. Hence, the challenge of understanding and debugging software development agents
remains largely unsolved.
   This paper introduces AgentStepper, the first interactive debugger specifically designed for LLM-
based software development agents. AgentStepper consists of three main components – a user
interface, a backend, and an API – that work together to enable interactive debugging of agent
trajectories. First, the web-based user interface presents the trajectory of an agent as a structured
conversation among the LLM, the agent program, and the tools invoked during execution. Similar to
conventional debuggers, AgentStepper supports breakpoints, stepwise execution, and live editing of
prompts and tool invocations. Additionally, the interface displays repository-level code changes at
different points in time as a commit history, enabling developers to track how the agent modifies the
code base. Second, the debugger backend captures and stores events during an agent’s execution,
records intermediate code changes performed by the agent, and manages the resulting agent
trajectories. Third, the API enables attaching AgentStepper to existing agents with minimal code
changes. By invoking the API at critical points in the agent program, such as before and after an
LLM query or a tool call, developers can instrument their agents to interact with AgentStepper,
similar to setting breakpoints in a conventional debugger.
   The approach exploits our observation that debugging software development agents shares
many similarities with conventional debugging of software programs. Both activities involve
understanding the flow of execution, inspecting intermediate states at key points during execution,
and manipulating the execution to test hypotheses about a program’s behavior. While a conventional
debugger can also be applied to the agent program itself, this would expose the developer to low-
level implementation details that are often not relevant for understanding the agent’s overall
behavior. Instead, AgentStepper raises the level of abstraction from the agent program’s source
code to the high-level actions performed by the agent when interacting with the LLM and tools. By
adopting established concepts of interactive debugging to the domain of software development
agents, AgentStepper provides developers with a powerful tool to understand and control the
AgentStepper: Interactive Debugging of Software Development Agents                                                           3


behavior of these agents. In practice, developers may, of course, combine AgentStepper with
conventional debuggers to inspect and debug the agent program itself when needed, which we
leave for future work to explore.
   We evaluate AgentStepper by integrating it into three state-of-the-art software development
agents: ExecutionAgent [6], SWE-Agent [54], and RepairAgent [4]. The integration requires only
minor modifications to the agent programs, with 5–7 API calls inserted and 39–42 lines of code
changed, demonstrating the ease of adoption. To assess the effectiveness of AgentStepper in
supporting developers, we conduct a user study with twelve participants. Given a trajectory
comprehension task and two agent debugging tasks, the participants either use AgentStepper or
inspect a raw log with a tool of their choice. We observe that participants using AgentStepper are
better able to understand the agent’s behavior (with the mean performance increasing from 64%
to 67%), and that they identify bugs in the agent program more effectively (with the success rate
increasing from 17% to 60%). Moreover, participants using AgentStepper report a lower perceived
workload compared to those participants using conventional tools, e.g., with perceived frustration
reduced from 5.4/7.0 to 2.4/7.0.
   In summary, this paper contributes the following:
• We identify the unique challenges developers face when understanding and debugging software
  development agents.
• We draw parallels between debugging conventional software and debugging software develop-
  ment agents, laying the foundation for our approach.
• We present the first interactive debugger for LLM-based software development agents, which
  enables developers to inspect, control, and manipulate agent trajectories.
• We evaluate our approach by integrating it into three state-of-the-art software development
  agents and by conducting a user study, demonstrating its effectiveness in supporting developers.
• We make our code and data publicly available to foster further research in this area.

2   Background on Software Development Agents
The term “agent” is used in different ways in the literature, sometimes simply meaning any program
that uses an LLM. Following prior work [4], we define an LLM-based software development agent as
a program with two properties: First, the agent relies on an LLM to autonomously plan and execute
a sequence of actions to achieve a goal. Notable, this “agency”, i.e., the ability to make choices
and act on them, distinguishes agents from techniques that rely on hard-coded LLM prompts and
techniques that follow a hard-coded algorithm to issue a pre-defined sequence of LLM queries.
Second, the agent interacts with its environment by performing actions suggested by the LLM.
These actions typically are invocations of tools that enable the agent to interact with a development
environment similar to a human developer.
   Based on this definition, an agent can be seen as having three components: (i) the core program
that orchestrates the interaction between the LLM and the environment, which we call the agent
program,1 (ii) the LLM that is prompted by the agent program to suggest the next action, and (iii) the
tools invoked by the agent program, as suggested by the LLM. Recent work has proposed various
software engineering agents that follow this paradigm, targeting different tasks, such as setting up
programming environments [6, 13, 23, 38, 55], solving issues reported by users [15, 52, 54, 60], and
fixing bugs via program repair [4]. The most effective agents are typically equipped with specialized
tools tailored to the specific task, such as different kinds of code search tools, code editing tools,
tools for running tests, and tools for applying static analyses.

1 Other terms used in the literature include “scaffold” [43], “agent framework” [56], “middleware” [4], and “orchestrator” [8].
4                                                                     Robert Hutter and Michael Pradel


3     Approach
The following presents AgentStepper, our approach for interactively debugging software develop-
ment agents. The conceptual underpinning of the approach is to adapt established concepts from
conventional debugging to the domain of software development agents. To this end, Section 3.1
discusses similarities and differences between debugging conventional software and debugging
software development agents. Next, Section 3.2 provides an overview of the approach, followed by
detailed descriptions of the three main components: the user interface (Section 3.3), the backend
(Section 3.4), and the API for integrating AgentStepper into existing agents (Section 3.5).

3.1    Similarities and Differences Compared with Conventional Debugging
As LLM-based agents are programs, there are, in principle, amenable to traditional approaches for
understanding and debugging programs. However, because agents make heavy use of LLMs, large
parts of an agent’s behavior are not explicitly programmed, but emerge from the interaction of the
agent program with the LLM and the environment. That is, attaching a traditional debugger to the
agent program exposes low-level implementation details, e.g., how exactly to invoke a remotely
hosted LLM, but it reveals little about the high-level reasoning of the agent as it interacts with
the LLM and tools. At the same time, traditional debugging tools offer valuable concepts, such
as breakpoints, stepwise execution, and live editing of program state, which could also benefit
developers of software development agents.
  To benefit from these concepts when debugging software development agents, we identify two
parallels between developing conventional software and developing software development agents:
• Choosing and implementing algorithms ≈ Designing effective prompts. Developers must choose
  appropriate algorithms and implementation strategies when developing traditional software.
  When developing a software development agent, large parts of this activity are replaced by
  designing effective prompts, as these prompts effectively guide the LLM toward solving the task
  at hand. For example, a prompt that instructs the LLM to first search for existing code before
  generating new code will likely lead to different behavior than a prompt that directly asks the
  LLM to generate code.
• Understanding control flow and data flow ≈ Understanding agent behavior. In conventional
  software development, developers need to understand the control flow and data flow in their
  program to reason about its behavior. Similarly, developers of software development agents
  must understand how the agent interacts with the LLM and tools over time to reason about the
  agent’s behavior. For example, understanding which tools an agent invokes at which point in
  time, and how the LLM reacts to outputs produced by these tools is crucial for comprehending
  and ultimately improving the agent’s reasoning.
   Based on these parallels, the key hypothesis of our work is that adapting established concepts
from conventional debugging to software development agents can improve the ability of agent
developers to understand and debug these agents. Importantly, instead of merely copying these
concepts, we need to adapt them to the unique characteristics of software development agents.
This adaptation requires raising the level of abstraction from the agent program’s source code to
the high-level actions performed by the agent, which we address as presented in the following.

3.2    Overview of Approach
Figure 1 presents an overview of our approach. The upper part of the figure shows AgentStepper,
i.e., our novel approach for interactively debugging software development agents. Such agents, as
shown in the lower part of the figure and described in Section 2, consist of an agent program that
orchestrates the interaction between an LLM and tools applied to the code base. To understand
AgentStepper: Interactive Debugging of Software Development Agents                                                5


                                                                              Summarize events
            Display events                                                    and code changes
            and runs              User
                                                                  Backend
                                  interface
                                                                                                  LLM
                                                                                                        Agent-
                                                                                                        Stepper
Agent                                                                                    Track code
developer                                               Capture      Modify prompts      changes
             Interactive          API
                                                        events       and tool calls
             debugging




                                               Prompt                       Tool call
                                                                                                        Software
                                                                  Agent                          Code
                                    LLM                                                                 Engineering
                                                                  program                        base
                                                                                                        Agent
                                              Response                       Result



Fig. 1. Overview of the approach. The upper part of the figure (AgentStepper) is this paper’s contribution.



and debug such agents, an agent developer uses AgentStepper, which consists of three main
components: a user interface, a backend, and an API for integrating AgentStepper into existing
agents. To present the voluminous information produced during an agent’s execution, such as
lengthy prompts and potentially large code changes, in a concise manner, AgentStepper itself also
uses an LLM to summarize that information. Our approach also builds upon a version control
system, such as git, to track intermediate code changes made by the agent during its execution.

3.3   User Interface
The user interface presents agent trajectories in a clear format through four key design choices:
(1) a conversation-based representation that structures agent-LLM and agent-tool interactions as
interleaved conversations (Section 3.3.1), (2) balancing high-level overview with detailed inspection
(Section 3.3.2), (3) viewing code changes at different points in time (Section 3.3.3), and (4) interac-
tive debugging via breakpoints, stepping, and editing (Section 3.3.4). The interface also supports
managing and importing past agent runs.
   Figure 2 shows a screenshot of the user interface of AgentStepper. Part A presents a panel for
selecting different runs of an agent. Part B displays the structured conversation view, showing
the interleaved conversations between the agent program and the LLM, and between the agent
program and the tools. At the bottom of part B, the agent control panel allows developers to stop at
breakpoints, step through the execution, and continue execution. Part C shows the repository-level
code changes made by the agent during its execution, presented as a commit history.

3.3.1 Structured Conversations. Agent execution produces raw logs that present a single long
sequence of prompts, responses, tool calls, and tool outputs, which poses challenges for developers
trying to understand agent behavior. While raw logs contain all information about an agent’s
execution, they present many low-level details that make it difficult to follow the agent’s reasoning.
For example, a recent study reports a mean token count per agent run ranging from 23k to 1.2M,
depending on the agent, and a typical run involves several dozens of cycles that each invoke a tool
producing some output [5]. Log viewers, such as those provided by OpenAI [42] and LangChain [28],
improve upon raw logs by offering search and filtering capabilities, but they still present information
as a linear sequence of events without higher-level structure.
6                                                                           Robert Hutter and Michael Pradel




Fig. 2. User interface of AgentStepper. Part A is a panel to select agent runs. Part B shows the structured
conversation view with breakpoints and stepping controls. Part C displays repository-level code changes.



   To address these limitations, AgentStepper introduces a structured representation of agent
trajectories that organizes agent interactions into two interleaved conversations: one between
the agent program and the LLM, and another between the agent program and the tools. This
representation follows the metaphor of a chat application, similar to interfaces commonly used in
modern chatbot systems, but extends this metaphor to simultaneously display two conversations
that proceed in parallel. The two conversations are naturally interleaved, as the agent program
performs its typical four-step cycle: (i) the agent program sends a prompt to the LLM, and (ii)
the LLM responds; these first two steps are part of the conversation between the agent program
and the LLM. Then, (iii) the agent program invokes a tool based on the LLM’s response, and (iv)
the tool returns its output to the agent program; these last two steps are part of the conversation
between the agent program and the tools. By organizing messages around these cycles, we provide
a natural and intuitive structure for presenting the interleaved conversations. Messages in both
conversations are displayed side-by-side in two columns and sorted chronologically, with the most
recent messages appearing at the bottom, enabling developers to follow the agent’s interactions
over time. The screenshot in Figure 2, part B, illustrates this structured conversation view.
3.3.2 Summarized and Detailed Views of Events. An important challenge is to present the volumi-
nous information produced during an agent’s execution in a concise manner that still conveys the
essential details. This challenge stems from the fact that prompts, responses, tool call arguments,
and results are typically lengthy and often presented in raw formats (e.g., JSON) that are unsuitable
for direct display as readable text. AgentStepper addresses this challenge by summarizing messages
to provide agent developers with a comprehensive overview of an agent’s activities throughout its
execution. The summaries are displayed in the chat bubbles of the conversation view, as shown in
Figure 2, part B.
   To summarize the individual events that occur during an agents 4-step cycle, AgentStepper
prompts an LLM to condense the details of an event into a single sentence. In the summarization
prompt, we instruct the LLM to focus on event-specific content while disregarding boilerplate or
repetitive information that does not contribute to understanding the agent’s behavior. We use four
AgentStepper: Interactive Debugging of Software Development Agents                                  7


different summarization prompts, each tailored for one of the four message types (LLM queries,
LLM responses, tool invocations, and tool outputs), which are provided in the supplementary
material. As prompts issued by agents often include standard instructions or repeated sections, it is
important that the summaries focus on the unique and relevant aspects of each message. To achieve
this goal, we provide the LLM with both the current event and the preceding event, prompting it to
highlight only the differences between the two events in the summary.
   While the summaries provide a high-level overview of the agent’s activities, developers must
sometimes inspect the full details of specific messages to understand how the agent program invokes
tools or interprets responses. To support this need, AgentStepper provides a message inspector
window that displays comprehensive message details. The inspector window is structured similarly
to a typical email client, presenting both meta-information about the message, including its type,
origin, and destination, as well as the full content of the message. Message content is rendered in
plain text format for simple messages, or through an interactive JSON object viewer for messages
represented as JSON or dictionaries, enabling developers to navigate and understand complex
structured data. In addition, the message inspector provides a comparison feature that displays
the differences between the selected message and another message, which is particularly useful
when comparing subsequent prompts where specific sections are updated dynamically based on
the previous cycle.
3.3.3 Repository-Level Code Changes. Agents employed in software development primarily operate
on code bases, where the agent may modify existing source files, create new ones, remove outdated
files, build a project, and execute tests. When operating autonomously, agents often introduce
numerous changes to the code base over the course of their trajectory. However, these intermediate
modifications remain invisible to the user, as agents typically work on a local copy of the code and
transfer changes only if they consider the run successful. Consequently, the user receives either
the final submission or nothing in the case of a failed run. While this all-or-nothing approach may
be suitable for end users, it poses significant challenges for agent developers aiming to understand
and debug the agent’s behavior.
   AgentStepper addresses the challenge of reviewing intermediate code changes by visualizing
repository-level modifications made by the agent during its execution in a dedicated side panel
(part C in Figure 2). This presentation is inspired by commit history views offered by version control
systems and IDEs. Each modification made by a tool invocation is represented as a commit in the
history, with a commit message summarizing the change. Developers can click on a commit to
view the exact changes made to the code base in a diff viewer. In addition, links to the correspond-
ing commits are provided in the main conversation view (see center part of Figure 2), allowing
developers to quickly navigate to the relevant code changes associated with cycles of the agent’s
execution. Importantly, the commit history created by AgentStepper is independent of the version
control system used by the target repository: While the latter is typically updated once an agent
has completed its run, the former is updated after each tool invocation, providing a fine-grained
view of the agent’s modifications throughout its execution.
3.3.4 Breakpoints, Stepping, and Live Editing of Prompts and State. AgentStepper can be used in
two modes: either post hoc to inspect a completed trajectory or interactively to control the execution
of an agent in real time. The following presents the interactive mode. Following the analogy with
conventional debugging, a key requirement of an interactive debugger is the ability to halt the
program at breakpoints and step through execution event by event. In the user interface, this
functionality is facilitated by a control panel, as shown in the lower end of part B in Figure 2.
   AgentStepper provides a flexible breakpoint system that allows developers to control the ex-
ecution of events during debugging. By default, each event defines two breakpoints: before and
8                                                                          Robert Hutter and Michael Pradel


after the event is executed. Developers can adjust this default behavior using the API described in
Section 3.5. When the execution reaches a breakpoint, AgentStepper pauses the agent’s execution
and displays the corresponding event in the conversation view. Similar to traditional debuggers,
developers can either step through the execution one breakpoint at a time or continue execution
until they decide to return to stepping mode.
   AgentStepper not only allows developers to observe the agent’s execution but also enables them
to interactively modify the agent’s behavior at breakpoints. This functionality is akin to modifying
variable values in a traditional debugger. Such interactive capabilities are useful in several scenarios.
First, developers can engage in interactive prompt engineering by modifying a prompt before it
is sent to the LLM, thereby testing how the change affects the agent’s behavior. Second, they can
simulate LLM responses by editing the actual response from the LLM to evaluate how the agent
program handles different responses. Third, the ability to modify tool invocations allows developers
to change the arguments of a tool call or replace the tool call suggested by the LLM with a different
tool call. Finally, developers can simulate tool outputs by editing the output returned by a tool,
which facilitates testing how the agent program responds to various outputs.

3.4   Backend
The backend of AgentStepper captures and manages agent events during execution, records interme-
diate code changes, and manages agent trajectories. Events are triggered via API calls performed by
the agent program, e.g., whenever the agent program sends a prompt to the LLM. To record interme-
diate states, the backend initializes the agent’s workspace as a git repository at the beginning of the
run and creates a new branch for the run. After the run concludes, the API automatically switches
back to the original branch in preparation for the next execution. After each tool invocation, the
backend commits the pending changes to the repository. To obtain a commit message, the backend
queries an LLM with the diff produced by the tool invocation and asks it to generate a concise
message describing the change.
   In interactive mode, AgentStepper manages the execution state of the agent by supporting three
distinct states to control its progress. The first state is “paused,” where the agent is halted at a
breakpoint, allowing developers to inspect the current state. The second state is “stepping,” in
which the agent executes one event at a time and waits for user input after each event, facilitating
a detailed examination of the agent’s behavior. Finally, the “running” state enables the agent to
execute continuously until the developer decides to pause or step through the execution.

3.5   API for Integrating into Agents
To capture events during an agent’s execution and enable interactive debugging, AgentStepper
provides an API that developers of agents can use to instrument their agent programs. By allowing
developers to insert API calls at critical points in the agent program, the approach raises the level
of abstraction from the agent program’s source code to the high-level actions performed by the
agent when interacting with the LLM and tools. We evaluate the ease of integrating AgentStepper
into existing agents in Section 4, showing that only a few dozens of code lines need to be changed
to add support for AgentStepper.
   Table 1 presents the seven API functions that AgentStepper provides to integrate with existing
software development agents. The API is offered by a single AgentStepper class that developers can
instantiate in their agent program to establish a connection to the AgentStepper backend (entry 1
in the table). The next four entries (2–5) correspond to breakpoints that developers can insert
before and after LLM queries and tool invocations. These four API functions enable AgentStepper
to capture the agent’s interaction with the LLM and tools, and they support interactive editing
of prompts, responses, tool calls, and tool outputs. Entry 6 in the table allows the agent program
AgentStepper: Interactive Debugging of Software Development Agents                                             9


       Table 1. API functions to integrate AgentStepper into existing software development agents.

Id   API function                             Description
1    __init__(agent_name: str, address: Establishes a connection to the backend and initializes a new
     str, port: int, workspace_path: AgentStepper object. The agent_name parameter identifies the
     Optional[str])                     agent as a whole, while address and port specify the backend’s
                                              location. Optionally, a workspace path can be provided to track
                                              changes if the agent edits a local project directory.
2    begin_llm_query_breakpoint(prompt: Marks the beginning of an LLM query event. The method sends
     Union[str, Dict]) -> Union[str, the query prompt to the debugger and halts execution if a break-
     Dict]                              point is triggered. The user may modify the prompt in the UI, in
                                              which case the updated prompt is returned. If no modifications
                                              are made, the original prompt is returned unchanged.
3    end_llm_query_breakpoint(response: Marks the completion of an LLM query event. The method
     Union[str, Dict]) -> Union[str, transmits the response received from the LLM to the debugger
     Dict]                              and halts execution if required. As with the prompt, the user
                                              may modify the response via the UI. The method then returns
                                              either the modified or the original response.
4    begin_tool_invocation_breakpoint(        Encapsulates the beginning of a tool invocation event. The tool
     tool:   str,    args:   Dict)   ->       identifier and its arguments are sent to the debugger, allowing
     Tuple[str, Dict]                         the user to inspect and possibly alter them before execution. The
                                              return value consists of the (potentially updated) tool identifier
                                              and argument dictionary.
5    end_tool_invocation_breakpoint(          Marks the end of a tool invocation event. The results produced
     results: Union[str, Dict]) ->            by the tool are provided to the debugger and may be altered in
     Union[str, Dict]                         the user interface before being returned to the agent.
6    commit_agent_changes(                    Commits the current state of the agent’s workspace to its ver-
     commit_summary:                   str, sion control repository and synchronizes the commit with the
     commit_description:        str)     -> AgentStepper backend. If no summary or description is supplied,
     bool                                   they are generated automatically. The method returns True if
                                            changes were committed, and False otherwise.
7    post_debug_message(message: str)         Sends a textual message to the debugger user interface. This
                                              method can be used by the agent program to provide additional
                                              contextual information or debugging notes to the developer.


to commit changes made to the agent’s workspace to the version control repository managed by
AgentStepper. By default, AgentStepper automatically commits changes after each tool invocation,
but developers can also use this API function to commit changes at other points in time, e.g., in
case the agent program modifies the code base without invoking a tool. Finally, entry 7 enables
the agent program to post arbitrary debug messages to the AgentStepper user interface, which
developers can use to provide additional context or debugging notes.
   To illustate how to use the API, consider the minimal agent program shown in Figure 3. The
agent consists of a main loop (lines 13–18) that repeatedly calls the think method to determine
the next action to perform and then executes that action. The think method first constructs the
next prompt to send to the LLM (line 3) and then invokes the LLM to obtain a response (line 5).
To use our approach, the agent program connects to AgentStepper by creating an AgentStepper
object (line 11). The agent program then invokes the API via this object: before and after each LLM
     10                                                                               Robert Hutter and Michael Pradel


 1   class MyAgent(Agent):
 2     def think(self) -> Action:
 3       prompt = self.get_next_prompt()
 4       prompt = self.debugger.begin_llm_query_breakpoint(prompt)
 5       response = self.llm.get_completion(prompt)
 6       response = self.debugger.end_llm_query_breakpoint(response)
 7       return self.response_to_action(response)
 8
 9   def main():
10     agent = MyAgent()
11     with AgentStepper('MyAgent', 'localhost', 8765, 'agent_workspace') as debugger:
12       agent.debugger = debugger
13       while not agent.is_done():
14         action = agent.think()
15         (action.name, action.args) = debugger.begin_tool_invocation_breakpoint(action.name, action.args)
16         result = environment.execute(action)
17         result = debugger.end_tool_invocation_breakpoint(result)
18         agent.add_observation_to_history(result)


      Fig. 3. Minimal agent program using the AgentStepper API. Code with gray background shows API calls.


     query (highlighted code around line 5), and before and after each tool invocation (highlighted code
     around line 16). Instead of propagating all events to AgentStepper, as done in this simple example,
     agent developers may also expose events selectively, giving them finer control over which events
     to inspect and manipulate during debugging.

     4     Evaluation
     We evaluate our work by applying AgentStepper to three state-of-the-art software development
     agents and by conducting a user study to assess its effectiveness in supporting developers. The
     evaluation addresses the following research questions:
     • RQ1: What effort is required to integrate AgentStepper into existing software development
        agents?
     • RQ2: To what extent does AgentStepper support developers in understanding and debugging
        software development agents?
     • RQ3: How does using AgentStepper affect the perceived workload of developers?

     4.1    Experimental Setup
       Implementation. We implement our approach to be compatible with state-of-the-art LLM agents
     and frameworks, such as SWE-Agent [54], OpenHands [52], RepairAgent [4], and Execution-
     Agent [6]. Since these projects are developed in Python, we implement both the API and the
     backend of AgentStepper in Python. The user interface is a web application implemented in Vue.js
     and is hosted on a web server started by the backend. For implementing the communication between
     the API and the backend, as well as the backend and the user interface, we use WebSockets, as
     they support bidirectional messaging and maintain a persistent connection throughout the agent’s
     execution.
       Agents. We integrate AgentStepper into three state-of-the-art, open-source software development
     agents that address three different tasks and are implemented in different ways. First, we use SWE-
     Agent [54], which is multi-purpose but was originally intended to help developers resolve problem
     reports by automatically generating code patches. As of September 2025, it was ranked as the
     top-performing agent on SWE-bench [25]. Second, we use RepairAgent [4], which focuses on
     automated program repair by generating patches for buggy code based on failing test cases. It takes
AgentStepper: Interactive Debugging of Software Development Agents                                 11


              Table 2. Overview of code changes made to integrate AgentStepper into agents.

                        Agent              API calls   Files modified    Lines changed
                        SWE-Agent                  7                 3             42
                        RepairAgent                7                 5             39
                        ExecutionAgent             5                 4             39



as an input a code base with failing tests and iteratively suggests code changes until all tests pass
or a maximum number of iterations is reached. As of its publication, it was the state-of-the-art
agent for program repair on the Defects4J benchmark [26]. Third, we use ExecutionAgent [6],
which is designed to autonomously set up programming environments by installing dependencies
and configuring settings. Its input is the URL of a GitHub repository, and it aims to create a
containerized environment where the test suite of the repository can be executed successfully.
As of its publication, ExecutionAgent was the first agent to address this task, which has also
been addressed by concurrent and follow-up work [13, 23, 38, 55]. These agents differ in their
tasks, architecture, and the tools they invoke, providing a diverse set of case studies for evaluating
AgentStepper.

4.2   RQ1: Integration Effort
To integrate AgentStepper into each of the three agents, we familiarize ourselves with their
implementations (a step that is not necessary for developers of an agent, who are the prime audience
for a debugging technique like AgentStepper) and then insert API calls at specific locations in
the agent program. Specifically, we instantiate the AgentStepper object at a point before entering
each agent’s main execution loop, establishing the connection to the AgentStepper backend before
any agent actions are performed. We then insert API calls at critical points in the agent program:
before and after each LLM query, before and after each tool invocation, and at locations where the
agent modifies the code base. To ensure seamless integration with the user interface, we implement
additional code that converts data structures internal to the agent program, such as agent-specific
prompt representations and tool result formats, into formats compatible with the AgentStepper
API. This conversion ensures that data produced by the agent is displayed correctly in the user
interface and that changes applied by developers in the user interface are consistently propagated
back to the agent program during interactive debugging sessions.
   To quantitatively assess the integration effort, we employ three metrics: the number of API calls
added, the number of files modified, and the lines of code changed (added, deleted, or modified).
These metrics provide an objective and quantifiable measure of the work required to integrate
AgentStepper into an agent program. We select these metrics over alternative approaches, such as
measuring integration time, which would be more subjective and influenced by factors including
developer familiarity with the agent code base and the complexity of the agent’s architecture.
   Table 2 summarizes the results of integrating AgentStepper into the three agents. Each agent
requires between 5 to 7 API calls to be added. The reason for these relatively small numbers is that
agent programs typically dispatch LLM queries and tool invocations through centralized functions
or methods, allowing us to insert API calls in just a few locations to capture all relevant events.
The modifications performed to integrate AgentStepper into the agents affects between 3 and 5
code files per agent, where the total lines of code changed per agent ranges between 39 and 42.
Overall, these findings indicate that the integration process is manageable and does not impose a
significant burden on developers.
12                                                                       Robert Hutter and Michael Pradel


4.2.1 Case Study 1: SWE-Agent. To offer a more qualitative perspective on the integration effort,
we present two case studies. The first case study focuses on SWE-Agent, where we made a total of
42 lines of code changes across 3 files. To instrument SWE-Agent, we first insert API calls for LLM
queries and tool invocations. The AgentStepper object is instantiated in run_single.py before the
agent starts, ensuring it persists throughout the agent’s execution. For debugging LLM queries, API
calls are added in the query method of models.py before and after fetching the LLM completion.
The entire message history, which consists of prior queries and tool invocations, is passed as a
JSON-serializable dictionary to the begin breakpoint API call. This format enhances readability
in the user interface. If modifications are made, they are directly written to the internal messages
variable. Ending the query breakpoint involves passing the completion result as a JSON structure
to the debugger, allowing for either the original or modified result to be returned.
   Handling tool calls and their effects is more complex because SWE-Agent runs within an isolated
Docker container. The container starts at the beginning of execution, and the agent copies the
user’s code repository into it. Throughout execution, the agent executes commands within this
isolated environment, modifying only the container’s copy of the code. Normally, SWE-Agent
transfers the changes to the user’s file system and applies them to the original repository only if
the agent successfully generates a submission. We enable AgentStepper to capture tool invocations
and results despite this isolation by modifying the forward method in agents.py. The modified code
captures the tool invocation before it is being sent to the container and sends it to the debugger
via the begin_tool_invocation_breakpoint API call as a a JSON-serializable dictionary. After tool
execution, we capture the result and send it to the debugger to end the breakpoint. To track code
modifications made within the Docker container, we utilize SWE-Agent’s submission mechanism
to generate and apply a patch to the local repository after each tool invocation.



4.2.2 Case Study 2: RepairAgent. The second case study focuses on RepairAgent, where we made a
total of 39 lines of code changes across 5 files. RepairAgent is built on top of the AutoGPT framework
and operates in an isolated devcontainer. To integrate AgentStepper into RepairAgent, the first task
is to modify the devcontainer’s configuration file. This allows the agent program to connect to
AgentStepper by adding a line to devcontainer.json that instructs Docker to use the host machine’s
network. By sharing the host machine’s network, the agent program can communicate directly
with AgentStepper’s backend.
   We instantiate the AgentStepper object in the run_interaction_loop function of
main.py, which implements the agents cyclic operation. To set a breakpoint at each tool invocation,
we enclose the agent.execute() statement in API calls within the loop of the run_interaction_loop
function. Because the command name is stored as a string and the command arguments are stored
as a JSON-serializable dictionary object, we pass these values to the API directly without con-
version. Consequently, we can apply modifications directly. The same applies to the result of the
tool invocation, which is stored as a string. In contrast, the prompts are stored in an object that
is not a dictionary, thus we convert the object into a JSON-serializable dictionary before passing
it to the begin breakpoint call. To apply modifications, we convert the modified dictionary back
into a ChatSequence object. Since the LLM completion is returned as a string, we pass it directly
to the end breakpoint call, and we apply modifications directly. To record the individual attempts
made at fixing the bug by RepairAgent, an additional step is necessary. Specifically, we add a
call to commit_agent_changes right after the proposed fix is written to the code base but before
RepairAgent may revert it in case the fix fails the test cases.
AgentStepper: Interactive Debugging of Software Development Agents                                    13


4.3     RQ2: Usefulness for Understanding and Debugging Agents
The primary objective of AgentStepper is to support developers in understanding and debugging
software development agents. To evaluate the effectiveness of AgentStepper in achieving this
objective, we conduct a user study examining to what extent our approach supports users in
comprehending agent trajectories and in locating bugs. The study involves twelve participants,
three tasks, and three software developments agents. It is a between-group study, in which there
are two groups of participants: the debugger group that completes tasks using AgentStepper and
the control group that completes tasks using conventional methods.
4.3.1    Methodology.
   Tasks. We design three tasks that mimic two typical kinds of problems encountered during
the development of software development agents. The first kind of problem, called trajectory
comprehension, involves understanding and interpreting the behavior of an agent based on its
trajectory. Specifically, participants analyze a partially successful agent trajectory, interpret it, and
then answer a series of questions about the agent’s behavior. The second kind of problem, called
bug identification, involves locating and diagnosing bugs in an agent program based on a trajectory
of the agent. Participants are given a trajectory where an agent fails to achieve its goal due to a
bug in the agent program’s logic, and are asked to identify and describe the bug. We design one
trajectory comprehension task and two bug identification tasks, each involving a different software
development agent.
   For the trajectory comprehension task, participants review a trajectory of SWE-Agent. In this
scenario, the agent receives a feature request to add income-tracking functionality to a personal
finance tracker CLI application in Python, along with specific requirements, including a description
of a new class and modifications to existing sources. During execution, the agent successfully adds
the new sources but becomes stuck in a loop when editing an existing file, repeatedly applying the
same modification until termination. To assess participants’ understanding of the agent’s behavior,
they are asked to answer 14 questions about the trajectory. We include both high-level questions
concerning the entire trajectory, such as the agent’s goals, whether it completed its task, and the
key challenges encountered, and low-level questions focusing on specific cycles. Many of these
questions address key trajectory characteristics, including recurring action sequences and the
semantic coherence linking thoughts and actions across multiple cycles [5]. For example, questions
posed in this regard include: “Analyze the final four changes the agent makes to the repository. How
do these changes relate to each other?" or “What feedback does the agent receive after its first attempt
to run the test script for the finance tracker, and how does it influence the next action?" Furthermore,
we ask for precise details regarding individual changes, such as “What specific changes does the
agent make to the cli.py file when it first modifies it?" and “Which Python packages does the agent
install over the course of the run?" Participants are given 25 minutes to answer these questions,
either in free-form or by copying relevant information from the logs.
   For the first of the two bug identification tasks, participants analyze a trajectory from RepairAgent.
The agent attempts to fix an issue in the Apache CSV Java library, but the agent fails due to a bug
in the agent program that prevents it from applying its suggested changes to the code base. The
second bug identification task involves a trajectory from ExecutionAgent. In this scenario, the agent
attempts to build the Google Gson project and run its test suite, but the agent fails because it cannot
connect to a running Docker container due to a bug in the agent program. Participants are given
12 minutes to identify and describe the bug that prevents the agent from succeeding.
  Task Evaluation. As all answers are given in free-form, we develop a standardized grading scheme
and then use it to evaluate responses. For the trajectory comprehension task, we grade each of the
14                                                                            Robert Hutter and Michael Pradel


                       Table 3. Participants of the user study and assignment to groups.

     Participant background                                             Control group      Debugger group
     Occupation                  Bachelor’s Computer Science Student                 3                   2
                                 Master’s Computer Science Student                   0                   1
                                 PhD Candidate in Computer Science                   3                   3
     Programming experience      1-3 years                                           1                   2
                                 3-5 years                                           3                   2
                                 5-10 years                                          2                   1
                                 10+ years                                           0                   1
     LLM familiarity             None                                                2                   2
                                 Basic (heard of them)                               2                   1
                                 Moderate (configured and used)                      1                   1
                                 Advanced (developed or analyzed)                    1                   2


14 questions individually. For each question, we create an expected answer and determine a total
number of points that can be awarded for an answer. For example, a binary question gives either
zero or one point, whereas a more complex question may give up to five points depending on the
level of detail provided in the answer. The grading scheme is initially developed by the first author
of this paper, and then reviewed and refined together with another author to reduce subjectiveness
and bias. After grading, we normalize points by assigning each question the same weight to ensure
all questions contribute equally to the total score. For the bug identification tasks, there is only
a single question, graded as correct or incorrect depending on whether the participant correctly
identifies the bug in the agent program.
   Participants and groups. We recruit twelve participants for the user study: half are active computer
science students enrolled in bachelor’s or master’s programs, and half are PhD candidates in
computer science. Upon registering for the study, all participants complete a form detailing their
demographics and prior technical experience in software development and LLM agent development.
Based on the information about the technical background of participants, we assign each participant
to either the control group or the debugger group. Participants in the debugger group complete
the tasks using AgentStepper, where the trajectory is loaded into the debugger interface. The
participants are asked to use only the features of AgentStepper to explore the agent’s behavior.
The control group receives the console output and the detailed log files produced by the respective
agents. Those participants can use a file viewer of their choice to analyze the logs, for which all
participants chose the VSCode IDE.
   Table 3 shows the assignment of participants to the two groups. Both groups contain three
computer science students and three PhD candidates. Each group includes two participants with
no prior knowledge of LLM agents and two to three participants with moderate or advanced
knowledge. Both groups also have similar programming experience.
   Once assigned to their respective groups, each participant completes all three tasks. That is, the
total number of task instances completed in the study is 36 (12 participants × 3 tasks).
   Procedure. Each participant books a one-hour session in advance. To ensure consistency, all
sessions follow the same structure and are conducted by the same experimenter. The experimenter
follows a standardized study script and reads it verbatim, providing identical information to all
participants. Participants receive a three-minute introduction to LLM agents, covering high-level
background information and the typical structure and workflow of agents. After this introduction,
        AgentStepper: Interactive Debugging of Software Development Agents                                                                                  15

                               SWE-Agent Trajectory Comprehension             RepairAgent Bug Identification               ExecutionAgent Bug Identification
                          90                                              6                     Performance            6                      Performance
                          80                                                                      Failure                                       Failure
                                                                          5                       Bug Identified       5                        Bug Identified




Overall Performance (%)
                          70
                          60                                              4                                            4
                          50                                          N   3                                        N   3
                          40
                                             Familiarity                  2                                            2
                          30                      Advanced
                                                  Moderate
                                                  Basic                   1                                            1
                          20
                                                  None
                                                                          0                                            0
                                  Control Group      Debugger Group           Control Group   Debugger Group                Control Group    Debugger Group

        Fig. 4. RQ2 results for trajectory comprehension task (left) and the two bug localization tasks (middle and
        right).


        participants are informed of their group assignment and receive a three-minute explanation of the
        tools available for completing the tasks. Additionally, participants have three minutes to familiarize
        themselves with the tools. Following this orientation, participants complete the tasks. Each task is
        timed.
        4.3.2                     Results.
           Trajectory comprehension task. Figure 4 (left) presents the results of the trajectory comprehension
        task. The plot shows the scores achieved by the participants in both groups, where 100% corresponds
        to a perfect score. The median performance achieved by the control group and debugger group
        is 64% and 67%, respectively. To illustrate the performance of individual participants, the dots in
        the plot represent the scores of each participant, which we color depending on the familiarity of
        the participant with LLM agents. For both groups, we observe a high variance, with participants
        who are more familiar with LLM agents generally achieving higher scores, whereas participants
        with little or no familiarity tend to achieve lower scores. Overall, the participants in the debugger
        group slightly outperform those in the control group, with a difference in median performance of 3
        percentage points.
          Bug identification tasks. The middle and right-hand plots in Figure 4 present the results of the
        two bug identification tasks. For each task and group, the plot shows how many of the participants
        correctly identified the bug in the agent program (blue) or failed to do so (red, shaded). The debugger
        group has only five participants for the bug identification tasks, as we remove one participant who
        has prior experience with the two agents used in these tasks to avoid bias. As shown in the middle
        plot, only one of the control group participants correctly identifies the bug in RepairAgent, whereas
        three out of five participants in the debugger group do so. Similarly, in the right-hand plot, only
        one participant in the control group correctly identifies the bug in ExecutionAgent, whereas three
        participants in the debugger group do so. While the total numbers are the same for the two tasks,
        the individual participants who correctly identify the bugs differ between the tasks. Overall, the
        debugger group clearly outperforms the control group, with a total of 2/12 = 17% of participants in
        the control group correctly identifying the bugs, compared to 6/10 = 60% in the debugger group.
           Discussion. To statistically analyze the results, we use the Mann-Whitney U test [37] with a
        significance level of 𝑝 < 0.05 to compare the two groups. Due to the small sample size and diverse
        participant backgrounds, detecting statistically significant differences is challenging. Nevertheless,
16                                                                                                                Robert Hutter and Michael Pradel

                                                Perceived Difficulty of SWE-Agent Trajectory Comprehension Task
                         7                                                                                                 Participant Group



      Avg Score (± SD)
                         6                                                                                                    Control Group
                                                                                                                              Debugger Group
                         5
                         4
                         3
                         2
                         1
                                  Mental Demand        Temporal Demand Perceived Performance*           Effort*              Frustration
                                                    Perceived Difficulty of RepairAgent Bug Identification Task
                         7                                                                                                 Participant Group



      Avg Score (± SD)
                         6                                                                                                    Control Group
                                                                                                                              Debugger Group
                         5
                         4
                         3
                         2
                         1
                                 Mental Demand        Temporal Demand Perceived Performance            Effort             Frustration*
                                                  Perceived Difficulty of ExecutionAgent Bug Identification Task
                         7                                                                                                 Participant Group



      Avg Score (± SD)
                         6                                                                                                    Control Group
                                                                                                                              Debugger Group
                         5
                         4
                         3
                         2
                         1
                                Mental Demand          Temporal Demand Perceived Performance               Effort              Frustration
                             (Scale 1-7) Smaller Better in Every Dimension * Statistically significant difference between groups (p < 0.05)

                                Fig. 5. RQ3 results showing NASA TLX scores for the three tasks (lower = better).


we observe a statistically significant difference for two out of the three studied tasks: For the
two bug localization tasks, the debugger group outperforms the control group in a statistically
significant manner.
   Taking a more qualitative perspective, we observe two main reasons why AgentStepper supports
users in understanding and debugging software development agents. One reason is that the approach
enables users to see information that otherwise is very hard to obtain from the logs alone. For
example, the bug in RepairAgent causes a code change to be not applied to the code base, despite
the corresponding tool call returning a success message. The fact that AgentStepper captures
intermediate code changes made by the agent and presents them to the user as diffs allows users to
quickly identify this discrepancy. The other reason is that AgentStepper allows users to retrieve
information about an agent’s behavior more easily than by inspecting log files. In particular, the
single-sentence summary of each event helps users to quickly grasp the essence of an event without
having to read through lengthy log messages.

4.4             RQ3: Workload Perceived by Agent Developers
To answer the question of how using AgentStepper affects the perceived workload of developers,
we ask participants to assess the subjective difficulty of performing the tasks. After each task,
participants complete the NASA Task Load Index (TLX) [20] form, a standardized questionnaire
that measures perceived workload across multiple dimensions: mental demand, temporal demand,
effort, performance, and frustration.2
2We omit the “physical demand” dimension, as it does not apply to computer-based tasks.
AgentStepper: Interactive Debugging of Software Development Agents                                 17


   Figure 5 shows the NASA TLX scores for the three tasks, where a lower score indicates a lower
perceived workload. We find that participants in the debugger group consistently report lower
workload across all three tasks compared to the control group. The differences are most pronounced
for the perceived performance, i.e., how successful participants feel in accomplishing the tasks,
and for frustration, i.e., how insecure, discouraged, irritated, and annoyed participants feel during
the tasks. For example, the average frustration score across all three tasks is 5.4 for the control
group, whereas it is only 2.4 for the debugger group. We apply the Mann-Whitney U test [37]
with a significance level of 𝑝 < 0.05 and mark statistically significant differences in the figure
with an asterisk. Similar to RQ2, the small sample size yields limited statistical power, but we
observe statistically significant differences for three of the individual task-dimension combinations:
perceived performance and effort on the trajectory comprehension task, and frustration on the
RepairAgent bug identification task. Beyond statistical significance, the consistent trend of lower
workload scores in the debugger group across all tasks and dimensions suggests that AgentStepper
effectively supports users in understanding and debugging software development agents.

4.5    Threats to Validity
Our evaluation has certain limitations that may affect its validity and generalizability. First, the
code changes and API calls metrics for RQ1 may not fully capture all integration effort, such
as understanding agent architecture. We select these metrics because they provide objective,
quantifiable measures enabling consistent comparison. Second, the paper’s main author was not
involved in the original agents’ development; the original developers users are likely to integrate
with comparable or less effort given their familiarity. Third, the user study involves a relatively
small participant group, limiting statistical power. We mitigate this by carefully balancing group
assignments based on technical background. Fourth, study tasks may not fully represent real-world
debugging scenarios. We address this by using multiple activity types and three agents. Fifth,
participants were not original developers, potentially affecting their performance. Results suggest
participants with more LLM agent familiarity benefit from AgentStepper at least as much as those
with less familiarity. Finally, focusing on three specific agents limits generalizability. We mitigate
this by selecting agents differing in tasks, architectures, and toolsets.

5     Related Work
  Software engineering agents. Recent years have seen a surge of interest in software engineering
agents that leverage LLMs to assist developers in various tasks. Program repair and issue solving are
the most prominent tasks, with notable examples including RepairAgent [4], AutoCodeRover [60],
OpenHands [52], SWE-Agent [54], Magis [51], AgentCoder [24], MarsCode Agent [35], FixA-
gent [30], and Trae Agent [15]. Other tasks addressed by software engineering agents include
environment setup, e.g., by ExecutionAgent [6] and others [13, 23, 38, 55], root cause analysis [46],
generating issue-reproducing tests [1, 10, 40, 41], and debugging computational notebooks [17].
Rather than proposing a new agent, our work provides a technique to improve the development of
existing and future software engineering agents by enabling interactive debugging. Trust has been
identified as a key concern in software engineering agents [47]. We see interactive debugging as
one way to increase trust in an agent’s behavior.
   Studies of software engineering agents. To better understand the behavior of software engineering
agents, several recent works have conducted empirical studies [5, 7]. These studies yield insights
into agent performance, common failure modes, and typical interaction patterns. Our work could
support such studies by providing a tool for interactively exploring and analyzing agent trajectories.
Others aim to automatically identify error types in agent trajectories [12], which is orthogonal to
18                                                                            Robert Hutter and Michael Pradel


our goal of enabling human developers to debug agents. Finally, some studies are primarily about
the end-to-end effectiveness of software engineering agents [45], which differs from our goal of
debugging the internal behavior of an agent.

   Debugging LLM agents. Most closely related to our work on tools and techniques for debugging
LLM agents. Several of them focus on multi-agent systems, enabling inspection of the messages
exchanged between multiple agents [14], their social interaction patterns [36], or trying to attribute
failures to specific agents via spectrum-based fault localization [16]. Raggy [29] offers interactive
debugging tool for retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems, helping to understand the
impact of hyperparameters, such as the number of retrieved documents. Unlike AgentStepper, none
of the above techniques is designed for LLM agents that interact with external tools, and none offer
specific support for software development agents, such as displaying code changes made by an
agent. Watson [44] proposes a surrogate agent that operates in parallel with the main agent, trying
to reach the same result while also providing explanations for its actions. Finally, some commercial
providers of LLMs offer tools to inspect trajectories: e.g., OpenAI’s Platform Tools offers a tracing
dashboard that displays LLM calls and responses made by an agent in real time. However, it is not
interactive, cannot pause or modify agent execution, and also offers no specific support for agents
that interact with code repositories.

   Debugging. Motivated by the never-ending imperfection of software, debugging traditional
software has a long history. Popular techniques include text-based, interactive debuggers, such
as the GNU debugger (gdb) [50], back-in-time debugging [34], question-based debugging [27],
statistical debugging [11, 33], performance debugging [19, 49], and delta debugging, which identifies
those parts of a program input responsible for a failure [22, 39, 59]. Our work builds on this rich
history by adapting the concept of interactive debugging to the context of software development
agents, which present unique challenges due to their reliance on LLMs and interactions with
external tools. Other work explores how to enable LLMs to interact with debuggers, either to
partially automate the debugging process [3, 32] or to improve LLM-based code generation [57, 61].
While that line of work lets LLMs use debuggers, our work focuses on enabling human developers
to debug LLM-based software development agents.

6    Conclusion
This paper presents AgentStepper, the first interactive debugger for software development agents
that enables developers to step through an agent’s execution, inspect its internal state, and modify
its behavior at runtime. Our evaluation demonstrates that integrating AgentStepper into existing
agents requires only modest effort, and a user study shows that AgentStepper helps developers better
understand and debug software development agents while reducing their perceived workload. We
envision our approach to contribute to the development of more reliable and trustworthy software
development agents, which is an essential step toward their broader adoption in practice.

7    Data Availability
Our implementation and all relevant data are available at:
https://github.com/sola-st/AgentStepper

References
 [1] Toufique Ahmed, Martin Hirzel, Rangeet Pan, Avraham Shinnar, and Saurabh Sinha. 2024. TDD-Bench Verified:
     Can LLMs Generate Tests for Issues Before They Get Resolved? CoRR abs/2412.02883 (2024). arXiv:2412.02883
     doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2412.02883
AgentStepper: Interactive Debugging of Software Development Agents                                                        19


 [2] Ramakrishna Bairi, Atharv Sonwane, Aditya Kanade, Vageesh D. C., Arun Iyer, Suresh Parthasarathy, Sriram K.
     Rajamani, Balasubramanyan Ashok, and Shashank Shet. 2024. CodePlan: Repository-Level Coding using LLMs and
     Planning. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 1, FSE (2024), 675–698. doi:10.1145/3643757
 [3] Yasharth Bajpai, Bhavya Chopra, Param Biyani, Cagri Aslan, Dustin Coleman, Sumit Gulwani, Chris Parnin, Arjun
     Radhakrishna, and Gustavo Soares. 2024. Let’s Fix this Together: Conversational Debugging with GitHub Copilot. In
     2024 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC). IEEE, 1–12.
 [4] Islem Bouzenia, Premkumar T. Devanbu, and Michael Pradel. 2025. RepairAgent: An Autonomous, LLM-Based Agent
     for Program Repair. In 47th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2025, Ottawa, ON, Canada,
     April 26 - May 6, 2025. IEEE, 2188–2200. doi:10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00157
 [5] Islem Bouzenia and Michael Pradel. 2025. Understanding Software Engineering Agents: A Study of Thought-Action-
     Result Trajectories. In ASE.
 [6] Islem Bouzenia and Michael Pradel. 2025. You Name It, I Run It: An LLM Agent to Execute Tests of Arbitrary Projects.
     Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 2, ISSTA (2025), 1054–1076. doi:10.1145/3728922
 [7] Ira Ceka, Saurabh Pujar, Shyam Ramji, Luca Buratti, Gail Kaiser, and Baishakhi Ray. 2025. Understanding Software
     Engineering Agents Through the Lens of Traceability: An Empirical Study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08311 (2025).
 [8] Jizhou Chen and Samuel Lee Cong. 2025. Agentguard: Repurposing agentic orchestrator for safety evaluation of tool
     orchestration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09809 (2025).
 [9] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harrison
     Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov,
     Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power,
     Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias
     Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas
     Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N.
     Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira
     Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech
     Zaremba. 2021. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code. CoRR abs/2107.03374 (2021). arXiv:2107.03374
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374
[10] Runxiang Cheng, Michele Tufano, Jürgen Cito, José Cambronero, Pat Rondon, Renyao Wei, Aaron Sun, and Satish
     Chandra. 2025. Agentic Bug Reproduction for Effective Automated Program Repair at Google. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2502.01821 (2025).
[11] Trishul M. Chilimbi, Ben Liblit, Krishna K. Mehra, Aditya V. Nori, and Kapil Vaswani. 2009. HOLMES: Effective
     statistical debugging via efficient path profiling. In 31st International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2009,
     May 16-24, 2009, Vancouver, Canada, Proceedings. 34–44.
[12] Darshan Deshpande, Varun Gangal, Hersh Mehta, Jitin Krishnan, Anand Kannappan, and Rebecca Qian. 2025. TRAIL:
     Trace Reasoning and Agentic Issue Localization. arXiv:2505.08638 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.08638
[13] Aleksandra Eliseeva, Alexander Kovrigin, Ilia Kholkin, Egor Bogomolov, and Yaroslav Zharov. 2025. EnvBench: A
     Benchmark for Automated Environment Setup. CoRR abs/2503.14443 (2025). arXiv:2503.14443 doi:10.48550/ARXIV.
     2503.14443
[14] Will Epperson, Gagan Bansal, Victor Dibia, Adam Fourney, Jack Gerrits, Erkang Zhu, and Saleema Amershi. 2025.
     Interactive Debugging and Steering of Multi-Agent AI Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.02068 (2025).
[15] Pengfei Gao, Zhao Tian, Xiangxin Meng, Xinchen Wang, Ruida Hu, Yuanan Xiao, Yizhou Liu, Zhao Zhang, Junjie
     Chen, Cuiyun Gao, et al. 2025. Trae agent: An llm-based agent for software engineering with test-time scaling. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2507.23370 (2025).
[16] Yu Ge, Linna Xie, Zhong Li, Yu Pei, and Tian Zhang. 2025. Who is Introducing the Failure? Automatically Attributing
     Failures of Multi-Agent Systems via Spectrum Analysis. arXiv:2509.13782 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.13782
[17] Konstantin Grotov, Artem Borzilov, Maksim Krivobok, Timofey Bryksin, and Yaroslav Zharov. 2024. Debug Smarter,
     Not Harder: AI Agents for Error Resolution in Computational Notebooks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.14393 (2024).
[18] Priyanshu Gupta, Avishree Khare, Yasharth Bajpai, Saikat Chakraborty, Sumit Gulwani, Aditya Kanade, Arjun Rad-
     hakrishna, Gustavo Soares, and Ashish Tiwari. 2023. Grace: Language Models Meet Code Edits. In Proceedings of the
     31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering,
     ESEC/FSE 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA, December 3-9, 2023, Satish Chandra, Kelly Blincoe, and Paolo Tonella (Eds.).
     ACM, 1483–1495. doi:10.1145/3611643.3616253
[19] Shi Han, Yingnong Dang, Song Ge, Dongmei Zhang, and Tao Xie. 2012. Performance debugging in the large via
     mining millions of stack traces. In International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 145–155.
[20] Sandra G. Hart and Lowell E. Staveland. 1988. Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results of Empirical
     and Theoretical Research. In Human Mental Workload, Peter A. Hancock and Najmedin Meshkati (Eds.). Advances in
     Psychology, Vol. 52. North-Holland, 139–183. doi:10.1016/S0166-4115(08)62386-9
20                                                                                        Robert Hutter and Michael Pradel


[21] Ishrak Hayet, Adam Scott, and Marcelo d’Amorim. 2024. ChatAssert: LLM-based Test Oracle Generation with External
     Tools Assistance. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2024), 1–15. doi:10.1109/TSE.2024.3519159
[22] Satia Herfert, Jibesh Patra, and Michael Pradel. 2017. Automatically Reducing Tree-Structured Test Inputs. In ASE.
[23] Ruida Hu, Chao Peng, Xinchen Wang, and Cuiyun Gao. 2025. An LLM-based Agent for Reliable Docker Environment
     Configuration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13681 (2025).
[24] Dong Huang, Qingwen Bu, Jie M. Zhang, Michael Luck, and Heming Cui. 2024. AgentCoder: Multi-Agent-based Code
     Generation with Iterative Testing and Optimisation. arXiv:2312.13010 [cs.CL]
[25] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R. Narasimhan. 2024.
     SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-world Github Issues?. In The Twelfth International Conference on
     Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?
     id=VTF8yNQM66
[26] René Just, Darioush Jalali, and Michael D. Ernst. 2014. Defects4J: a database of existing faults to enable controlled
     testing studies for Java programs. In International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, ISSTA ’14, San Jose, CA,
     USA - July 21 - 26, 2014, Corina S. Pasareanu and Darko Marinov (Eds.). ACM, 437–440. doi:10.1145/2610384.2628055
[27] Andrew Jensen Ko and Brad A. Myers. 2008. Debugging reinvented: asking and answering why and why not questions
     about program behavior. In International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). ACM, 301–310.
[28] LangChain. Accessed in January 2026. LangChain. https://www.langchain.com/.
[29] Quentin Romero Lauro, Shreya Shankar, Sepanta Zeighami, and Aditya Parameswaran. 2025. RAG Without the Lag:
     Interactive Debugging for Retrieval-Augmented Generation Pipelines. arXiv:2504.13587 [cs.HC] https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2504.13587
[30] Cheryl Lee, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Longji Yang, Jen tse Huang, Zhouruixin Zhu, Lingming Zhang, and Michael R.
     Lyu. 2024. A Unified Debugging Approach via LLM-Based Multi-Agent Synergy. arXiv:2404.17153 [cs.SE] https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2404.17153
[31] Caroline Lemieux, Jeevana Priya Inala, Shuvendu K Lahiri, and Siddhartha Sen. 2023. CODAMOSA: Escaping Coverage
     Plateaus in Test Generation with Pre-trained Large Language Models. In 45th International Conference on Software
     Engineering, ser. ICSE.
[32] Kyla Levin, Nicolas van Kempen, Emery D. Berger, and Stephen N. Freund. 2024. ChatDBG: An AI-Powered Debugging
     Assistant. arXiv:2403.16354 [cs.SE]
[33] Ben Liblit, Mayur Naik, Alice X. Zheng, Alexander Aiken, and Michael I. Jordan. 2005. Scalable statistical bug isolation.
     In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 2005 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, Chicago,
     IL, USA, June 12-15, 2005. 15–26.
[34] Adrian Lienhard, Tudor Gîrba, and Oscar Nierstrasz. 2008. Practical Object-Oriented Back-in-Time Debugging. In
     European Conference in Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP), Vol. 5142. Springer, 592–615.
[35] Yizhou Liu, Pengfei Gao, Xinchen Wang, Chao Peng, and Zhao Zhang. 2024. MarsCode Agent: AI-native Automated
     Bug Fixing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00899 (2024).
[36] Jiaying Lu, Bo Pan, Jieyi Chen, Yingchaojie Feng, Jingyuan Hu, Yuchen Peng, and Wei Chen. 2024. Agentlens: Visual
     analysis for agent behaviors in llm-based autonomous systems. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
     Graphics (2024).
[37] Patrick E. McKnight and Julius Najab. 2010. Mann-Whitney U Test. In The Corsini Encyclopedia of Psychology. John
     Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 1. arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9780470479216.corpsy0524 doi:10.1002/
     9780470479216.corpsy0524
[38] Louis Milliken, Sungmin Kang, and Shin Yoo. 2025. Beyond pip install: Evaluating llm agents for the automated
     installation of python projects. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering
     (SANER). IEEE, 1–11.
[39] Ghassan Misherghi and Zhendong Su. 2006. HDD: Hierarchical Delta Debugging. In Proceedings of the 28th international
     conference on Software engineering. ACM, 142–151.
[40] Niels Mündler, Mark Niklas Müller, Jingxuan He, and Martin Vechev. 2024. Code Agents are State of the Art Software
     Testers. arXiv:2406.12952 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.12952
[41] Noor Nashid, Islem Bouzenia, Michael Pradel, and Ali Mesbah. 2026. Issue2Test: Generating Reproducing Test Cases
     from Issue Reports. In International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE).
[42] OpenAI. Accessed in January 2026. OpenAI Platform. https://platform.openai.com/.
[43] Jiayi Pan, Xingyao Wang, Graham Neubig, Navdeep Jaitly, Heng Ji, Alane Suhr, and Yizhe Zhang. 2025. Training
     Software Engineering Agents and Verifiers with SWE-Gym. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine
     Learning, ICML 2025, Vancouver, BC, Canada, July 13-19, 2025. OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=
     Cq1BNvHx74
[44] Benjamin Rombaut, Sogol Masoumzadeh, Kirill Vasilevski, Dayi Lin, and Ahmed E. Hassan. 2025. Watson: A Cognitive
     Observability Framework for the Reasoning of LLM-Powered Agents. In ASE.
AgentStepper: Interactive Debugging of Software Development Agents                                                     21


[45] Pat Rondon, Renyao Wei, José Cambronero, Jürgen Cito, Aaron Sun, Siddhant Sanyam, Michele Tufano, and Satish
     Chandra. 2025. Evaluating Agent-Based Program Repair at Google. In 47th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
     Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice, SEIP@ICSE 2025, Ottawa, ON, Canada, April 27 - May 3, 2025.
     IEEE, 365–376. doi:10.1109/ICSE-SEIP66354.2025.00038
[46] Devjeet Roy, Xuchao Zhang, Rashi Bhave, Chetan Bansal, Pedro Henrique B. Las-Casas, Rodrigo Fonseca, and Saravan
     Rajmohan. 2024. Exploring LLM-Based Agents for Root Cause Analysis. In Companion Proceedings of the 32nd ACM
     International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering, FSE 2024, Porto de Galinhas, Brazil, July 15-19,
     2024, Marcelo d’Amorim (Ed.). ACM, 208–219. doi:10.1145/3663529.3663841
[47] Abhik Roychoudhury, Corina Pasareanu, Michael Pradel, and Baishakhi Ray. 2025. Agentic AI Software Engineers:
     Programming with Trust. Communications of the ACM (CACM) (2025).
[48] Gabriel Ryan, Siddhartha Jain, Mingyue Shang, Shiqi Wang, Xiaofei Ma, Murali Krishna Ramanathan, and Baishakhi
     Ray. 2024. Code-Aware Prompting: A study of Coverage Guided Test Generation in Regression Setting using LLM. In
     FSE.
[49] Linhai Song and Shan Lu. 2014. Statistical debugging for real-world performance problems. In Conference on Object
     Oriented Programming Systems Languages & Applications (OOPSLA). ACM, 561–578.
[50] Richard Stallman, Roland Pesch, Stan Shebs, et al. 1988. Debugging with GDB. Free Software Foundation 675 (1988).
[51] Wei Tao, Yucheng Zhou, Wenqiang Zhang, and Yu Cheng. 2024. MAGIS: LLM-Based Multi-Agent Framework for
     GitHub Issue Resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17927 (2024).
[52] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li,
     Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff,
     Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin, Robert Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. 2024. OpenHands:
     An Open Platform for AI Software Developers as Generalist Agents. arXiv:2407.16741 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2407.16741
[53] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Matteo Paltenghi, Jia Le Tian, Michael Pradel, and Lingming Zhang. 2024. Fuzz4All: Universal
     Fuzzing with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software
     Engineering, ICSE 2024, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14-20, 2024. ACM, 126:1–126:13. doi:10.1145/3597503.3639121
[54] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press.
     2024. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering. In Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024,
     Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024, Amir Globersons, Lester Mackey, Danielle Belgrave, Angela Fan,
     Ulrich Paquet, Jakub M. Tomczak, and Cheng Zhang (Eds.). http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/
     5a7c947568c1b1328ccc5230172e1e7c-Abstract-Conference.html
[55] John Yang, Kilian Leret, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kabir Khandpur, Yanzhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Ofir Press,
     Ludwig Schmidt, and Diyi Yang. 2025. SWE-smith: Scaling Data for Software Engineering Agents. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2504.21798 (2025).
[56] Zhuowen Yin, Cuifeng Gao, Chunsong Fan, Wenzhang Yang, Yinxing Xue, and Lijun Zhang. 2025. A Comprehensive
     Empirical Evaluation of Agent Frameworks on Code-centric Software Engineering Tasks. arXiv:2511.00872 [cs.SE]
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.00872
[57] Xingdi Yuan, Morgane M Moss, Charbel El Feghali, Chinmay Singh, Darya Moldavskaya, Drew MacPhee, Lucas Caccia,
     Matheus Pereira, Minseon Kim, Alessandro Sordoni, et al. 2025. debug-gym: A Text-Based Environment for Interactive
     Debugging. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21557 (2025).
[58] Zhiqiang Yuan, Mingwei Liu, Shiji Ding, Kaixin Wang, Yixuan Chen, Xin Peng, and Yiling Lou. 2024. Evaluating and
     Improving ChatGPT for Unit Test Generation. Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 1, FSE (2024), 1703–1726. doi:10.1145/3660783
[59] Andreas Zeller and Ralf Hildebrandt. 2002. Simplifying and isolating failure-inducing input. IEEE Transactions on
     Software Engineering 28, 2 (2002), 183–200.
[60] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. 2024. AutoCodeRover: Autonomous Program
     Improvement. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis,
     ISSTA 2024, Vienna, Austria, September 16-20, 2024, Maria Christakis and Michael Pradel (Eds.). ACM, 1592–1604.
     doi:10.1145/3650212.3680384
[61] Li Zhong, Zilong Wang, and Jingbo Shang. 2024. Debug like a Human: A Large Language Model Debugger via
     Verifying Runtime Execution Step by Step. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2024,
     Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 11-16, 2024, Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (Eds.).
     Association for Computational Linguistics, 851–870. doi:10.18653/V1/2024.FINDINGS-ACL.49
[62] Albert Ziegler, Eirini Kalliamvakou, X Alice Li, Andrew Rice, Devon Rifkin, Shawn Simister, Ganesh Sittampalam, and
     Edward Aftandilian. 2022. Productivity assessment of neural code completion. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGPLAN
     International Symposium on Machine Programming. 21–29.
