                                                                                                                                     Nanbeige


                                        SWE-World: Building Software Engineering Agents in
                                                   Docker-Free Environments

                                                         Shuang Sun1∗, Huatong Song1∗ , Lisheng Huang1∗ , Jinhao Jiang1∗ ,
                                                        Ran Le2 , Zhihao Lv1 , Zongchao Chen2 , Yiwen Hu1 , Wenyang Luo1 ,
                                                    Wayne Xin Zhao1†, Yang Song2† , Hongteng Xu1 , Tao Zhang2 , Ji-Rong Wen1
                                                        1
                                                          Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China.




arXiv:2602.03419v1 [cs.SE] 3 Feb 2026
                                                                            2
                                                                              BOSS Zhipin, Beijing, China.
                                                     sunshuang@ruc.edu.cn, batmanfly@gmail.com, songyang@kanzhun.com


                                                                                         Abstract
                                                     Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have enabled software en-
                                                     gineering agents to tackle complex code modification tasks. Most existing ap-
                                                     proaches rely on execution feedback from containerized environments, which
                                                     require dependency-complete setup and physical execution of programs and tests.
                                                     While effective, this paradigm is resource-intensive and difficult to maintain, sub-
                                                     stantially complicating agent training and limiting scalability. We propose SWE-
                                                     World, a Docker-free framework that replaces physical execution environments
                                                     with a learned surrogate for training and evaluating software engineering agents.
                                                     SWE-World leverages LLM-based models trained on real agent–environment
                                                     interaction data to predict intermediate execution outcomes and final test feed-
                                                     back, enabling agents to learn without interacting with physical containerized
                                                     environments. This design preserves the standard agent–environment interac-
                                                     tion loop while eliminating the need for costly environment construction and
                                                     maintenance during agent optimization and evaluation. Furthermore, because
                                                     SWE-World can simulate the final evaluation outcomes of candidate trajectories
                                                     without real submission, it enables selecting the best solution among multiple
                                                     test-time attempts, thereby facilitating effective test-time scaling (TTS) in soft-
                                                     ware engineering tasks. Experiments on SWE-bench Verified demonstrate that
                                                     SWE-World raises Qwen2.5-Coder-32B from 6.2% to 52.0% via Docker-free SFT,
                                                     55.0% with Docker-free RL, and 68.2% with further TTS. The code is available
                                                     at https://github.com/RUCAIBox/SWE-World



                                        1       Introduction
                                        Recent years have seen rapid progress in software engineering (SWE) agents that leverage large
                                        language models (LLMs) [1], which are beginning to deliver practical value in real-world settings [2,
                                        3]. Such agents typically operate in an iterative agent–environment interaction loop driven by
                                        physical environment execution feedback [4, 5]. In SWE scenarios, this environment corresponds to
                                        an isolated, dependency-complete workspace instantiated from the target repository, most commonly
                                        realized via containerization frameworks such as Docker, where programs and unit tests can be
                                        executed reliably [6, 7]. Consequently, existing approaches to training and evaluating SWE agents
                                        highly depend on physical execution environments, which serve as a central prerequisite for effective
                                        agent optimization [8].
                                        In practice, execution feedback in SWE tasks encompasses both intermediate program behaviors
                                        (e.g., reproducing failures) and running unit tests for final evaluation. In particular, evaluation
                                        requires executing the agent-fixed repository and verifying that all designated tests pass. Compared to
                                            ∗
                                                Equal contribution.
                                            †
                                                Correspondence to Wayne Xin Zhao and Yang Song.
lightweight execution settings that require only a basic interpreter/runtime and limited dependencies
(e.g., algorithmic programming tasks), SWE tasks necessitate a full repository workspace together
with a dependency-complete environment, requiring environment setup, dependency resolution,
and program execution, and thus making execution feedback substantially more resource-intensive
to construct and maintain in practice [9]. To support such execution-based training, prior work
has predominantly relied on Docker to instantiate task-specific environments and provide reliable
execution feedback for supervised fine-tuning (SFT) or reinforcement learning (RL), enabling agents
to improve their performance through multi-turn environment interaction [10, 11, 12].
Despite their effectiveness, Docker-based training paradigms introduce several fundamental scalability
limitations for SWE agents. At a high level, these limitations manifest across data, training, and
test-time regimes. First, data scalability is constrained: many real-world repositories and pull
requests cannot be readily leveraged, as complex or brittle dependency configurations often prevent
projects from building or executing reliably within containerized environments [13]. Second, training
scalability is hindered: the storage, management, and distribution of large numbers of Docker images
impose substantial infrastructure overhead, which significantly complicates large-scale optimization,
particularly reinforcement learning, in resource-constrained academic settings [11]. Third, test-time
scalability is limited: because environment interactions are computationally expensive and often
irreversible, it becomes difficult to fully exploit additional test-time computation through iterative
exploration or trial-and-error strategies [14].
Motivated by recent advances in world modeling with LLMs [15, 16], we explore an alternative
paradigm that replaces physical execution environments with learned models. This raises a central
question: can execution feedback traditionally obtained from Docker-based environments be approxi-
mated by LLMs, enabling Docker-free training and deployment of software engineering agents? If
feasible, such an approach would fundamentally alleviate the scalability bottlenecks of Docker-centric
SWE pipelines by decoupling agent optimization from costly environment instantiation. However,
modeling execution at the repository level is inherently challenging: it requires reasoning over large,
evolving codebases where localized edits may induce complex, non-local effects, and demands accu-
rate prediction of diverse execution behaviors across heterogeneous projects. In this work, we address
this challenge by training LLMs on real agent–environment interaction data to predict execution
outcomes, yielding a learned surrogate environment that provides effective feedback for SWE agent
training while overcoming the data, training, and test-time scalability constraints of Docker-based
approaches.
To this end, we propose SWE-World, a Docker-free framework that replaces resource-intensive
physical execution environments with a learned surrogate for training SWE agents. The design
of SWE-World is motivated by a key observation: while dependency-complete, runnable environ-
ments required for program and test execution are costly to construct and maintain, many agent
actions—such as file navigation, text inspection, and code editing (e.g., ls, grep, vim)—only involve
lightweight file-system operations and incur negligible computational overhead. SWE-World explic-
itly separates these two classes of actions during the interaction loop. Lightweight operations are
handled deterministically by a sandbox that directly updates the repository state, whereas execution-
oriented commands that would traditionally require Docker are routed to an LLM-based transition
model that predicts execution outcomes without instantiating runnable environments. By learning
to approximate execution behavior observed in Docker, the transition model effectively replaces
dependency-complete containers as the source of execution feedback, allowing agents to receive
feedback without incurring the high resource cost of physical execution. Upon episode termination,
i.e., when the agent submits its final code patch, an LLM-based reward model replaces containerized
test execution by acting as a virtual test runner that evaluates the patch and produces structured
test feedback together with a binary success signal. Together, these components form a unified
surrogate world for the agent, capturing both step-level dynamics and terminal outcomes, alleviating
the scalability bottlenecks of resource-heavy execution.
We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of SWE-World as a Docker-free
training and inference environment. Using a combination of open-source benchmarks and newly
crawled tasks, we show that agents optimized entirely without physical execution environments
achieve strong performance on SWE-bench Verified [3]. In particular, when trained with Docker-free
execution feedback provided by SWE-World, Qwen2.5-Coder-32B improves from a base resolve
rate of 6.2% to 52.0%, and further to 55.0% with additional Docker-free RL optimization, while the
smaller Qwen3-4B-Instruct reaches 25.6% and 30.0%, respectively. Beyond training, SWE-World


                                                  2
also enables effective Docker-free test-time scaling: by using the learned reward model to evaluate
and select candidate solutions, Qwen2.5-Coder-32B attains a resolve rate of 68.2% with TTS@8.
These results demonstrate that SWE-World can match, and in some settings surpass the effectiveness
of Docker-based pipelines, while drastically lowering the infrastructure and resource barrier of SWE
experimentation, enabling large-scale SWE research and iteration without industrial-grade container
infrastructure.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• Docker-Free SWE Environment: We propose SWE-World, a Docker-free framework that replaces
physical execution environments with a learned surrogate for training and evaluating software
engineering agents.
• Effective Agent Training without Execution: We show that LLM-based environment feedback can
successfully support SFT and RL, achieving performance comparable to or better than training with
real execution.
• Scalable Use of Open-Source SWE Data: By eliminating the requirement for buildable environ-
ments, SWE-World enables substantially broader utilization of real-world GitHub data for training
software engineering agents.


2   Related Work

Datasets for Software Engineering Tasks. The evaluation paradigm for large language models
(LLMs) in software engineering has transitioned from isolated code generation tasks [17, 18] toward
complex, repository-level issue resolution. SWE-bench [2] and its refined counterpart, SWE-bench-
verified [3], pioneered this shift by establishing a rigorous benchmark for assessing the capacity of
LLM-based code agents to resolve real-world software issues. Building upon this, several studies
have focused on synthesizing issue-solving tasks from GitHub data to facilitate model training [6].
SWE-Gym [6] and SWE-rebench [7] directly harvest interactive SWE tasks from diverse GitHub
repositories, while SWE-smith [8] introduces an automated pipeline for large-scale issue generation.
However, a significant bottleneck in these existing datasets is their heavy infrastructure dependency;
each data sample typically necessitates a dedicated Docker environment for execution and verification,
incurring substantial computational and storage overhead [9]. In contrast, our approach streamlines
this process by directly filtering issues from GitHub and utilizing only the underlying code repositories
and unit tests for trajectory synthesis. By bypassing the requirement for per-sample containerization,
our method significantly reduces the resource barrier while maintaining high fidelity in training data.

Software Engineering LLMs and Agents. To unlock the potential of LLMs as autonomous
software agents, researchers have introduced various agentic frameworks, such as SWE-agent [19]
and OpenHands [4], which provide the necessary infrastructure for environment interaction. Current
research in autonomous issue resolution generally follows two paradigms. The first is the agent-
based approach, which situates models within authentic, sandboxed environments (e.g., Docker) to
generate interaction trajectories and perform agentic SFT [20, 10, 13, 21] and RL [22, 11, 23, 24]
training. While effective, this paradigm suffers from significant resource overhead, as each data
sample typically demands a dedicated container. The second is the agentless approach [25, 9], which
decomposes software engineering tasks into a structured, three-stage pipeline: fault localization, code
repair, and patch verification [26, 27]. Although more efficient, these predefined workflows often
restrict the agent’s capacity for autonomous exploration and adaptive reasoning. Diverging from these
two paths, our method maintains an agentic loop to preserve exploratory autonomy but introduces an
LLM-based environment simulator. By simulating environmental feedback rather than relying on
heavy-weight containerization, our approach eliminates the infrastructure bottleneck of traditional
agent-based systems while maintaining the flexibility of autonomous agents.


3   Preliminaries

We study software engineering (SWE) issue resolution as an interactive process involving three
components: (i) a code agent that proposes edits and execution commands, (ii) a codebase (repository


                                                   3
        Build SWE-World                                     Enhance Code Agents with SWE-World                                                                                              Trajectories Comparison
                   GitHub Issues/PRs                                  Code Agent Docker-Free SFT with SWE-World                                                       Issue: Document does not add path to     Issue: Document does not add path to
                                                                                                                                                                      empty group When the passed…             empty group When the passed…
                                                    SWE Instances                       Code Execution
                                                                                                                  SWT             SFT Trajs
                                                                                            Observation
                                                    SWE-World
                                                                                                                                                                      Thought: Let me analyze the problem…     Thought: Let me analyze the problem…
        Open SWE datasets curation                   Dataset                                  Editing
                                                                                                                  Sandbox                                             Action:str_replace_editor view           Action:str_replace_editor view
   SWE                               Docker                                                 Observation                                                               --path /testbed                          --path /testbed
                                                                                                                                   Reward=1
   Instances                         Images         Open-Source                 Agent
                                                     Datasets                           Submit Patch                     Report               Docker-
                                                                                         Evaluation               SWR                         Free SFT
                                                                                                                         Reward                                        Observation: /testbed/README.md         Observation: /testbed/README.md
                                                                                                                                   Reward=0                            /testbed/examples...                    /testbed/examples...
      SWE-World Training data rollout                                                                         SWE-World
                                                                                                                                                                   Editing with Docker                                               Editing with Sandbox
                                    Docker                                                                                                                                               …                                     …
      Agent
                                    Runtime                             Code Agent Docker-free RL with SWE-World
                                                                                                                                                                       Thought: The reproduction script is …   Thought: Now let me run this script…
                                                                                                                                                                       Action: execute_bash 'python            Action: execute_bash 'python
  Interactions                      Submits                                                        SWT                 Reward 1                                        reproduce_issue.py'                     final_verification.py'

         SWE-World Model Training                                                                 Sandbox              Reward 2         Docker- Final
                                                                                                                                        Free RL                       Observation: [STDOUT] Testing            Observation: [STDOUT] Testing
   l Instance Meta Data   l Instance Meta Data
                                                                         Patch 1                                         …
                                                                                                                                                                      VoipRestServlet for...                   exact issue scenario...
   l Agent Patch          l Agent Patch                                  Patch 2                   SWR                 Reward G
                                                                          …
                                                                                                                                                                   Editing with Docker                                             Code Execution with SWT
   l Execution Content
   l Observation
                          l Execution Content
                          l Test report & Reward
                                                                         Patch G
                                                                                             SWE-World                                                                                   …                                     …
                                                                                                                       Update
           SWT Data              SWR Data                                                                                                                              Thought: Since I've completed the …     Thought: Since I've completed the …
                                                                                                                                                                       Action: submit
                                                                                                                                                                                  …                            Action: submit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           …

                   Supervised Fine-tuning
                                                                                Test-time Scaling with SWE-World
                                                                                                                                                                       Test report: test session...            Test report: test session...
                                                     Instance                                               Reward 1                                                   PASSED test/test_groups.py::            PASSED test/test_groups.py...
                                                                                    Patch 1                                                      Final Submit
                                                                                                                          AVG                                          TestGroups::test_add_group...           3 passed in 0.32s...
                                                                                                            Reward 2               Score 1                             3 passed in 0.42s...                    Reward: 1
                                                                                                                                                         Patch I
                                                                   Multiple         Patch 2                   …
                                                                                                                                                                   Editing with Docker                                               Evaluation with SWR
          SWT        Sandbox        SWR
                                                                  Exploration           …                   Reward M                …         MAX
                                                                                                                                                         Score I

                    SWE-World                                                       Patch N                                                                                              Reward = 1                             Reward = 1
                                                                                                               SWR                 Score N
                                                                                                                                                                   Generated based on Docker                   Generated based on SWE-World




Figure 1: Overview of SWE-World. Left: We collect agent-Docker interaction data to train the
SWE-World Transition Model (SWT) and SWE-World Reward Model (SWR). Middle: SWE-World
forms a Docker-free surrogate environment, enabling scalable agent enhancement via SFT, RL, and
Test-Time Scaling. Right: Comparison of Code Agent trajectories generated based on Docker and
SWE-World.
workspace) to be modified, and (iii) an execution environment E that provides step-level feedback
and evaluates candidate fixes.

SWE Task Instances. A task instance is defined by an issue description and a reference repository
snapshot. We denote an instance as I = (R, b, d, U), where R is a repository, b is a base commit, d
is the problem statement (e.g., a bug report), and U is the validation unit tests that must pass for a
correct fix. Additional instance metadata is provided in Appendix A.

Interactive Repair Process. The agent operates in a mutable workspace initialized at (R, b) and
interacts with an execution environment E. At each step t, the agent produces a thought zt and takes
an action at ; the environment E executes at and returns step-level feedback yt :
                                                                                                        yt ∼ E(at ; R, b, Pt ).                                                                                                                              (1)
We represent code edits as a patch P (a set of line-level modifications to the codebase). A repair
episode terminates when the agent takes a submit action, producing the final patch P . A complete
trajectory is denoted as                                                    
                           τ = I, (z1 , a1 , y1 ), . . . , (zT , aT , yT ), P .                (2)

Evaluation. Given a submitted patch P , the environment E evaluates the modified workspace by
running the designated unit tests U. This yields a final evaluation output
                                                                yeval = ⟨test_report, r⟩ ∼ E(P ; R, b, U ),                                                                                                                                                  (3)
where test_report summarizes execution logs, and the binary reward r ∈ {0, 1} follows the
standard criterion:
                                                   r = 1 ⇐⇒ all required unit tests in U pass under P,                                                                                                                                                       (4)
and r = 0 otherwise.

3.1        Execution Environments for SWE

A central challenge in SWE is the execution environment E: it must support both lightweight
interactions (file navigation and editing) and heavyweight repository-specific execution (running
programs and unit tests) [8]. To make this clear, we distinguish four increasingly capable layers of
environment that often appear implicitly in prior work.

File System. The repository workspace—files and directories that the agent reads and modifies—is
the mutable state to transform from (R, b) into a correct fix.


                                                                                                                                    4
Terminal. A terminal provides generic interfaces (e.g., ls, grep, vim) and editing tools to navigate
and modify the file system, but does not inherently provide repository-specific code execution.

Sandbox. A sandbox couples the file system with a terminal to deterministically support naviga-
tion/editing for any repository. It typically cannot run repo-specific programs or tests due to missing
dependencies and runtime setup.

Docker. Docker instantiates a dependency-complete environment for a given repository snapshot,
subsuming sandbox operations while enabling repo-specific code execution and test runs. However,
building and maintaining Docker images is brittle in practice: different repositories require different
installation procedures and dependency constraints, and large-scale SWE training requires spawning
and managing many images and containers. As a result, the storage, management, and distribution of
Docker impose significant infrastructure overhead.

3.2     From Docker-Based to LLM-Based Environments

The above decomposition suggests a key observation: many agent actions in SWE only require
the lightweight sandbox, while the main scalability bottleneck comes from repository-specific code
execution traditionally provided by Docker. This motivates our core idea: replace the Docker
execution component with learned models, while retaining a deterministic sandbox for file operations.
Concretely, we aim to construct a surrogate environment Eworld that preserves the standard agent–
environment interface: the sandbox maintains the workspace state and supports navigation/editing
actions, while LLMs approximate the execution feedback and test-based evaluation that would
otherwise require Docker. By combining a universal sandbox with LLM-based execution surrogates,
we can eliminate the need for Docker-based environments during training and inference, substantially
improving scalability. Details of the learned components are introduced in Section 4.

4     SWE-World: LLM-Based Docker-Free Environment
We propose SWE-World, a surrogate execution environment Eworld that approximates containerized
runtimes by training LLMs to predict execution feedback from real agent–environment interaction
traces. By decoupling the agent from physical execution, SWE-World enables scalable training and
inference without Docker.

4.1     System Architecture

SWE-World replaces Docker with a universal lightweight sandbox and learned LLM components.
Given an agent action at , we categorize it into two types:
    • Navigation & Editing: file exploration and edits via generic shell/tool commands (e.g., ls, cat,
      grep, view, create, str_replace).
    • Code Execution: repository-specific execution commands whose outputs depend on runtime
      semantics (e.g., python reproduce.py, pytest).
Navigation and editing actions are executed deterministically by a lightweight Sandbox, which
maintains the workspace state and returns step feedback yt . Code execution actions are handled by
the learned SWE-World Transition Model (SWT), which predicts step-level execution feedback ŷt .
When the agent terminates by submitting a final patch P , the SWE-World Reward Model (SWR)
acts as a virtual test runner and produces a test report together with the binary reward. To drive the
learned models, we construct a compact context κ that includes the instance information and the
current workspace state; concrete context definitions are given below.

4.1.1    Lightweight Sandbox for Navigation and Editing
The sandbox consists of the file system and terminal: it deterministically supports navigation and
editing over the repository workspace. We delegate these operations to the sandbox (instead of
an LLM) for two reasons: (1) Reliability: file operations are deterministic; LLM simulation may
hallucinate files or contents and catastrophically mislead the agent. (2) Efficiency: navigation/editing
is inexpensive and does not require semantic reasoning, making LLM inference unnecessary. As a


                                                   5
result, the workspace state and the code content referenced by the learned models remain accurate
and strictly consistent with the agent’s edit history.

4.1.2   SWT: Step-Level Execution Feedback Simulation
For Code Execution actions, we employ the SWE-World Transition Model, denoted as MSWT .
Modeling execution at the repository level is inherently challenging: it requires reasoning over large,
evolving codebases where localized edits may induce complex, non-local effects, and demands
accurate prediction of diverse execution behaviors across heterogeneous projects. Moreover, SWT
must be sensitive to the agent’s incremental edits, producing meaningfully different feedback as the
patch evolves.

Transition Context. At step t, we construct an transition context κSWT
                                                                   t   consisting of three parts:
   • Instance Meta Data: problem description, an initial analysis generated by a powerful LLM
     (summarizing the core bug and intended fix), and a ground-truth patch as an internal reference.
     This reference is strictly hidden from the agent to prevent leakage.
   • Agent Patch: the current patch reflecting the agent’s modifications so far.
   • Execution Content: the command (action at ) to be simulated and the relevant code content
     needed to determine the runtime behavior.
Given an context κSWT
                  t   , SWT predicts step-level execution feedback:
                       ŷt = ⟨stdout, stderr, exit_code⟩ ∼ MSWT (κSWT
                                                                  t   ).                             (5)
By conditioning on κSWT
                      t     , SWT can produce realistic feedback such as error tracebacks and printed
logs, enabling iterative debugging and refinement without Docker execution. See Appendix A for
transition context details.

4.1.3   SWR: Test Report and Reward Generation for Evaluation Simulation
The SWE-World Reward Model, denoted as MSWR , validates the agent’s final submission. Prevalent
approaches cast validation as a generative classification task, prompting an LLM to map the agent
trajectory directly to a binary token (i.e., Y ES/N O) [28, 10]. During inference, they extract token
log-probabilities lYES and lNO and compute a scalar score via softmax:
                                                 exp(lYES )
                                     r̂ =                          .                                 (6)
                                            exp(lYES ) + exp(lNO )
This black-box formulation provides limited interpretability and can be sensitive to long, noisy
trajectories.
In contrast, SWR acts as a virtual test runner, simulating the execution of the unit tests U on the final
submitted patch P and generating a structured test report before assigning the final binary reward.
Moreover, SWR must faithfully account for complex test logic and aggregate outcomes across many
test cases, where a single failing case determines r̂ = 0.

Evaluation Context. For a trajectory τ , to drive this simulation, we construct an evaluation context
κSWR
 τ   . It contains the same three parts as the transition context (Instance Meta Data, Agent Patch, and
Execution Content), and additionally includes the unit tests U:
   • Fail to Pass (F2P): tests that reproduce the issue and must transition to passing.
   • Pass to Pass (P2P): regression tests that must remain passing.
In particular, for κSWR
                    τ   , the Agent Patch is the final submitted patch P , and the Execution Content
corresponds to the test command and the test-case content of U.
Given κSWR
       τ   , SWR predicts the evaluation output:
                    ŷeval = ⟨test_report, r̂⟩ ∼ MSWR (κSWR
                                                        τ   ),          r̂ ∈ {0, 1}.                 (7)
By enforcing the generation of a detailed test report prior to r̂, SWR provides an interpretable
verification signal that supports scalable Docker-free selection and optimization. See Appendix A for
evaluation context details.


                                                    6
4.2     Training SWT and SWR

We train SWT and SWR based on Qwen2.5-Instruct-32B and Qwen2.5-Instruct-72B [29] via SFT,
utilizing data collected directly from the interactions between SWE agents and real execution
environments.

4.2.1    Data Collection from Real Docker Rollouts
We construct our training corpus by generating trajectory rollouts on open-source SWE datasets [14,
6, 7] and corresponding Docker images. For each code execution step, we extract κSWTt    and the real
execution feedback yt directly from the Docker container’s output, yielding transition samples:
                                         Dtrans = {(κSWT
                                                     t   , yt )}.                                      (8)
For a trajectory τ , at the terminal step, we extract κSWR
                                                       τ   execute the unit tests to obtain the evaluation
outcome yeval , forming the reward dataset:
                                       Dreward = {(κSWR
                                                    τ   , yeval )}.                                    (9)
Crucially, this collection process achieves high data efficiency: a single rollout simultaneously yields
multiple interaction samples for supervising the environment models and an agent trajectory for
policy training. Details are provided in Appendix B.

4.2.2    Reverse-Reasoning Distillation for CoT Backfilling
Directly mapping complex repository contexts to precise execution feedback poses a significant
learning challenge. Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [30] reasoning mitigates this by providing intermediate
logical steps, effectively breaking down the reasoning process and enhancing model learnability.
Moreover, during inference, the explicit generation of CoT facilitates more granular analysis, leading
to higher prediction accuracy [31, 32].
To obtain high-quality CoT data, we employ a reverse-reasoning strategy [33, 34]. We feed both the
input context κ and the ground-truth execution feedback yGT (from Docker) to a powerful reasoning
model, requiring it to produce a strictly forward derivation without explicitly revealing the answer in
the reasoning process. This model is prompted to generate a step-by-step derivation CoT that reasons
from the input to the specified output:
                                 CoT ← πteacher (Reasoning | κ, yGT ).                               (10)
Before integration, we employ an LLM-as-a-Judge [35] to assess the quality of the generated CoTs,
filtering out invalid reasoning, or CoTs that directly leak yGT . We backfill the high-quality thoughts
into our dataset, formatting the target output by wrapping the thoughts within <think> tags followed
immediately by the ground truth. Consequently, both SWT and SWR are trained to predict the
sequence <think>CoT</think>yGT , enabling them to learn the underlying execution logic more
effectively. Details are provided in Appendix B.

5     Training SWE Agents with SWE-World
In this section, we leverage SWE-World to establish an end-to-end, fully Docker-free training pipeline
for training SWE agents, enabling scalable data curation, supervised fine-tuning, and reinforcement
learning.

5.1     Software Eengineering Data Preparation

We construct a unified instance pool from two sources.

Open-Source SWE Datasets. We aggregate instances from open-source SWE datasets, includ-
ing R2E-Gym, SWE-Gym, and SWE-rebench. We convert these instances into a unified schema
compatible with SWE-World.

SWE-World Dataset. A limitation of previous dataset construction pipelines is the heavy reliance on
Docker environments; a vast number of Pull Requests (PRs) and issues are typically discarded simply


                                                    7
because their repositories fail to build in a container [8]. Leveraging SWE-World’s ability to simulate
execution without physical constraints, we bypass this bottleneck. We crawled a fresh collection of
PRs and issues from GitHub, applied deduplication against existing datasets, and parsed the relevant
repository information. After applying heuristic filtering rules, we obtain SWE-World Dataset, a
curated set of 16.6K high-quality instances. As shown in Table 1, the SWE-World Dataset covers
more tasks and far more repositories than prior SWE datasets, offering broader coverage and higher
diversity. The detailed data processing pipeline is provided in the Appendix F. The final training set
is a mixture of these open-source and newly curated instances.


 Table 1: Comparison of SWE-World Dataset and other SWE datasets with Docker environments.

                      Dataset                   # Tasks     # Repos       Source
                      SWE-rebench                 6.5k        1,429       Real
                      SWE-Gym                     2.4k         11         Real
                      R2E-Gym                     4.6k         10         Synth
                      SWE-World Dataset          16.6k        3,763        Real



5.2   Docker-Free Supervised Fine-tuning

We employ a rejection sampling fine-tuning strategy to train the policy model. This process consists
of three key steps:

Trajectory Generation. For each training instance, we use a powerful code agent [36, 37] to interact
within the SWE-World environment (including the SWT and the Sandbox). This interaction yields
agent trajectories efficiently and in parallel, bypassing the overhead of container management.

Dual-Stage Filtering. To ensure the quality of the training data, we apply a rigorous filtering
mechanism to the generated agent trajectories:
   • Rule-Based Filtering: We discard agent trajectories exhibiting invalid tool usage, execution
     timeouts, excessive context length, exceeding the maximum turn limit, or failure to produce a
     final submission.
   • SWR-Based Verification: We use the SWR to assess the correctness of the remaining agent
     trajectories. We retain only those receiving a positive reward (r̂ = 1), which indicates that the
     agent has successfully resolved the issue according to the surrogate evaluation.

Agentic Supervised Fine-Tuning. Finally, we use the high-quality agent trajectories to train our
policy model (Qwen2.5-32B-Coder-Instruct [38] and Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 [39]). Following
standard practices for agentic training, we perform agentic SFT [13] on the agent’s thoughts and
actions. Crucially, the entire SFT pipeline is Docker-free. Training details are provided in Appendix C.

5.3   Docker-Free Reinforcement Learning

SWE reinforcement learning [24, 22] is expensive and brittle due to its heavy reliance on Docker
containers, since repeatedly spawning and managing containers for rollouts and validation consumes
massive memory, CPU, and storage resources and often destabilizes the training infrastructure. SWE-
RM [28] replaces part of the validation with a learned verifier, but still relies on Docker containers
for transition feedback during rollouts and mixes execution-based signals for final rewards, leaving
Docker in the RL loop. In contrast, building on SWE-World, we achieve fully Docker-free RL.

Agentic RL Loop with SWE-World. Starting from the SFT-trained model, we further optimize the
agent with RL. We first launch SWT and SWR as inference services. During training rollouts, the
agent interacts with SWE-World, receiving transition feedback from the SWT and Sandbox, while
the SWR assigns the final trajectory reward. Crucially, this pipeline eliminates the need for Docker
containers, requiring only the maintenance of inference servers for SWT and SWR models.


                                                   8
Optimization. We optimize the policy following the Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO)
paradigm [40, 11]. Specifically, we employ a stabilized variant that incorporates clipped ratio
objectives, leave-one-out advantage estimation, and length normalization to effectively handle long-
horizon reasoning tasks.
By using SWT for transition feedback and SWR for terminal rewards, SWE-World supports stable,
scalable, fully Docker-free RL for SWE agents. Training details are provided in Appendix D.

5.4   Test-Time Scaling with SWR

We further improve inference performance via test-time scaling (TTS), where multiple candidate
solutions are generated and a verifier selects the best one. While prevalent verifiers rely on the single-
token generative classification discussed previously [14, 6], SWR enables verification grounded in
simulated execution mechanics.
SWR is explicitly designed to judge whether an agent trajectory has successfully resolved the issue,
making it inherently suitable for TTS. Given that SWR outputs a discrete binary reward, we employ
a multi-sample voting strategy to derive a fine-grained confidence score. Specifically, for a given
instance, we sample N candidate trajectories using the code agent. For each trajectory τ , we query
SWR M times to mitigate variance and calculate the mean reward:

                                                            M
                                                        1 X
                                        Score(τ ) =           r̂i .                                  (11)
                                                        M i=1
where ⟨test_report, r̂i ⟩ ∼ Mreward (κSWR
                                        τ   ) and κSWR
                                                   τ   denotes the evaluation context derived from
the candidate trajectory τ . The trajectory with the highest average score is selected as the final
submission.

6     Experiments
In this section, we first detail the training implementation for the SWE-World components (SWT and
SWR) and SWE agents. We then present our evaluation results, ablation studies, and further analyses
to validate our motivation and methodology.

6.1   Experimental Settings

Agent Scaffolding. We build our agent on top of R2E-Gym framework [14], which is a minimal scaf-
fold adapted from OpenHands [4] and follows a standard ReAct-style interaction loop [41]. The agent
is equipped with three tools: str_replace_editor for file reading and editing, execute_bash for
running shell commands, and submit tool for terminating the episode. We integrate SWE-World into
the R2E-Gym framework execution backend, enabling the same scaffold to run either with Docker or
with SWE-World as the environment.

Evaluation Benchmark. We evaluate on SWE-bench Verified [2], a curated split of 500 real-world
GitHub issue–PR tasks over 12 Python repositories. Performance is measured by resolve rate (%),
i.e., the fraction of instances whose final patch passes all designated tests in the evaluation harness.

SWT Evaluation. We evaluate SWT in an end-to-end setting by replacing Docker-based step
feedback with SWT during rollouts, while keeping the code agent fixed (Minimax-M2.1 [42]). After
each rollout terminates with a submitted patch, we run the unit test in Docker to obtain the reward
and report the resolve rate on SWE-bench Verified.

SWR Evaluation. For SWR evaluation, we compute the Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1 by
comparing the SWR-predicted rewards against the ground-truth rewards obtained via Docker-based
test execution on a held-out set of SWE-bench Verified trajectories.

SWE Agents Evaluation. We evaluate SWE-World models on the SWE-bench Verified dataset,
utilizing a Docker execution backend for verification and benchmarking against the open-source


                                                    9
code agents [38, 39, 6, 14, 43, 8, 22, 11, 13, 9, 44, 10, 26, 45, 46]. To prevent git hacking [47], we
disallow solution-revealing git commands (e.g., git log, git show).

Test-Time Scaling Setup. When using SWR for test-time scaling, we sample N =8 candidate
trajectories per instance and query SWR M =3 times per candidate to estimate its expected reward;
we report this setting as TTS@8.

6.2   Main Results


       Model/Method                       Scaffold   Training    Environment       Resolve Rate (%)
       Qwen2.5-Coder-32B              OpenHands      -               Docker                 6.2
       Qwen3-32B                      OpenHands      -               Docker                23.2
       Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B            OpenHands      -               Docker                51.6
       SWE-Gym-32B                    OpenHands      SFT             Docker                20.6
       R2E-Gym-32B                    R2E-Gym        SFT             Docker                34.4
         + TTS@16                     R2E-Gym        SFT             Docker                49.4
       Skywork-SWE-32B                OpenHands      SFT             Docker                38.0
         + TTS@8                      OpenHands      SFT             Docker                47.0
       SWE-agent-LM-32B               SWE-agent      SFT             Docker                40.2
       SWE-Fixer-72B                   Agentless     SFT               -                   32.8
       SA-SWE-32B                     OpenHands      RL              Docker                39.4
       Llama3-SWE-RL-70B               Agentless     SFT+RL            -                   41.0
       Lingma-SWE-GPT-72B              Agentless     SFT               -                   30.2
       DeepSWE-32B-Preview            OpenHands      RL              Docker                42.2
         + TTS@16                     OpenHands      RL              Docker                59.0
       Kimi-Dev-72B                  SWE-Agent       SFT+RL            -                   48.6
         + TTS@40                      Agentless     SFT+RL            -                   60.4
       SWE-Mirror-LM-32B             MOpenHands      SFT             Docker                52.2
       FrogBoss-32B                  SWE-Agent       SFT+RL          Docker                54.6
       SWE-Lego-Qwen3-32B             OpenHands      SFT             Docker                52.6
         + TTS@16                     OpenHands      SFT             Docker                58.8
       SWE-World-4B-SFT                   R2E-Gym    SFT                                   25.6
       SWE-World-4B-RL                    R2E-Gym    SFT+RL                                30.0
                                                                    Sandbox
       SWE-World-32B-SFT                  R2E-Gym    SFT                                   52.0
                                                                    + LLMs
       SWE-World-32B-RL                   R2E-Gym    SFT+RL                                55.0
        + TTS@8                           R2E-Gym    SFT+RL                                68.2

Table 2: Performance of various models on SWE-Bench Verified. The best results are in bold and the
second-best are underlined, excluding test-time scaling (TTS) results.


 Transition feedback   Resolve Rate (%)    ∆                  Reward Simulation   Acc.    Prec.   Recall    F1
 Docker (GT)                 68.4          –                  Docker (GT)         1.00    1.00     1.00    1.00
 Minmax-M2.1                 56.2          ↓ 12.2%            Minmax-M2.1         0.740   0.709   0.891    0.790
 GLM-4.7                     59.4          ↓ 9.0%             GLM-4.7             0.768   0.763   0.836    0.798
 SWT-32B                     55.2          ↓ 13.2%            SWR-32B             0.754   0.779   0.770    0.774
 SWT-72B                     60.2          ↓ 8.2%             SWR-72B             0.770   0.780   0.807    0.794

Table 3: SWE-bench Verified performance                    Table 4: Performance of reward simulation
using different transition-feedback providers.             against Docker ground truth.



Performance of SWE Agents. As shown in Table 2, our method reaches the frontier performance
among open-source 32B models. Starting from the Qwen2.5-Coder backbone (6.2%), SFT and
RL boost performance to 52.0% and 54.8% respectively. Crucially, our purely Docker-free models
significantly outperform baselines trained with real Docker execution (e.g., FrogBoss-32B at 54.6%),
validating the efficacy of our pipeline. With SWR-based TTS@8, performance peaks at 68.2%,
surpassing the previous best (Kimi-Dev-72B TTS@40) by a large margin.


                                                     10
                        SFT data source         Total #Traj    Resolve Rate (%)
                        Docker (baseline)           5.7K               51.4
                        SWE-World                   5.7K               52.2
                        SWE-World + Docker          9.3K               53.8

Table 5: SFT performance comparison using trajectories collected from Docker, SWE-World, and
their mixture, under identical training settings.

Effectiveness of SWT. While a performance gap between simulation and reality is inevitable, SWT-
72B minimizes this degradation most effectively. It supports a resolve rate of 60.2% for Minmax
M2.1 (Table 3), outperforming general-purpose LLMs like GLM-4.7 (59.4%) and Minimax-M2.1
(56.2%) as a more faithful environmental surrogate.

Effectiveness of SWR. Table 4 validates the robustness of our reward models. SWR-32B achieves an
accuracy of 0.754, surpassing Minmax-M2.1, and notably outperforms both Minmax-M2.1 and GLM-
4.7 in Precision (0.779). Scaling up, SWR-72B further advances performance, overtaking GLM-4.7
in both Accuracy (0.770) and Precision (0.780), thereby demonstrating the strongest comprehensive
capability in reward simulation.

6.3   Ablation Study

We investigate whether replacing the ground-truth Docker environment with SWE-World affects the
quality of training data. We generated two parallel datasets of 5.7K trajectories using identical expert
agents and prompt settings, differing only in the execution backend used during the rollout phase. As
shown in Table 5, the model fine-tuned on SWE-World trajectories achieves a resolve rate of 52.2%,
slightly outperforming the model trained on Docker-generated data (51.4%). Moreover, starting from
the 5.7K SWE-World trajectories, we deduplicate an additional Docker-collected set and retain 3.6K
unique trajectories; mixing them yields 9.3K trajectories in total and further improves performance to
53.8%. This result suggests that our simulated environment provides supervision quality comparable
to, or even better than, the physical environment. Furthermore, mixing in Docker-based trajectories
yields additional gains, confirming that SWE-World is a highly effective, scalable alternative for data
generation.

7     Further Analysis
This section provides further analyses on the impact of CoT (Section 7.1), RL training dynamics
(Section 7.2), test-time scaling behavior (Section 7.3), and qualitative fidelity of SWT/SWR simulation
(Section 7.4), to clarify the key factors behind SWE-World’s effectiveness.

7.1   Impact of Chain-of-Thought

 Method Data Size Resolve Rate (%)                  Method Data Size Acc. Prec. Recall              F1
 w/o CoT       26K             55.2                 w/o CoT       4K          0.578 0.609 0.704 0.653
 w. CoT        26K             56.0                 w. CoT        4K          0.712 0.754 0.704 0.728

Table 6: CoT yields only a marginal im-           Table 7: CoT substantially improves SWR reward
provement for SWT.                                prediction quality.


We observe a distinct asymmetry in the benefits of Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning between the
transition and reward models:

Marginal Gain for SWT. As shown in Table 6, adding CoT to the transition model yields only
a negligible improvement (0.8%) in the downstream agent’s resolve rate. We attribute this to the
informational robustness of the transition task. The primary role of SWT is to simulate textual
feedback (i.e., stdout, stderr, exit_code). Small inconsistencies in such feedback are often
tolerable: the agent can still interpret the signal, continue exploring, and correct itself via subsequent


                                                   11
                       Main RL (SWR, with CoT)                                                                                     Comparison (SWR, w/o CoT)
         0.48
                                                                                Reward 114                        0.65                                               Reward 120
         0.46                                                                   Turns                                                                                Turns
                                                                                           112                    0.60                                                      100
         0.44

                                                                                              Interaction Turns

                                                                                                                                                                                 Interaction Turns
         0.42                                                                              110                    0.55                                                      80
Reward   0.40
                                                                                                   Reward
                                                                                           108                    0.50                                                      60
         0.38
         0.36                                                                              106                    0.45                                                      40
         0.34                                                                                                     0.40
                                                                                           104                                                                              20
                0     10                         20            30              40                                            0   10      20           30        40   50
                                               Training Step                                                                             Training Step
 Figure 2: RL training dynamics using SWT-32B. Orange lines denote average reward; Green dashed
 lines denote mean interaction turns. Left: Main experiment using CoT-enhanced SWR-32B shows
 stable learning. Right: Comparison with non-CoT SWR-32B leads to trajectory length collapse,
 indicating reward hacking.


                                                     Pass@K (Optimal)
                                                                                                                                                           75.0%
                                          75         SWR-32B                                                                                  74.4%
                                                     R2E-Gym-Verifier-14B                                                        73.4%
                                                     OpenHands-32B-Verifier                                         72.2%


                                                                                             70.2%
                                          70
                                                                                                                                                           68.2%




                       Resolve Rate (%)
                                                                               67.4%                                                          67.2%
                                                                                                                                 66.8%
                                                                                                                    66.2%

                                                                                             64.4%
                                          65
                                                                               62.8%
                                                           62.8%


                                                                                                                                 60.2%        60.4%
                                                                                                                    60.0%                                  59.6%
                                          60                           60.6%                 59.0%
                                                                               58.4%
                                                                                                                                                           59.4%
                                                               57.0%
                                                                                                                    58.2%        58.4%        58.2%
                                                                                             57.8%
                                                                               57.0%
                                                               56.2%
                                          55
                                               55.0%

                                                 1                 2            3              4                         5        6            7            8
                                                                                       Number of Agent Rollouts (K)


         Figure 3: Test-time scaling on SWE-bench Verified: comparing SWR-32B with prior verifiers.
 actions and verification. Since CoT can substantially increase inference latency, the modest fidelity
 gain is typically not worth the added cost for step-level simulation.

 Significant Gain for SWR. In contrast, Table 7 shows that CoT is critical for the reward model,
 boosting accuracy by over 13% (0.578 → 0.712) and Precision significantly. This is due to the
 binary sensitivity of the reward task. The SWR must synthesize complex test execution report into a
 strictly binary signal (Success/Failure). A minor misinterpretation of a test report can flip the reward
 label. CoT encourages more complete reasoning over repository context, patch effects, and test logic,
 thereby improving the fidelity of the predicted test report and making the resulting reward assignment
 substantially more accurate. We further analyze how this CoT integration impacts the stability of RL
 training in Section 7.2.


 7.2            RL Dynamics

 We analyze the stability of our reinforcement learning process by tracking the reward and interaction
 turns over training steps. Figure 2 contrasts our main RL training with a comparison run under an
 alternative reward model setting.

 Main RL Training. In the main run (Left), the agent exhibits healthy optimization dynamics:
 the reward steadily increases while the interaction length shows a gentle, efficiency-driven decline.
 This suggests that the policy performance improves steadily over training, without collapsing into
 degenerate behaviors.


                                                                                                    12
                         Step-Level Execution Feedback                                                                     Evaluation Execution Feedback
       Action: execute_bash 'cd /testbed && python reproduce_issue.py'                           Action: PYTHONWARNINGS='ignore::UserWarning,ignore::SyntaxWarning’
                                           …                                                     bin/test -C --verbose sympy/sets/tests/test_contains.py
                                                                                                 FAIL_TO_PASS: ["test_as_set"]
                Real Docker Output                          SWT Simulation                       PASS_TO_PASS: ["test_contains_basic","test_issue_6194","test_issue_10326",
  [STDOUT]                                   [STDOUT]                                            "test_binary_symbols"]
  === Testing Current Behavior ===           === Testing Current Behavior ===
                                                                                                                                          …
  MyForm.active.required: True               MyForm.active.required: True
  MyForm.name.required: True                 MyForm.name.required: True                               Real Docker Output                                     SWT Simulation
  FactoryForm.active.required: False         FactoryForm.active.required: False
  FactoryForm.name.required: False           FactoryForm.name.required: False           === test process starts ===               ==== test session starts ====
  ✗ Test failed: FactoryForm active          ✗ Test failed: FactoryForm active          executable:                               platform linux -- Python 3.8.20, pytest-8.3.4, pluggy-
  should be required                         should be required                         /opt/miniconda3/envs/testbed/bin/python   1.5.0
                                                                                        (3.9.21-final-0) [CPython]                rootdir: /testbed
  === Testing Explicit Callback              === Testing Explicit Callback              architecture:       64-bit                configfile: pyproject.toml
  (Regression) ===                           (Regression) ===                           cache:              no                    plugins: anyio-4.5.2, hypothesis-6.113.0, asyncio-0.24.0,
  FactoryForm.active.required: True          FactoryForm.active.required: True          ground types:       python                cov-5.0.0, cython-0.3.1, xdist-3.6.1
  FactoryForm.name.required: True            FactoryForm.name.required: True            numpy:              None                  asyncio: mode=strict, default_loop_scope=None
  ✓ Test passed: Explicit callback works     ✓ Test passed: Explicit callback works     random seed:        23532584              collected 6 items
  correctly                                  correctly                                  hash randomization: on
                                                                                        (PYTHONHASHSEED=4230081148)               sympy/sets/tests/test_contains.py ...... [100%]
  === Testing No Meta Callback ===           === Testing No Meta Callback ===
  FormWithoutCallback.active.required:       FormWithoutCallback.active.required:       sympy/sets/tests/test_contains.py[6]      === PASSES ===
  False                                      False                                      test_contains_basic ok                    === short test summary info ===
  FormWithoutCallback.name.required: False   FormWithoutCallback.name.required: False   test_issue_6194 ok                        PASSED
  FactoryForm.active.required: False         FactoryForm.active.required: False         test_issue_10326 ok                       sympy/sets/tests/test_contains.py::test_contains_basic
  FactoryForm.name.required: False           FactoryForm.name.required: False           test_binary_symbols ok                    PASSED sympy/sets/tests/test_contains.py::test_issue_6194
  ✓ Test passed: Default behavior when no    ✓ Test passed: Default behavior when no    test_as_set ok                            PASSED sympy/sets/tests/test_contains.py::test_issue_10326
  callback in Meta                           callback in Meta                           test_type_error ok                        PASSED
                                                                                        [OK]                                      sympy/sets/tests/test_contains.py::test_binary_symbols
  ✗ Some tests failed!                       ✗ Some tests failed!                                                                 PASSED sympy/sets/tests/test_contains.py::test_as_set
                                                                                        === tests finished: 6 passed, in 0.26     PASSED sympy/sets/tests/test_contains.py::test_type_error
  [STDERR]                                   [STDERR]                                   seconds ===                               === 6 passed in 0.22s ===




                                           Figure 4: Qualitative fidelity of SWE-World simulation.
Comparison Run. In contrast, the comparison run (Right), which uses a non-CoT SWR, exhibits
clear signs of reward hacking. The trajectory length collapses drastically after step 20, as the policy
learns to exploit the reward model’s low precision by submitting short, invalid solutions that are
mistakenly flagged as correct. These results suggest that a robust and faithful reward signal is critical
for stable Docker-free reinforcement learning, and CoT provides an effective way to enhance it.


7.3      Test-Time Scaling

Figure 3 compares test-time scaling on SWE-bench Verified using agent rollouts generated by
SWT-32B, where we rank K candidate trajectories with a verifier and select the best submission.

Superior Scaling Performance. As shown in Figure 3, SWR-32B delivers strong gains under TTS:
performance increases from 55.0 at K=1 to 68.2 at TTS@8, an absolute improvement of 13.2%,
and substantially outperforms both R2E-Gym-Verifier-14B (59.4 at TTS@8) and OpenHands-32B-
Verifier (59.6 at TTS@8). Notably, the gap between SWR-32B and the Pass@K (Optimal) upper
bound is much smaller than that of prior verifiers, indicating stronger reward modeling and a more
effective ranking signal. Moreover, SWR-32B improves monotonically from K = 1 to K = 8,
indicating a promising scaling behavior.

Generative Verification vs. Regression. Beyond the final score, the scaling trend reveals a
fundamental difference in signal fidelity. SWR-32B improves steadily from K = 1 to K = 8,
whereas R2E-Gym-Verifier-14B plateaus early (around TTS@5) and yields little benefit thereafter;
OpenHands-32B-Verifier is even less stable, showing noticeable fluctuations after K≥3. This contrast
highlights the advantage of our generative simulation paradigm over token-level scoring. By func-
tioning as a virtual test runner that explicitly predicts a structured test report based on the evaluation
context, SWR grounds its judgment in fine-grained execution logic, enabling it to robustly distinguish
truly correct fixes from near-misses even within a large candidate pool. In contrast, baselines that
bypass this reasoning to derive scores directly from trajectory-level Y ES/N O log-probabilities (via
softmax) are highly susceptible to the noise inherent in long interaction histories. Lacking explicit
verification steps, these “black-box” signals lose discrimination power as the candidate set grows,
leading to early saturation and unstable scaling.


7.4      Qualitative Fidelity of SWT and SWR Simulation

We qualitatively validate the fidelity of SWE-World feedback by comparing Docker ground-truth
outputs with SWT/SWR predictions under the same context (Figure 4). For readability, we omit
lengthy fields in the input context and only present the essential information: (i) the command (action)
to be simulated for SWT, and (ii) the test command (action) together with the F2P/P2P test sets for
SWR.


                                                                                           13
SWT: Faithful Step-Level Execution Feedback. In the SWT example, the agent runs python
reproduce_issue.py to reproduce a Django issue. The simulated stdout matches the real output
almost line-by-line, capturing the printed field requirements, the failure mode, and the assertion
error message and exit status. It also preserves the script’s structure, indicating that SWT emulates
the causal consequence of the current code state under the given command rather than producing
generic-looking feedback.

SWR: Semantically Consistent Test-Based Verification. For SWR, we compare real test execution
with SWR’s predicted report on a SymPy instance.
There are some formatting differences between the real test report and the output generated by
SWR, as the training data adopts a unified template that produces standardized pytest-style reports.
Despite the format shift, the semantics align: SWR correctly predicts that all collected tests pass and
explicitly lists key ones, including the F2P target and the P2P regression set. Non-essential artifacts
(e.g., version strings and wall-clock time) may differ, but the core verification signal is preserved.
Overall, these examples suggest that SWE-World produces realistic and trustworthy feedback: SWT
closely matches real step outputs, and SWR provides content-faithful test-based verification under a
standardized report format.


8   Conclusion

In this paper, we propose SWE-World, a Docker-free framework (i.e., execution-free) for training
code agents. By training and leveraging repository-level environment and reward simulation models
(i.e., SWT and SWR), we establish a fully Docker-free pipeline for data synthesis, supervised fine-
tuning, and reinforcement learning. This approach effectively circumvents the deployment complexity
and concurrency bottlenecks inherent in traditional Docker-based trajectory generation. Evaluation
results on the SWE-bench-Verified dataset demonstrate that agents trained within this framework
achieve performance comparable to those trained with ground-truth execution feedback. Furthermore,
the SWR model proves highly effective for test-time scaling, providing a grounded verification
mechanism to select superior solutions without the need to execute actual unit tests. Additionally, by
eliminating the strict dependency on buildable environments, SWE-World unlocks vast amounts of
previously inaccessible open-source data resources, such as unbuildable Pull Requests and issues.


References
 [1] Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min,
     Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. A survey of large language models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2303.18223, 1(2), 2023.
 [2] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
     Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth
     International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
 [3] Neil Chowdhury, James Aung, Chan Jun Shern, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, Giulio Starace,
     Evan Mays, Rachel Dias, Marwan Aljubeh, Mia Glaese, Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Leyton
     Ho, Tejal Patwardhan, Kevin Liu, and Aleksander Madry. Introducing swe-bench verified,
     August 2024.
 [4] Xingyao Wang, Simon Rosenberg, Juan Michelini, Calvin Smith, Hoang Tran, Engel Nyst,
     Rohit Malhotra, Xuhui Zhou, Valerie Chen, Robert Brennan, et al. The openhands software
     agent sdk: A composable and extensible foundation for production agents. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2511.03690, 2025.
 [5] SWE agent Team. Mini-swe-agent. https://github.com/SWE-agent/Mini-SWE-Agent,
     2024.
 [6] Jiayi Pan, Xingyao Wang, Graham Neubig, Navdeep Jaitly, Heng Ji, Alane Suhr, and Yizhe
     Zhang. Training software engineering agents and verifiers with swe-gym. In Forty-second
     International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2025, Vancouver, BC, Canada, July
     13-19, 2025. OpenReview.net, 2025.


                                                  14
 [7] Ibragim Badertdinov, Alexander Golubev, Maksim Nekrashevich, Anton Shevtsov, Simon
     Karasik, Andrei Andriushchenko, Maria Trofimova, Daria Litvintseva, and Boris Yangel. Swe-
     rebench: An automated pipeline for task collection and decontaminated evaluation of software
     engineering agents, 2025.
 [8] John Yang, Kilian Lieret, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kabir Khandpur, Yanzhe Zhang,
     Binyuan Hui, Ofir Press, Ludwig Schmidt, and Diyi Yang. Swe-smith: Scaling data for software
     engineering agents, 2025.
 [9] Zonghan Yang, Shengjie Wang, Kelin Fu, Wenyang He, Weimin Xiong, Yibo Liu, Yibo Miao,
     Bofei Gao, Yejie Wang, Yingwei Ma, et al. Kimi-dev: Agentless training as skill prior for
     swe-agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23045, 2025.
[10] Chaofan Tao, Jierun Chen, Yuxin Jiang, Kaiqi Kou, Shaowei Wang, Ruoyu Wang, Xiaohui Li,
     Sidi Yang, Yiming Du, Jianbo Dai, et al. Swe-lego: Pushing the limits of supervised fine-tuning
     for software issue resolving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.01426, 2026.
[11] Michael Luo, Naman Jain, Jaskirat Singh, Sijun Tan, Ameen Patel, Qingyang Wu, Alpay Ariyak,
     Colin Cai, Tarun Venkat, Shang Zhu, Ben Athiwaratkun, Manan Roongta, Ce Zhang, Li Erran
     Li, Raluca Ada Popa, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. Deepswe: Training a fully open-sourced,
     state-of-the-art coding agent by scaling rl. https://www.together.ai/blog/deepswe, 7
     2025. Blog post.
[12] Ji Zeng, Dayuan Fu, Tiantian Mi, Yumin Zhuang, Yaxing Huang, Xuefeng Li, Lyumanshan
     Ye, Muhang Xie, Qishuo Hua, Zhen Huang, et al. davinci-dev: Agent-native mid-training for
     software engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18418, 2026.
[13] Junhao Wang, Daoguang Zan, Shulin Xin, Siyao Liu, Yurong Wu, and Kai Shen. Swe-
     mirror: Scaling issue-resolving datasets by mirroring issues across repositories. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2509.08724, 2025.
[14] Naman Jain, Jaskirat Singh, Manish Shetty, Liang Zheng, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. R2e-
     gym: Procedural environments and hybrid verifiers for scaling open-weights swe agents. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2504.07164, 2025.
[15] Jade Copet, Quentin Carbonneaux, Gal Cohen, Jonas Gehring, Jacob Kahn, Jannik Kossen,
     Felix Kreuk, Emily McMilin, Michel Meyer, Yuxiang Wei, et al. Cwm: An open-weights llm
     for research on code generation with world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02387, 2025.
[16] Ziyang Luo, Zhiqi Shen, Wenzhuo Yang, Zirui Zhao, Prathyusha Jwalapuram, Amrita Saha,
     Doyen Sahoo, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, and Junnan Li. Mcp-universe: Benchmark-
     ing large language models with real-world model context protocol servers. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2508.14704, 2025.
[17] Mark Chen. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374,
     2021.
[18] Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Ar-
     mando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. Livecodebench: Holistic and contamination
     free evaluation of large language models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07974, 2024.
[19] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik
     Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software
     engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:50528–50652, 2024.
[20] Shuang Sun, Huatong Song, Yuhao Wang, Ruiyang Ren, Jinhao Jiang, Junjie Zhang, Fei
     Bai, Jia Deng, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zheng Liu, Lei Fang, Zhongyuan Wang, and Ji-Rong Wen.
     Simpledeepsearcher: Deep information seeking via web-powered reasoning trajectory synthesis,
     2025.
[21] Shukai Liu, Jian Yang, Bo Jiang, Yizhi Li, Jinyang Guo, Xianglong Liu, and Bryan Dai. Context
     as a tool: Context management for long-horizon swe-agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.22087,
     2025.
[22] Shiyi Cao, Dacheng Li, Fangzhou Zhao, Shuo Yuan, Sumanth R Hegde, Connor Chen, Charlie
     Ruan, Tyler Griggs, Shu Liu, Eric Tang, et al. Skyrl-agent: Efficient rl training for multi-turn
     llm agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16108, 2025.


                                                 15
[23] Huatong Song, Jinhao Jiang, Yingqian Min, Jie Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Lei Fang,
     and Ji-Rong Wen. R1-searcher: Incentivizing the search capability in llms via reinforcement
     learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05592, 2025.
[24] Alexander Golubev, Maria Trofimova, Sergei Polezhaev, Ibragim Badertdinov, Maksim Nekra-
     shevich, Anton Shevtsov, Simon Karasik, Sergey Abramov, Andrei Andriushchenko, Filipp
     Fisin, et al. Training long-context, multi-turn software engineering agents with reinforcement
     learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03501, 2025.
[25] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. Agentless: Demystifying
     llm-based software engineering agents, 2024.
[26] Chengxing Xie, Bowen Li, Chang Gao, He Du, Wai Lam, Difan Zou, and Kai Chen. Swe-fixer:
     Training open-source llms for effective and efficient github issue resolution. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2501.05040, 2025.
[27] Zhenyu He, Qingping Yang, Wei Sheng, Xiaojian Zhong, Kechi Zhang, Chenxin An, Wenlei
     Shi, Tianle Cai, Di He, Jiaze Chen, and Jingjing Xu. Swe-swiss: A multi-task fine-tuning
     and rl recipe for high-performance issue resolution. https://github.com/zhenyuhe00/
     SWE-Swiss, 2025. Notion Blog.
[28] KaShun Shum, Binyuan Hui, Jiawei Chen, Lei Zhang, Jiaxi Yang, Yuzhen Huang, Junyang Lin,
     Junxian He, et al. Swe-rm: Execution-free feedback for software engineering agents. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2512.21919, 2025.
[29] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan
     Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,
     Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin
     Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li,
     Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan,
     Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 technical report. CoRR,
     abs/2412.15115, 2024.
[30] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le,
     Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
     Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
[31] Yu Huang, Zixin Wen, Aarti Singh, Yuejie Chi, and Yuxin Chen. Transformers provably learn
     chain-of-thought reasoning with length generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.07378, 2025.
[32] Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
     language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems,
     35:22199–22213, 2022.
[33] Justin Chen, Zifeng Wang, Hamid Palangi, Rujun Han, Sayna Ebrahimi, Long Le, Vincent Perot,
     Swaroop Mishra, Mohit Bansal, Chen-Yu Lee, et al. Reverse thinking makes llms stronger
     reasoners. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the
     Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long
     Papers), pages 8611–8630, 2025.
[34] Honglin Lin, Qizhi Pei, Xin Gao, Zhuoshi Pan, Yu Li, Juntao Li, Conghui He, and Lijun Wu.
     Scaling code-assisted chain-of-thoughts and instructions for model reasoning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2510.04081, 2025.
[35] Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan
     Shen, Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, et al. A survey on llm-as-a-judge. The Innovation, 2024.
[36] Z.ai. Glm-4.6: Advanced agentic, reasoning and coding capabilities. https://z.ai/blog/
     glm-4.6, 2025. 2025-09-30.
[37] MiniMax. Minimax m2 & agent: Ingenious in simplicity. https://www.minimax.io/news/
     minimax-m2, 2025. 2025-10-27.
[38] Binyuan Hui, Jian Yang, Zeyu Cui, Jiaxi Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Lei Zhang, Tianyu Liu, Jia-
     jun Zhang, Bowen Yu, Keming Lu, et al. Qwen2. 5-coder technical report. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2409.12186, 2024.
[39] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu,
     Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang,
     Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,


                                                16
     Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin
     Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin
     Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin,
     Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang
     Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng
     Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen3 technical report, 2025.
[40] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
     Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
     reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
[41] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
     Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international
     conference on learning representations, 2022.
[42] MiniMax.                M2.1:         Multilingual     and     multi-task     coding      with
     strong         generalization.                         https://www.minimaxi.com/news/
     m21-multilingual-and-multi-task-coding-with-strong-general, 2026. 2025-01-
     04.
[43] Liang Zeng, Yongcong Li, Yuzhen Xiao, Changshi Li, Chris Yuhao Liu, Rui Yan, Tianwen Wei,
     Jujie He, Xuchen Song, Yang Liu, et al. Skywork-swe: Unveiling data scaling laws for software
     engineering in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.19290, 2025.
[44] Atharv Sonwane, Isadora White, Hyunji Lee, Matheus Pereira, Lucas Caccia, Minseon Kim,
     Zhengyan Shi, Chinmay Singh, Alessandro Sordoni, Marc-Alexandre Côté, et al. Bugpilot:
     Complex bug generation for efficient learning of swe skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.19898,
     2025.
[45] Yingwei Ma, Rongyu Cao, Yongchang Cao, Yue Zhang, Jue Chen, Yibo Liu, Yuchen Liu,
     Binhua Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. Lingma swe-gpt: An open development-process-centric
     language model for automated software improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00622, 2024.
[46] Yuxiang Wei, Olivier Duchenne, Jade Copet, Quentin Carbonneaux, Lingming Zhang, Daniel
     Fried, Gabriel Synnaeve, Rishabh Singh, and Sida I Wang. Swe-rl: Advancing llm reasoning
     via reinforcement learning on open software evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18449, 2025.
[47] Bangjun Xiao, Bingquan Xia, Bo Yang, Bofei Gao, Bowen Shen, Chen Zhang, Chenhong He,
     Chiheng Lou, Fuli Luo, Gang Wang, et al. Mimo-v2-flash technical report. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2601.02780, 2026.




                                                17
A     Instance Metadata and Context Fields
This section details the instance-level metadata used throughout the paper, including the task definition
I = (R, b, d, U) and the fields involved in constructing SWT/SWR contexts.

A.1    Instance Metadata Schema

 Key                       Description
 repo                      Repository name from which the task is sourced.
 instance_id               A unique identifier constructed from the repository and its PR/issue ID.
 base_commit               Commit hash of the reference repository snapshot used to instantiate the task.
 hints_text                Optional natural-language hints that guide the intended fix.
 problem_statement         Natural-language specification of the desired change (bug report / feature request).
 FAIL_TO_PASS              Unit tests expected to flip from failing to passing after a correct fix (F2P).
 PASS_TO_PASS              Regression unit tests that must remain passing after the fix (P2P).
 gold_patch                Reference solution in .patch format, used internally for supervision and analysis.
 test_patch                .patch-format string that adds hidden/unseen evaluation tests.

Table 8: Instance metadata fields used to define I = (R, b, d, U) and to construct SWT/SWR contexts.


Table 8 summarizes the key metadata fields defining each SWE task instance and used to construct
the SWT and SWR contexts.

A.2    Instance Meta Data in SWT/SWR Contexts

Initial Analysis Generation. The Initial Analysis used in both SWT and SWR contexts is generated
from the instance metadata using GLM-4.6. This analysis is designed to help SWT and SWR quickly
grasp the core issue and the expected fix direction. The prompt template is shown in Figure G.1.

SWT Context Meta Data. At step t, SWT takes a context κSWT    t   . Its Instance Meta Data includes:
(i) the problem statement problem_statement (d), (ii) an Initial Analysis summarizing the failure
behavior, likely root cause, and intended fix, and (iii) the reference solution gold_patch as an
internal patch P ⋆ for comparison, which is never exposed to the code agent. In addition, κSWT  t
contains the agent’s current patch Pt and the execution content needed to simulate the command at .
The prompt template for SWT is shown in Figure G.2.

SWR Context Meta Data. SWR operates on an evaluation context κSWR           eval , which follows the
same three-part structure as κSWT
                               t    (Instance Meta  Data,  Agent Patch, and Execution Content) and
additionally includes the unit tests U, consisting of FAIL_TO_PASS and PASS_TO_PASS. For κSWR   eval ,
the Agent Patch corresponds to the final submitted patch P , and the Execution Content corresponds
to the unit-test command together with the test content in U. The prompt template for SWR is shown
in Figure G.3

B     Training Details for SWT and SWR
B.1    Detailed Training Setup

Data Collection. We collect training data using the R2E-Gym framework, with at most 100 interaction
turns per rollout. Our task pool is built upon three open-source SWE datasets: SWE-Gym [6], SWE-
rebench [7], and R2E-Gym. We use powerful LLMs (GLM-4.6 and MinMax-M2; temperature 0.7)
to interact with Docker-based environments and record real step-level execution outputs, final unit
test reports and rewards.
Importantly, we use both successful and failed rollouts: regardless of whether the final reward is 0
or 1, a trajectory is useful as long as we can extract the corresponding context and the ground-truth


                                                     18
 Component              Global Batch Size   Max Len        LR       Scheduler    Warmup     Epochs
                                                              −5
 SWT-32B (non-CoT)             512            98304     4×10         cosine        0.1         4
 SWT-32B (CoT)                 512            98304     4×10−5       cosine        0.1         4
 SWR-32B (CoT)                 512            98304     3×10−5       cosine        0.1         2

                    Table 9: Key SFT hyperparameters for SWT/SWR training.

Docker outputs for supervision. We additionally filter out trajectories whose Docker environments
are corrupted (e.g., broken images, dependency failures, or abnormal logs) that produce invalid or
inconsistent outputs. For SWR data, we enforce a balanced label distribution by subsampling to
achieve a 1:1 ratio between reward-0 and reward-1 examples.

Chain-of-Thought (CoT) Augmentation. To improve reasoning fidelity, we augment both SWT and
SWR training outputs with chain-of-thought generated by Qwen3-235B-A22B-Thinking (prompt
shown in Figure G.4). For each example, we produce two versions of supervision: (i) a non-CoT
version with only the final structured output, and (ii) a CoT version that prepends a reasoning trace
wrapped by <think> . . . </think>. After augmentation, we obtain training datasets: SWT: 26K
non-CoT + 26K CoT; SWR: 21K non-CoT + 21K CoT.

Models and Baselines. We train SWT and SWR using Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct and Qwen2.5-72B-
Instruct. As prompt-engineering baselines for both SWT and SWR, we adopt powerful open mod-
els (MinMax-M2.1 and GLM-4.7) to directly generate simulated feedback via carefully designed
prompts.

Prompt Templates and Output Formats. We format each training example into a unified instruction-
following template with explicit input fields. The SWT and SWR input prompt templates are shown
in Figure G.2 and Figure G.3, respectively. For outputs, we enforce a strict JSON format to facilitate
reliable parsing:
    • SWT: {"stdout": ..., "stderr": ..., "exit_code":                    ...}
    • SWR: {"test_report": ..., "reward": ...}
For CoT, we prepend the reasoning trace before the JSON: <think> ... </think> {...}. This
design allows us to extract structured fields (e.g., stdout/exit_code or reward) without ambiguity.

B.2   SFT Hyperparameters

Table 9 summarizes the main SFT hyperparameters extracted from our training commands. All
runs use AdamW and DeepSpeed ZeRO-3, with BF16, FlashAttention, ring attention, and gradient
checkpointing enabled.

Final Trained Models. Considering resource constraints and training time, we train the following
models used in the main paper: SWT-32B (non-CoT; trained on 26K training examples), SWT-
32B-CoT (CoT; trained on 26K training examples), SWT-72B-CoT (CoT; trained on 26K training
examples), SWR-32B (CoT; trained on 21K training examples), SWR-72B (CoT; trained on 21K
training examples).

C     Training Details for Docker-Free SFT with SWE-World

Data Collection with SWE-World Rollouts. We collect training data by rolling out code agents
in a Docker-free setting using the R2E-Gym framework, with at most 100 interaction turns per
rollout. The rollout task pool includes three public SWE datasets—R2E-Gym, SWE-Gym, and SWE-
rebench—together with our SWE-World dataset. During rollouts, we replace the Docker backend
with SWE-World: SWT provides step-level feedback, and SWR assigns the trajectory-level reward
after termination. For a favorable efficiency–accuracy trade-off, we use SWT-32B and SWR-32B with
a 128K context window, using a sampling temperature of 0. We drive rollouts with powerful LLM
agents (GLM-4.6 and MinMax-M2; temperature 0.7) to generate diverse high-quality interaction
traces.


                                                 19
Trajectory Filtering. We apply format-based filtering to ensure training stability. We keep only
successful trajectories (reward = 1), and drop outliers that exceed 80K tokens or 100 turns to
reduce OOM risks. We further discard trajectories containing malformed actions (e.g., unparsable
tool/function calls or invalid repeated invocations). After filtering, we obtain 5.7K SWE-World-only
trajectories for Docker-free SFT.

Backbones. We fine-tune two policy backbones: Qwen2.5-32B-Coder-Instruct and Qwen3-4B-
Instruct-2507.

SFT Hyperparameters. We train for 5 epochs with a maximum context length of 80K tokens and a
global batch size of 256. We use AdamW with a cosine learning-rate schedule, warming up for 10%
of training and decaying the learning rate from 5 × 10−5 to 5 × 10−6 .

D    Training Details for Docker-Free Agent RL with SWE-World

Task Pool. We conduct reinforcement learning on a unified task pool constructed from three open-
source SWE datasets: R2E-Gym, SWE-Gym, and SWE-rebench.

Execution-Free Rollouts with SWE-World. All RL rollouts are generated in the R2E-Gym
framework with the Docker backend fully replaced by the SWE-World backend. Concretely, we use
SWT-32B to provide step-level execution feedback and SWR-32B to assign the terminal unit-test
reward after the agent submits a patch. Both SWT and SWR operate with a 128K context window,
and we sample both models with a temperature of 0.

Policy Initialization. The RL policies are initialized from our Docker-free SFT checkpoints: SWE-
World-4B-SFT and SWE-World-32B-SFT.

Optimization with GRPO++. We optimize the policy using GRPO++. GRPO++ is a stabilized
variant of group-based policy optimization that uses a clipped ratio objective with leave-one-out
advantages and length normalization. For completeness, we provide the objective and related
definitions below.

                                                    |oi |
                                     "      G                                                      G
                                                                                                        !
                                         1 X 1 X                πθ (oi,t | q, oi,<t )          1 X
      J (θ) = E{oi }G                                     min                           Ri −          Rj ,
                   i=1 ∼πold (·|q)       G i=1 Lmax t=1         πold (oi,t | q, oi,<t )      G − 1j=1
                                                                                                 j̸=i
                                                                                        G
                                                                                                !!#
                              πθ (oi,t | q, oi,<t )                                   1 X
                        clip                          , 1 − εlow , 1 + εhigh   Ri −          Rj     ,        (12)
                              πold (oi,t | q, oi,<t )                               G − 1j=1
                                                                                          j̸=i

where Lmax is a fixed constant.

Return Definition with SWR. Let r̂i ∈ {0, 1} denote the terminal reward predicted by SWR for
rollout oi . We define the scalar return Ri as
                          
                             r̂i ,   if the rollout ends with submit,
                    Ri =                                              α = 0.5.          (13)
                             α r̂i , otherwise,

RL Hyperparameters and Rollout Budget. We train with a constant learning rate of 1×10−6 and
optimize on batches of 32 problems per update. For each problem, we sample 4 rollouts in parallel
with a policy sampling temperature of 1.0. To control cost and stabilize long-context training, each
trajectory is capped at 150 interaction turns, uses a maximum context length of 108K tokens during
training, and is subject to a per-trajectory timeout of 5,400 seconds.

E    Additional Evaluation Configurations
This section provides the concrete inference configurations used in our evaluations.


                                                          20
SWT/SWR/TTS Inference Settings. For SWT Evaluation, SWR Evaluation, and Test-Time Scaling,
we use a maximum context length of 128K tokens and set the sampling temperature to 0 for
deterministic model outputs.

SWE Agent Evaluation Settings. For SWE agent evaluation, we run the agent with a sampling
temperature of 0.7, a maximum context length of 128K tokens, and a maximum of 150 interaction
turns. All final correctness judgments are obtained by running the submitted patch in the Docker
evaluation harness.

F     SWE-World Dataset Construction and Statistics
We construct SWE-World dataset by extracting Python Issue-PR pairs from the GitHub Archive
covering the period from 2010 to 2025. To ensure the semantic richness and quality required for
downstream tasks, we apply a rigorous filtering pipeline.

F.1   Data Selection Heuristics

We first utilize regex matching to eliminate bot-generated noise. We retain issues that contain bug-
related keywords and meet specific length constraints: titles must exceed 20 characters and issue
bodies must exceed 200 characters. Additionally, we require at least three high-quality community
comments to ensure sufficient context.
For the linked Pull Requests (PRs), we apply the following structural constraints to ensure the tasks
are solvable yet non-trivial:
    • File Count: The number of modified files ranges from 1 to 20.
    • Code Churn: The total code churn (additions + deletions) is between 1 and 2,000 lines.
    • Patch Size: The maximum patch length is limited to 10,000 characters.
After filtering, we deduplicate the remaining instances against existing open-source SWE datasets.
This pipeline distills an initial pool of 627k records into approximately 17k high-quality samples.

F.2   Dataset Statistics

Table 10 presents the detailed statistics of our collected dataset, including the distribution of patch
sizes and unit test breakdown. Our dataset contains 16,550 instances across 3,763 unique repositories.
On average, each solution patch modifies 1.55 files and 18.76 lines of code. regarding verifica-
tion, each instance includes an average of 1.98 FAIL_TO_PASS tests (verification tests) and 42.11
PASS_TO_PASS tests (regression tests).
Table 11 compares our dataset with other standard benchmarks in the field. Our dataset provides a
significantly larger scale of training instances while maintaining reasonable complexity in terms of
modified files and lines.

Table 10: Detailed statistics of the collected dataset, focusing on the solution patches (Gold Patch)
and evaluation unit tests.

                     Metric                   Total Count      Avg. per Instance
                     General Statistics
                     Total Samples                  16,550                      -
                     Unique Repositories             3,763                      -
                     Fix Patch Statistics
                     Lines Edited (Churn)         310,544                  18.76
                     Files Edited                  25,703                   1.55
                     Unit Test Statistics
                     Fail to Pass (F2P)            32,819                   1.98
                     Pass to Pass (P2P)           696,895                  42.11



                                                  21
Table 11: Comparison of our dataset with related SWE datasets. We exclude execution environment
details for brevity.

                       Dataset             # Tasks    # Repos     Source
                       R2E                  0.25k       137        Synth
                       R2E-gym (Subset)      4.6k        10        Synth
                       SWE-bench-extra      6.38k        2k        Real
                       SWE-bench-train       19k         37        Real
                       SWE-fixer            115k        856        Real
                       SWE-gym               2.4k        11        Real
                       SWE-smith             50k        128        Both
                       SWE-World           16.55k      3,763       Real

G     Prompt Templates

    Prompt for Initial Analysis

    System Prompt:

    You are a senior software engineer and bug-fixing expert.

    Your task: given a bug report, human discussion, repository name, code patch,
        test patch,
    and lists of FAIL_TO_PASS / PASS_TO_PASS tests, produce a *concise initial
        technical analysis*
    of the problem and the fix.

    **Goals of the analysis:**
    - Identify the core problem / bug being fixed.
    - Explain the key symptoms or incorrect behavior.
    - Describe which part of the codebase (modules / functions) is conceptually
        responsible.
    - Summarize the essence of the fix: what is changed and why it fixes the bug.
    - Mention how the tests (FAIL_TO_PASS / PASS_TO_PASS) relate to the fix: what
        behavior they verify.
    - Call out any subtle constraints / corner cases that are important.

    **Style & format requirements:**
    - Output MUST be plain text in English.
    - Use 5-10 short bullet points (markdown "- " style).
    - Each bullet should be one or two sentences, focused and technical.
    - Do NOT repeat the raw diff or test lists; summarize their intent.
    - Be specific but not verbose.

    User Prompt:

    ### Repository
    {repo}

    ### Problem Statement
    {problem_statement}

    ### Human Discussion / Hints
    {hints_text}

    ### Gold Patch (code fix)
    ‘‘‘diff
    {gold_patch}
    ‘‘‘



                                              22
### Test Patch (changes to tests)

‘‘‘diff
{test_patch}
‘‘‘

### FAIL_TO_PASS (should be failing before, passing after the fix)

{f2p}

### PASS_TO_PASS (should keep passing after the fix)

{p2p}

### Your Task

Produce a concise *initial technical analysis* that captures:

* what the core bug is,
* what behavior is wrong,
* what this patch is fundamentally doing to fix it,
* which areas of the code are conceptually involved,
* and how the tests validate the fix.

Remember: 5-10 bullet points, markdown - bullets, plain English, no extra
    commentary.


Prompt for SWT

System Prompt:

You are an expert Python code execution simulator and a world-class software
    engineer.
Your task is to predict the output of a given Python command within a specific
    code repository context.
Analyze all the provided information: the initial analysis, the problem
    description, human hints, the agent’s current changes, the ideal "gold"
    solution, and the original content of the modified files.

Your output MUST be a single JSON object containing ’stdout’, ’stderr’, and ’
    exit_code’. Do not add any explanations or text outside of this JSON block.

### Key Information You Must Use:
1. **Initial Analysis of the Problem**: This section contains a core analysis of
     the issue, including the description of the error behavior, the core bug,
    how the issue manifests, and the intended fix. It is crucial to
    understanding the problem and will guide the simulation process. Use this
    to help you quickly identify the issue and how it should be addressed.

2. **Problem Description**: This section describes the specific issue the agent
    is currently working on and trying to fix. Use this to understand the exact
     problem the agent is attempting to resolve.

3. **Command to Simulate**: This is the command that will be executed. It
    contains all the information about what needs to be run, including the
    files to be executed and any other relevant details. Use this to simulate
    the execution and generate the correct output. If the "Content of Code to
    be Executed" is empty, the code is embedded within the command itself.

4. **Content of Code to be Executed**: This is the actual code that will be
    executed. Pay close attention to this content as the simulated output must



                                      23
    strictly correspond to the code being executed. If this section is empty,
    the specific code to execute is provided in the "Command to Simulate"
    section.

5. **Agent’s Current Code Modifications (Patch)**: This section highlights the
    changes that the agent has made to the codebase. These changes are the ones
     you need to analyze carefully to simulate the feedback. Focus on these
    modifications when generating your simulated output.

6. **Gold Standard Patch (For Your Reference)**: This is the correct solution to
     the issue. You should compare the agent’s current changes with the gold
    standard solution to ensure that the simulated result is as accurate as
    possible. If the agent’s patch is **functionally equivalent** to the gold
    patch (i.e., it resolves the issue in the same way), then the simulation
    feedback should match the expected output as defined by the gold standard.

### Your Task:
- Use all the above information to generate the most realistic and accurate
    simulated output.
- For commands that reproduce errors (e.g., ‘python reproduce_issue.py‘), refer
    to the **Initial Analysis of the Problem** and the **Problem Description**
    to understand the nature of the error. Then, simulate the result based on
    the actual code content and the problem analysis.
- For test commands (e.g., commands that include ‘pytest‘), carefully compare
    the agent’s modifications with the gold standard patch. If the tests are "
    FAIL_TO_PASS" tests, analyze whether the agent’s changes fix the issue as
    described in the tests. For "PASS_TO_PASS" tests, ensure that the agent’s
    changes do not break existing functionality.
- It is important to note that the execution result must strictly follow the
    current code content being executed, and no fabricated test output should
    be added. The same test case may have multiple versions, and the test
    content may change across versions. Therefore, each case should be analyzed
     specifically based on its content.
- Your simulated output should reflect the most likely and realistic results of
    the command execution based on the context provided. Be precise and clear
    in your simulated outputs, focusing on realistic error messages, test
    outputs, or successful execution results.

### Format of the Output:
- **stdout**: The standard output of the command, if applicable. For example, in
     the case of a test run, this should reflect the results of the tests, such
     as which tests passed or failed.
- **stderr**: Any error messages that might be produced by the command. For
    example, if the command produces a syntax error or another exception, this
    should contain the appropriate traceback or error message.
- **exit_code**: The exit code of the command. ‘0‘ indicates success, while ‘1‘
    (or any other non-zero value) indicates failure.

### Example Scenarios:
- **Successful Command Execution**: If the command executes successfully, ‘
    stdout‘ should contain the output generated by executing the code, and ‘
    exit_code‘ should be ‘0‘. Ensure that the output corresponds directly to
    the expected result of the executed code.
- **Runtime Error (e.g., SyntaxError)**: If there is a runtime error, such as a
    syntax error, the ‘stderr‘ should contain the error traceback, and ‘
    exit_code‘ should be ‘1‘.
- **Test Failures (pytest)**: If a test fails, ensure the simulated output
    includes the failure details (e.g., pytest output) and an appropriate ‘
    exit_code‘.

Be sure to use all the context provided, including any discrepancies between the
     agent’s modifications and the gold standard patch, to generate the most
    accurate simulated output.



                                      24
User Prompt:

### 1. Initial Analysis of the Problem
{init_analysis}

### 2. Problem Description
{problem_statement}

### 3. Command to Simulate
‘‘‘bash
{command_to_simulate}
‘‘‘

### 4. Content of Code to be Executed
{execution_code}

### 5. Agent’s Current Code Modifications (Patch)
‘‘‘diff
{agent_patch}
‘‘‘

### 6. Gold Standard Patch (For Your Reference)
‘‘‘diff
{gold_patch}
‘‘‘

### YOUR TASK
Based on all the context above, provide the simulated output for the given
    command. Your response must be only the JSON object, with no other text.


Prompt for SWR

System Prompt:

You are an expert software engineering test runner and evaluator.
Your task is to simulate running a Python test command inside a code repository,
     and then:
1. A reasoning section enclosed within ‘<think>‘ and ‘</think>‘ tags that
    contains your full internal reasoning process.
2. Produce a realistic test report summarizing which tests pass or fail.
3. Decide a final reward value based on the status of specific tests.

### Key Information You Must Use:
1. **Initial Analysis of the Problem**: This section contains a core analysis of
     the issue, including the description of the error behavior, the core bug,
    how the issue manifests, and the intended fix. It is crucial to
    understanding the problem and will guide the simulation process. Use this
    to help you quickly identify the issue and how it should be addressed.

2. **Problem Description**: This section describes the specific issue the agent
    is currently working on and trying to fix. Use this to understand the exact
     problem the agent is attempting to resolve.

3. **Command to Simulate**: This is the command that will be executed. It
    contains all the information about what needs to be run, including the
    files to be executed and any other relevant details. Use this to simulate
    the execution and generate the correct output. If the "Content of Code to
    be Executed" is empty, the code is embedded within the command itself.

4. **Content of Code to be Executed**: This is the actual code that will be
    executed. Pay close attention to this content as the simulated output must
    strictly correspond to the code being executed. If this section is empty,



                                         25
    the specific code to execute is provided in the "Command to Simulate"
    section.

5. **Agent’s Current Code Modifications (Patch)**: This section highlights the
    changes that the agent has made to the codebase. These changes are the ones
     you need to analyze carefully to simulate the feedback. Focus on these
    modifications when generating your simulated output.

6. **Gold Standard Patch (For Your Reference)**: This is the correct solution to
     the issue. You should compare the agent’s current changes with the gold
    standard solution to ensure that the simulated result is as accurate as
    possible. If the agent’s patch is **functionally equivalent** to the gold
    patch (i.e., it resolves the issue in the same way), then the simulation
    feedback should match the expected output as defined by the gold standard.

7. **FAIL_TO_PASS Tests**: A list of tests that were failing before but are
    expected to **pass** after the correct fix. For the reward to be 1, **every
    ** test in this list must pass.

8. **PASS_TO_PASS Tests**: A list of regression tests that were already passing
    and must **remain passing** after the fix. For the reward to be 1, **every**
     test in this list must pass.

### Your Task
Given all of the above context:
* Simulate the execution of the command under the current agent patch.
* Focus especially on the tests in FAIL_TO_PASS and PASS_TO_PASS:
  - If **all** FAIL_TO_PASS tests pass and **all** PASS_TO_PASS tests pass, then
     the reward **must be 1**.
  - If **any** FAIL_TO_PASS test fails or errors, the reward **must be 0**.
  - If **any** PASS_TO_PASS test fails or errors, the reward **must be 0**.

### Output Format
- **Reasoning (‘<think>‘ block)**: First, provide your detailed internal
    reasoning, analysis, and step-by-step thought process enclosed within ‘<
    think>‘ and ‘</think>‘ tags. This section explains how you arrived at the
    simulated result.
- A single JSON object with the following keys:
  - **"test_report"**: A concise textual description of the simulated test
    results. Mention which FAIL_TO_PASS and PASS_TO_PASS tests pass or fail,
    and any important errors.
  - **"reward"**: An integer, either 0 or 1, following the rules above.

The final structure MUST look conceptually like this:
‘<think> ...your full reasoning process here... </think>
{"test_report": "...", "reward": 0/1}‘

Be sure to use all the context provided, including any discrepancies between the
     agent’s modifications and the gold standard patch, to generate the most
    accurate simulated output.

User Prompt:

### 1. Initial Analysis of the Problem
{init_analysis}

### 2. Problem Description
{problem_statement}

### 3. Command to Simulate
‘‘‘bash
{command_to_simulate}
‘‘‘



                                         26
### 4. Content of Code to be Executed
{execution_code}

### 5. Agent’s Current Code Modifications (Patch)
‘‘‘diff
{agent_patch}
‘‘‘

### 6. Gold Standard Patch (For Your Reference)
‘‘‘diff
{gold_patch}
‘‘‘

### 7. FAIL_TO_PASS Tests (Must All Pass for reward=1)
{f2p}

### 8. PASS_TO_PASS Tests (Must All Pass for reward=1)
{p2p}

### YOUR TASK
Using all the context above, simulate running the given command, focusing on the
     behavior of the FAIL_TO_PASS and PASS_TO_PASS tests.

Then:
* Produce a concise test report summarizing which tests pass or fail.
* Decide the final reward:
* reward = 1 if and only if all FAIL_TO_PASS and PASS_TO_PASS tests pass.
* reward = 0 otherwise.

Your answer must include a ‘<think>...</think>‘ block containing your full
    reasoning process, followed immediately by a single valid JSON object with
    keys ‘"test_report"‘ and ‘"reward"‘.


Prompt for Reverse CoT

You are an expert software engineering test runner simulator and a world-class
    SWE bug-fix evaluator.

In this task, the TRUE test execution outcome (a JSON containing the final ‘
    test_report‘ and ‘reward‘) is already provided in the input.
You MUST copy that JSON exactly at the end of your answer.

However, your reasoning MUST be written as if you do NOT know the true outcome.
You must only use the provided context (analysis, problem statement, command,
    code, patches, test lists, etc.) to do a forward simulation
that *could have produced* the true outcome.

The input context you receive is organized into multiple sections. Each section
    has a specific meaning and purpose:

1. Initial Analysis of the Problem:
   - What it is: A high-level technical analysis of the bug, including the
    observed error behavior, core bug, and intended fix.
   - How to use it: Use this to quickly understand what is broken, what the
    correct behavior should be, and what the fix is aiming to change.

2. Problem Description:
   - What it is: A more concrete description of the specific issue the agent is
    currently working on (bug report, task description, or failing scenario).
   - How to use it: Use this to understand the exact wrong behavior being
    observed and the expected correct behavior.



                                        27
3. Command to Simulate:
   - What it is: The exact command that will be executed (for example, a python
    script invocation or a pytest command).
   - How to use it: Use this to determine the entry point, what tests or scripts
     are run, and how execution will proceed (including arguments, options, and
     test discovery).

4. Content of Code to be Executed:
   - What it is: The full content of the files and Python code that will
    actually be executed by the command (it may be empty if embedded in the
    command itself).
   - How to use it: Use this as the ground truth for runtime semantics,
    carefully simulating how this code will behave when run.

5. Agent’s Current Code Modifications (Patch):
   - What it is: The diff of the changes that the current agent has applied to
    the codebase.
   - How to use it: Use this to understand exactly what logic changed, which
    modules/functions are affected, and how control flow or data handling is
    now different.

6. Gold Standard Patch (For Your Reference):
   - What it is: The correct, ideal solution (reference patch) for the same
    issue.
   - How to use it: Use this to compare with the agent’s patch, see whether they
     are functionally equivalent or where they differ, and reason about
    possible behavioral differences.

7. FAIL_TO_PASS Tests:
   - What it is: A list of tests that were failing before but are expected to
    pass after a correct fix.
   - How to use it: Use these to judge whether the patch fixes the targeted bug:
     if any FAIL_TO_PASS test fails, the reward must be 0.

8. PASS_TO_PASS Tests:
   - What it is: A list of regression tests that were already passing and must
    remain passing after the fix.
   - How to use it: Use these to check for regressions: if any PASS_TO_PASS test
     fails, the reward must be 0.

9. True Execution Result (JSON):
   - What it is: The real outcome of running the command in a real docker
    environment, containing ‘test_report‘ and ‘reward‘.
   - How to use it: You must copy this JSON exactly at the end of your answer,
    but you must NOT use it to guide, justify, or leak into your reasoning.
    Your reasoning must be written as if you have not seen this result.

---

### Your Task

A) Write a detailed forward-simulation reasoning trace that:
   - Starts from the context and code semantics.
   - Compares agent patch vs gold patch to judge whether they are functionally
    equivalent.
   - Predicts (as expectations) which FAIL_TO_PASS and PASS_TO_PASS tests should
     pass/fail and why.
      - For the PASS_TO_PASS test cases, you should carefully analyze and
    simulate whether the current agent patch would break any existing
    functionality in the repository, and use that to determine whether the
    tests would pass.




                                      28
      - For the FAIL_TO_PASS test cases, you should carefully analyze and
    simulate whether the current agent patch can fix the repository’s existing
    issue, and use that to determine whether the tests would pass.
      - This simulation should behave like a code interpreter: walk through the
    execution path line by line (or block by block), follow the key execution
    logic, and produce a complete, detailed narrative of the simulated run.
   - Based on the analysis, produce the test report for the PASS_TO_PASS and
    FAIL_TO_PASS tests. If all of them pass, the reward is 1; otherwise, it is
    0.

B) CRITICAL CAUSALITY REQUIREMENT (NO LEAKING / NO BACKWARD EXPLANATION)
   - Your reasoning MUST NOT mention that you have been given the true result.
   - Your reasoning MUST NOT quote, paraphrase, or reference any concrete lines
    from the true ‘test_report‘.
   - Do NOT write post-hoc explanations like "we see X in the output, therefore
    ...".
   - If you mention outcomes, phrase them as expectations derived from the code,
     e.g.:
     "This test is expected to pass because...", "It likely fails due to...".
   - Do NOT copy any distinctive strings from the True Execution Result into
    your reasoning.

C) After you finish the reasoning, append the provided True Execution Result
    JSON EXACTLY as-is.
   - Do not reformat it, do not add keys, do not change whitespace, do not add
    extra fields.
   - Do not add any extra commentary after the JSON.

---

### Output Format

You must output exactly:

<sim_reasoning>
...plain-text forward simulation reasoning...
</sim_reasoning>
{PASTE_THE_PROVIDED_TRUE_EXECUTION_RESULT_JSON_HERE_EXACTLY}

Rules:
- Inside <sim_reasoning>: plain text only (no markdown headings, no code fences)
    .
- After </sim_reasoning>: immediately paste the JSON exactly.
- Do not output anything else.

### 1. Initial Analysis of the Problem
{initial_analysis}

### 2. Problem Description
{problem_statement}

### 3. Command to Simulate
‘‘‘bash
{command_to_simulate}
‘‘‘

### 4. Content of Code to be Executed

{exec_code_block_str}

### 5. Agent’s Current Code Modifications (Patch)

‘‘‘diff



                                         29
{agent_patch}
‘‘‘

### 6. Gold Standard Patch (For Your Reference)

‘‘‘diff
{gold_patch}
‘‘‘

### 7. FAIL_TO_PASS Tests (Must All Pass for reward=1)

{f2p}

### 8. PASS_TO_PASS Tests (Must All Pass for reward=1)

{p2p}

### 9. True Execution Result (JSON)   [DO NOT USE THIS IN REASONING; ONLY COPY AT
     THE END]

{true_execution_result_json}

### YOUR TASK

Write the response in the STRICT output format required by the system prompt.
Remember:

* Reasoning must be a forward simulation based only on context.
* Do NOT reference/quote the true result in reasoning.
* Append the true JSON exactly after </sim_reasoning>.




                                       30
