                                            Can Interest-Bearing Positions Solve the Long-Horizon
                                                       Problem in Prediction Markets?
                                                               Evidence from Agent-Based Simulations




arXiv:2602.21091v1 [econ.GN] 24 Feb 2026
                                                                                   Caleb Maresca∗
                                                                               New York University

                                                                                 February 25, 2026



                                                                                        Abstract

                                                 Prediction markets suffer from reduced liquidity and price accuracy for long-horizon
                                                 events due to the opportunity cost of committed capital. Recently, major platforms
                                                 have introduced interest-bearing positions to mitigate this ”long-horizon problem.” I
                                                 evaluate this policy using agent-based simulations with large language model (LLM)
                                                 traders in a 2 × 2 factorial design, varying time horizon (4 days vs. 2 years) and the
                                                 presence of interest. While long horizons degrade accuracy, the observed pricing bias
                                                 (0.72 percentage points) is significantly smaller than theoretical and prior empirical
                                                 estimates. Paying interest eliminates approximately 83% of the horizon effect on accu-
                                                 racy and more than triples market participation (from 17% to 62% of wealth). These
                                                 findings suggest the long-horizon problem may be overstated in existing literature and
                                                 that interest-bearing positions are a highly effective intervention, primarily by incen-
                                                 tivizing participation rather than correcting bias.


                                                 Keywords: Prediction Markets


                                                 JEL Codes: D84, G14, C92




                                             ∗
                                               Email: ccm7752@nyu.edu. Department of Economics, New York University.
                                           The    code     for  this    paper    is    available   at   https://github.com/CalebMaresca/
                                           prediction-market-experiments
1     Introduction

Prediction markets harness the price mechanism to aggregate dispersed information into
probabilistic forecasts. The intellectual foundation for this approach traces back to Hayek
(1945), who argued that prices efficiently aggregate knowledge dispersed among individuals
that no central planner could collect. Building on this insight, Hanson (2003) advocated
for prediction markets as tools for corporate and public decision-making, while Wolfers and
Zitzewitz (2004) established prediction markets as a serious topic of academic inquiry, doc-
umenting their accuracy across diverse domains. These markets can be of social value: they
can improve decision-making in business and government, provide hedging instruments for
those with exposure to future events, and generate forecasts that inform public discourse on
topics ranging from elections to climate change.
    Despite this promise, prediction markets face several practical and theoretical challenges.
Markets on political events may create incentives for manipulation (Rhode and Strumpf,
2004, 2006). Thin markets suffer from illiquidity, leading to wide bid-ask spreads and un-
informative prices. Regulatory restrictions limit participation in many jurisdictions. This
paper focuses on a specific limitation that has received growing attention: the long-horizon
problem, the tendency for prediction markets to exhibit reduced liquidity and price accuracy
when the event will not resolve until far in the future.
    The long-horizon problem arises from opportunity costs. A simple example illustrates
the mechanism. Consider a trader who believes a contract is mispriced at $0.50 and that
the true probability is 0.60. If the market resolves tomorrow, she expects to earn $0.10 per
contract by buying and holding. But if the market resolves in five years, she still expects to
earn only $0.10, while the same capital invested in a diversified portfolio might earn 50% or
more. In fact, she could earn a higher return for a much lower risk with a bond yielding 4%
yearly. The expected return from prediction market participation is independent of time to
resolution, but the returns from outside options grow with time. Consequently, traders with
attractive outside options rationally abstain from long-horizon markets, reducing liquidity

                                               1
and potentially biasing prices.
   Antweiler (2012) develops an analytical framework formalizing this intuition. He shows
that opportunity costs create a participation constraint that reduces liquidity and systemati-
cally biases prices in long-horizon markets. His analysis also reveals an important asymmetry:
for a contract priced at p dollars, a trader betting the event will occur commits p dollars, while
a trader betting against commits (1 − p) dollars. At low prices, long positions face smaller
opportunity costs than short positions; at high prices, the reverse holds. This asymmetry
biases prices toward 50%, with the distortion growing as time horizons lengthen. Page and
Clemen (2013) provide compelling empirical evidence using over 500,000 transactions across
1,787 markets, finding that time until expiration negatively affects price accuracy: markets
are “reasonably well calibrated when time to expiration is relatively short, but prices are
significantly biased for events farther in the future.”
   To address the long-horizon problem, the two largest prediction markets, Kalshi and
Polymarket, have both started offering interest on open market positions.12 Polymarket
explicitly states that the purpose of this policy is to “keep long-term pricing accurate,”3
while Kalshi focuses on the benefits for users, stating “Interest accrual allows you to hold
your positions for a longer period without worrying about running out of funds.”4
   The effectiveness of these policies for improving price accuracy remains unknown. The
obvious benefit is that expected returns from prediction market positions now increase with
time to resolution, alleviating the long-horizon problem by reducing the gap between pre-
diction market returns and outside option returns. However, there are still reasons why a
trader may perceive outside options as superior to long-horizon prediction markets even with
interest payments. First, the interest offered by Kalshi and Polymarket is similar to that
offered by high-yield savings accounts and T-Bills, which may not be the relevant outside
option for many traders. Traders with a higher appetite for risk may prefer to invest in other
   1
     https://news.kalshi.com/p/interest-cash-open-positions
   2
     https://finance.yahoo.com/news/polymarket-lures-bettors-highest-4-204736721.html
   3
     https://docs.polymarket.com/polymarket-learn/trading/holding-rewards
   4
     https://help.kalshi.com/navigating-the-exchange/your-portfolio/apy-on-kalshi


                                                2
outside options, such as the stock market. Second, portfolio value interest has a significant
disadvantage compared to risk-free alternatives such as T-Bills: traders may lose their entire
investment if the market resolves against their position. Furthermore, they likely will not
receive a consistent interest payment as a percentage of their initial investment cost, as they
would with T-Bills. Rather, the interest is calculated on the current market value of their
portfolio, which varies with the price. For example, if a trader bought 1,000 contracts for
$0.50 each, and the market price dropped to $0.25 immediately thereafter, she would not
receive interest on her $500 investment, but rather on its current value of $250.
   Measuring the effect of portfolio value interest on pricing accuracy using observational
data is not currently possible, as it was only instituted by Kalshi in October of 2024 and by
Polymarket in September of 2025. Therefore, there are no markets with a horizon of over a
year and a half that have resolved since the policies were instituted. It may take a long time
to accumulate enough data for an accurate analysis, due not only to the inherent amount
of time it takes long-horizon markets to resolve, but also due to their noisy nature. The
effect of horizon on mispricing is easily confounded with the fact that markets that are far
from resolution often have less information available to help the investor make an accurate
prediction. In addition, it might be difficult to find appropriate control markets in which
portfolio value interest is absent.
   In this paper, I tackle this problem experimentally using Large Language Model (LLM)
agents to simulate prediction market trading. I implement a 2 × 2 factorial design varying
time horizon (short versus long) and portfolio value interest (absent versus present), allowing
me to isolate the causal effect of interest-bearing positions on market outcomes. The LLM
agents are endowed with heterogeneous risk preferences. Half have high risk tolerance and
half have medium risk tolerance, which generates meaningful variation in trading behavior
and portfolio allocation decisions.
   This approach has several advantages. First, I can remove the confounding effect of
information over long time horizons by keeping the amount of information given to the


                                              3
agents constant between the long and short time horizon treatments. Second, I can generate
a relatively large dataset with clean controls. Third, I know the true probability of the
event occurring. Thus, I can directly compare the market price to the true probability, as
opposed to comparing probability to frequency of outcomes, as is required in observational
data. Fourth, I can analyze auxiliary information that is unavailable in observational data,
such as the agents’ predicted probabilities. This is useful because theory predicts that when
markets are far from resolution, traders may all know that the market is mispriced, but
still choose not to trade due to attractive outside options. Finally, LLM simulations are far
cheaper than human experiments (especially as markets require multiple human participants
for each observation) allowing for a greater degree of experimentation and larger sample sizes.
   This approach also has limitations. The use of LLMs as experimental subjects is still
in its infancy, and questions remain about external validity. Recent work finds that LLM-
populated markets exhibit “textbook-rational” behavior with muted bubble formation com-
pared to human markets (Henning et al., 2025), suggesting that LLMs may not reproduce
all human behavioral anomalies. However, this limitation is less concerning for the present
research, which focuses on whether a specific mechanism design can address a problem that
exists even under rational behavior. Additionally, while studies show that LLMs exhibit
traits statistically indistinguishable from humans on many behavioral games (Mei et al.,
2024), the mapping from prompt-based “risk preferences” to actual trading behavior may
not mirror human decision-making in all respects.
   The experimental results provide three main findings. First, extending the time horizon
from four days to two years reduces price accuracy, trading volume, and prediction market
exposure while widening bid-ask spreads, confirming the existence of the long-horizon prob-
lem in a controlled setting. Second, the magnitude of the pricing bias attributable to the
lengthened time horizon is considerably smaller than both theoretical predictions and prior
empirical estimates, roughly 0.72 percentage points compared to the approximately 6 per-
centage points predicted by extending Antweiler (2012)’s model and the 4.7–10.9 percentage


                                              4
points found empirically by Page and Clemen (2013). Third, paying interest on prediction
market positions eliminates approximately 83% of the horizon effect on price accuracy and
increases market participation by more than 250%, from 16.9% to 61.6%; compared to a
short-horizon benchmark of 74.9%.
    The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant litera-
ture on prediction market accuracy, the long-horizon problem, laboratory prediction market
experiments, and the emerging use of large language models in experimental economics. Sec-
tion 3 describes the experimental design, including the market structure, participant design,
and treatment conditions. Section 4 develops the hypotheses tested in this study. Section
5 presents the main experimental findings. Section 6 concludes with a discussion of the
implications for prediction market design and directions for future research.



2     Literature Review

2.1    Prediction Market Accuracy and Information Aggregation

The theoretical foundation for prediction markets traces to Hayek (1945), who argued that
knowledge is dispersed among individuals and that the price system serves as an efficient
mechanism for aggregating this distributed information. The insight that decentralized mar-
kets can harness knowledge that no central planner could collect provides the intellectual
basis for virtually all prediction market research. The contemporary survey by Wolfers and
Zitzewitz (2004) establishes prediction markets as a serious academic topic, documenting
that market-generated forecasts typically outperform most moderately sophisticated bench-
marks across a range of domains. Their subsequent work, Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2006),
demonstrates that under log utility, equilibrium prices equal the budget-weighted average of
trader beliefs, providing theoretical justification for treating prices as probability estimates.
    The Iowa Electronic Markets (IEM) have generated the most rigorous empirical evidence
on prediction market accuracy. Berg et al. (2008) compared IEM predictions to 964 polls


                                               5
across five U.S. Presidential elections from 1988 to 2004, finding that the market was closer
to the eventual outcome 74% of the time. Election-eve forecasts showed average absolute
errors of just 1.33 percentage points, and markets significantly outperformed polls when fore-
casting more than 100 days in advance. Laboratory evidence from Plott and Sunder (1988)
demonstrates that double auction trading leads to efficient information aggregation and ra-
tional expectations equilibrium under controlled conditions, establishing the experimental
foundation for market-based forecasting.
   Not all assessments are uniformly positive. Manski (2006) challenges the direct interpre-
tation of prices as probabilities, showing that with risk-neutral price-taking traders and het-
erogeneous beliefs, prices only partially identify mean beliefs. Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2006)
respond that under reasonable assumptions about risk preferences, prices remain informative
about underlying probabilities. This theoretical debate highlights that the mapping from
prices to probabilities depends on assumptions about trader preferences and behavior that
may not hold in practice. Nevertheless, the empirical record suggests that prediction markets
work remarkably well across many domains, whatever the precise theoretical justification.


2.2    The Long-Horizon Problem

Despite their demonstrated accuracy over short time horizons, prediction markets consis-
tently suffer from reduced liquidity and price quality when resolution dates are distant.
Antweiler (2012) provides the definitive analytical framework for understanding this limi-
tation, identifying the opportunity cost mechanism as the fundamental constraint on long-
horizon markets. When traders commit capital to prediction market contracts, that capital
cannot be invested in alternative portfolios (such as stocks or bonds) that would otherwise
earn a compound return. This creates a participation constraint: traders will only enter
the market if their expected gain exceeds this lost opportunity, a threshold that becomes
increasingly difficult to meet as the time to resolution lengthens.
   Antweiler’s analysis reveals that this opportunity cost does not affect the market uni-


                                              6
formly, but rather introduces an important asymmetry rooted in the ”money at risk” for
different positions. In a standard unit portfolio where a contract pays $1 upon resolution,
a trader taking a ”long” position at price p must commit p dollars, while a trader taking
a ”short” position (betting against the event) must commit (1 − p) dollars to the alternate
contract. This creates asymmetric capital requirements: at a low market price of p = 0.20,
a long position is significantly ”cheaper” to maintain than a short position (0.20 vs. 0.80 at
risk).
   This asymmetry distorts the equilibrium price because a fixed cent-deviation from beliefs
yields a much higher return on the ”cheaper” side of the market. For instance, at p = 0.20,
a two-cent mispricing offers an 11.1% return for a long position but only a 2.5% return for a
short position. This imbalance allows long traders to satisfy their participation constraints
more easily than short traders at low prices, creating upward pressure that results in a sys-
tematic long bias. Conversely, at high prices, short positions become more capital-efficient,
leading to a short bias. Equilibrium is only achieved when the market price deviates from
the mean trader belief enough to equalize these asymmetric participation rates, distorting
predictions toward the 50% mark.
   Empirical evidence supports these theoretical predictions. Page and Clemen (2013) an-
alyze over 500,000 transactions across 1,787 markets on Intrade, finding that time until
expiration negatively affects price accuracy. High-likelihood events are systematically un-
derpriced and low-likelihood events are overpriced, with markets reasonably well calibrated
when time to expiration is relatively short but significantly biased for events farther in the
future. Page and Clemen invoke a different theoretical reason for the bias. Rather than
comparing the prediction market to outside options as in Antweiler (2012), they show that
the discounting of future payoffs implies that traders whose beliefs are near the market price
abstain from participation, forming a ”no-trade region” where neither buying nor selling
is utility-maximizing. Because the cost of time discounting is proportional to the capital
committed, this abstention is more pronounced for high-priced “favourite” contracts, which


                                              7
require a larger upfront investment. This asymmetric reduction in trade creates an imbal-
ance where demand for favourites decreases more than supply when prices are high, while
supply for low-priced “longshots” decreases more than demand. The net result of this ”dis-
appearance of trade” is a systematic longshot bias where equilibrium prices are distorted
toward 0.50 as the time until expiration increases.


2.3    Laboratory Prediction Market Experiments

The transition from theoretical models to empirical validation began with laboratory ex-
periments designed to test whether the price mechanism could truly aggregate dispersed
information. This tradition was pioneered by Plott and Sunder (1982) and Plott and Sunder
(1988), who utilized double auction markets to observe how information is shared among
traders. While Plott and Sunder (1982) demonstrated that markets could disseminate infor-
mation from ”insiders” to uninformed traders, the 1988 study provided the crucial evidence
for information aggregation—showing that a market can pool diverse, noisy signals to iden-
tify a state that no individual trader knows with certainty. These early studies established
that, under controlled conditions, prices in double auctions frequently converge to rational
expectations equilibria.
   Subsequent laboratory research has identified the behavioral and institutional limits of
this aggregation. Forsythe and Lundholm (1990) clarified that information aggregation is
more likely when traders have repeated experience with the market institution and common
knowledge of the dividend structure. Furthermore, work by Forsythe et al. (1992) and Oliven
and Rietz (2004) analyzed laboratory and field equivalents of the Iowa Electronic Markets,
finding that pricing efficiency often rests on a small subset of ”marginal traders” who correct
the biases of less active participants. These findings emphasize that while markets are
theoretically robust, their real-world performance is contingent on specific institutional and
participant characteristics, such as the speed of convergence and the distribution of private
information.


                                              8
   Providing a comprehensive synthesis of this literature, Deck and Porter (2013) offer a
broad review of the field’s evolution. Their work contextualizes the ”wisdom of crowds”
within the framework of markets as information processors, distilling diverse beliefs into
singular prices. The review documents the expansion of prediction markets from foundational
studies into varied domains, including corporate sales forecasting, product launch tracking,
and scientific discovery. Ultimately, Deck and Porter (2013) conclude that the reliability
of market-generated forecasts is not universal but depends on environmental factors such
as market thickness, the simplicity of payoff structures, and the intensity of incentives to
manipulate. This synthesis identifies that maintaining robust, ongoing participation remains
a critical challenge for ensuring market efficiency in complex or long-term settings.


2.4    Large Language Models in Experimental Economics

A growing literature explores the use of large language models as simulated economic agents.
Horton (2023) coins the term “Homo Silicus” and establishes that LLMs can be given en-
dowments, preferences, and information like traditional economic agents, replicating classic
experiments with results qualitatively similar to human subjects. This approach offers a
method for piloting experiments before costly human studies. This benefit is especially
useful for market experiments that require a large number of subjects.
   Importantly, Horton shows that while LLMs have likely ingested the results of many
experiments in their training corpus, they do not overfit to past results. Instead, they can
generalize to novel scenarios. Horton demonstrates this robustness by varying original exper-
iments through linguistic translations, context changes—such as substituting snow shovels
for artisan bread—and even adversarial prompts designed to invert established behavioral
relationships. Despite these perturbations, the models maintain consistent patterns, sug-
gesting they have internalized a generalized ”implicit social information” drawn from both
scholarly literature and the vast records of human interactions in their training data.
   The sensitivity of LLM performance to experimental design has also become a key focus.


                                              9
Wang et al. (2025) demonstrate that while assigned personas (such as occupation) signif-
icantly influence LLM preferences, they do not substantially impact economic rationality.
Furthermore, they find that the choice of dialogue structure is critical; using single-turn dia-
logues significantly decreases the rationality scores of smaller models compared to multi-turn
interactions.
   Evidence on LLM rationality and behavioral alignment is mixed but encouraging for
certain applications. Chen et al. (2023) demonstrate that GPT achieves higher rationality
scores than human subjects across risk, time, social, and food preference domains. Mei
et al. (2024) provide the most comprehensive behavioral comparison, showing that GPT-4
exhibits traits statistically indistinguishable from random humans across over 50 countries on
classic behavioral games, including the Dictator Game, Ultimatum Game, Trust Game, and
Prisoner’s Dilemma. When deviating from human norms, LLMs tend to be more cooperative
and altruistic rather than less.
   For market simulations specifically, Lopez-Lira (2025) demonstrates that LLMs can act
as consistent value investors, momentum traders, or market makers, with market dynam-
ics exhibiting realistic features including price discovery and strategic liquidity provision.
However, Henning et al. (2025) find that LLM-populated markets exhibit ’textbook-rational
behavior,’ pricing assets near fundamental value with muted bubble formation compared
to experimental markets with human participants. This finding suggests that LLM agents
may be too rational to generate the behavioral anomalies characteristic of human markets,
but may be well-suited to studying market design features where rational-agent predictions
are theoretically interesting. Recent work by del Rio-Chanona et al. (2025) nuances this
finding, showing that in dynamic market experiments, LLMs do not strictly follow rational
expectations but instead display bounded rationality similar to human participants. They
emphasize that providing a context window or ”memory” of at least three previous time
steps is necessary for LLMs to replicate broad market trends.
   Concerns regarding whether LLMs are more rational than human participants are less


                                              10
concerning for the present research, which focuses on whether a specific mechanism design
(interest-bearing positions) can address a problem that exists even under rational behavior.
The opportunity cost mechanism identified by Antweiler (2012) operates through rational
capital allocation decisions, not behavioral biases. If anything, the rationality of LLM agents
provides a clean test of the theoretical mechanism: if even rational agents reduce participa-
tion in long-horizon markets due to opportunity costs, and if paying interest mitigates this
effect, the results speak directly to the policy question without confounding from behavioral
factors.



3     Experimental Design

3.1     Experiment Structure

The experiment implements a binary prediction market for a single event with known reso-
lution date. The event occurs with probability p∗ , which is unknown to the agents. Markets
operate as double auctions where participants can trade contracts that pay $1 if the event
occurs (“Yes” contracts) and $0 otherwise, or contracts that pay $1 if the event does not
occur (“No” contracts) and $0 otherwise. In addition, the agents have two available outside
options: a risk-free asset and a risky asset.
    Figure 1 illustrates the experiment timeline. Each experimental session proceeds in three
phases: the signal phase, the trading phase, and the post-trading phase.

            Signal Phase          Trading Phase           Post-Trading            Resolution
           Receive private         10 rounds of          Allocate cash to       Event resolves,
            information           double auction         outside options        payoffs realized

                                   Figure 1: Experiment Timeline

Notes: The experiment proceeds in four stages. In the signal phase, agents receive private information (200
Bernoulli draws). During the trading phase, agents participate in 10 rounds of double auction trading. In
the post-trading phase, agents allocate remaining cash between risk-free and risky outside options. Finally,
the event resolves after horizon τ (4 days or 2 years depending on treatment) and payoffs are realized.


    In the signal phase at the start of the experiment, each agent receives private information

                                                    11
about the true event probability p∗ . Specifically, each agent observes S = 200 independent
draws from a Bernoulli distribution with the true probability p∗ . Agents see how many of
these draws were “successes,” providing them with a noisy but informative signal about the
underlying probability. With 200 draws, agents can form reasonably precise posterior beliefs
while retaining meaningful uncertainty that motivates trade.
   The true probability is set to either p∗ = 0.05 or p∗ = 0.95, representing events at
the extremes of the probability distribution where the long-short asymmetry identified by
Antweiler (2012) predicts the largest price distortions. However, the agents are not informed
of the experimental distribution of true probabilities and are instead told “The event has
a true probability of occurring that is fixed and lies in the interval [0.0, 1.0]. This true
probability is unknown to all participants.” Examining the reasoning summaries provided
with responses from the OpenAI API, I find that agents interpret this as either a uniform
prior or a Jeffreys prior (Beta(1/2, 1/2)).
   In the trading phase, agents participate in R = 10 discrete trading rounds in a double
auction market for the “Yes” and “No” contracts. Agents trade using their full cash endow-
ment during this phase. Following Lopez-Lira (2025), I use discrete trading rounds rather
than continuous real-time order processing because LLM latency constraints make real-time
processing infeasible. Within each round, agent orders are collected, then randomized to
simulate concurrent order arrival while maintaining fairness, and finally processed according
to standard price-time priority rules.
   The market operates on both “Yes” and “No” sides simultaneously through a unified order
book with an important structural feature: a bid of p to buy a “Yes” contract automatically
appears as an ask to sell a “No” contract at (1 − p), and vice versa. This duality arises
naturally from the complementary payoff structure: if I am willing to buy a Yes contract for
$0.60, I am implicitly offering to be the counterparty to someone who wants to buy a No
contract for $0.40, since together we would pay exactly $1.00 to fund the eventual payout.
Such a structure is used in both Kalshi and Polymarket.


                                              12
   Short selling either contract type is not permitted, and is not necessary due to the
complementary nature of the two contract types. Additionally, orders persist across trading
rounds unless explicitly canceled by agents. This persistence enables price discovery and
reduces the need for agents to constantly re-submit orders while allowing them to adapt
their strategies based on market developments.
   In the post-trading phase, after the final trading round, agents make a single portfolio
allocation decision: they choose what fraction of their remaining cash to invest in the risky
outside option versus the risk-free outside option. In treatments with portfolio value inter-
est, agents also receive interest on the market value of their prediction market positions,
calculated using the price at the end of the final trading round. The event then resolves,
outside investment returns are realized, and final payoffs are determined.
   While this experimental design shares the fundamental double-auction structure of classic
laboratory studies, it introduces several key departures to address the specific requirements
of the long-horizon problem. Unlike the foundational work of Plott and Sunder (1982) and
Plott and Sunder (1988), which typically utilized human subjects and discrete state spaces
(e.g., states X, Y, and Z), this design employs LLM agents and a continuous probability space
p∗ ∈ [0, 1]. Whereas classic designs focused on convergence toward a single ”correct” discrete
state, using a continuous truth allows for a more granular measurement of price accuracy and
systematic bias at different time horizons through mean absolute error. Furthermore, while
classic experiments relied on continuous real-time auctions, this paper implements discrete
trading rounds to accommodate LLM latency and ensure a level playing field for order
execution. Lastly, the inclusion of explicit risky and risk-free outside options, an element
absent from traditional designs, is essential for simulating the capital opportunity costs that
define the long-horizon problem.




                                              13
3.2    Participant Design

The experimental markets consist of N = 10 LLM agents implemented using the OpenAI
LLM GPT-5.2. Five agents are assigned high risk tolerance, and five are assigned medium
risk tolerance through natural language persona descriptions in their system prompts. Pilot
simulations also included agents with low risk tolerance, but they rarely participated in the
prediction market, preferring to allocate most or all of their capital to the outside options,
and were therefore removed from the experiment to focus on agents who actively engage
with the prediction market.
   This approach follows the emerging methodological literature on LLM experiments. Hor-
ton (2023) establishes that LLMs can be induced to “play different agents via prompts,”
noting that this agent programming “is not unlike the experimental economics practice of
giving an experimental subject a card that says their marginal cost of producing a widget
is 15 tokens.” More recent work by Wang et al. (2025) finds that assigned personas such
as occupation or risk profile “significantly affect preferences but not rationality,” suggesting
that persona-based heterogeneity operates similarly to how naturally occurring preference
heterogeneity functions in human experiments.
   I chose not to induce preferences through explicit utility functions for two reasons. First,
specifying a particular functional form would limit the experiment to testing whether that
specific model responds to opportunity costs, rather than testing the mechanism more gen-
erally. Second, this approach better mirrors the conditions of actual prediction markets:
when human traders participate, they bring naturally heterogeneous risk preferences that
we do not observe or control. Just as experimenters conducting laboratory experiments with
human subjects cannot specify participants’ utility functions and must work with whatever
preferences people bring into the lab, I allow the LLM agents to interpret their assigned risk
tolerances and translate them into trading behavior. This creates meaningful variation in
trading and portfolio allocation decisions without imposing assumptions about the precise
shape of utility that might not hold for human traders.


                                              14
   The LLM agents operate through a structured prompt-response loop. At the start of
the experiment, agents receive a system prompt explaining the experiment structure, their
initial endowment of W0 = $10,000, the number of participants, their objective (to maximize
final wealth), and their risk profile. They also receive their private signal: the number of
successes observed in their 200 Bernoulli draws.
   Each trading round, agents are prompted once to provide their trading decisions. Each
prompt consists of the current round number, updates from the previous trading round (e.g.,
orders created, orders filled), the market state for both Yes and No contracts (including best
bid and ask prices and the full order book), and their current financial position. Agents
respond by providing a probability estimate for the event, a list of orders they wish to
create, edit, or cancel, and explanations for their decisions.
   After the final trading round, agents receive a separate prompt for their post-trading
investment decision. They are informed of the outcome of trading, their current cash position
and contract holdings, and the parameters of the outside investment options. They then
specify what fraction of their remaining cash to allocate to the risky asset, with the remainder
going to the risk-free asset.
   For each agent, the entire conversation history of all prompts and responses is saved. At
each decision point, the agent receives not only the current prompt but the full history of prior
interactions, enabling agents to adapt their strategies based on observed market behavior and
their own performance. This architecture mirrors human memory in laboratory experiments,
where participants can recall their previous actions and market observations.
   The information structure follows standard conventions in experimental economics. The
experiment rules, number of participants, contract payoffs, and outside option parameters
are common knowledge. All agents receive identical information about these aspects in their
system prompts. Private signals (the number of Bernoulli successes each agent observes)
remain private information. Agents know only their own signal. The order book and trans-
action history become public information as trading proceeds, disseminated to all agents in


                                               15
their round prompts. This structure mirrors the classic Plott and Sunder (1988) design,
where traders had private information about the state but observed public market prices.
    Appendix B presents a partial transcript from one experimental session, including the
full system prompt, example trading round prompt and response, and example post-trading
investment decision prompt and response.


3.3       Treatments

The experimental design consists of four cells organized as a 2 × 2 factorial design, varying
time horizon and interest on positions. Table 1 summarizes the treatment structure.

                                   Short Horizon (4 days)                      Long Horizon (2 years)
 Without Interest                          Cell 1                                       Cell 2
                             rf = 0.044%, µr = 0.11%, σr = 1.7%            rf = 8%, µr = 20%, σr = 22.63%
                                     No portfolio interest                       No portfolio interest
 With Interest                               Cell 3                                      Cell 4
                             rf = 0.044%, µr = 0.11%, σr = 1.7%            rf = 8%, µr = 20%, σr = 22.63%
                                    Portfolio interest at rf                    Portfolio interest at rf

                      Table 1: Experimental Design: 2 × 2 Factorial Structure

Notes: Each cell contains 100 independent simulation sessions with 10 agents each. Parameters rf , µr , and
σr denote the risk-free return, expected risky return, and risky return standard deviation over the relevant
horizon. Short-horizon parameters are scaled from annual rates over 4 days; long-horizon parameters are
compounded over 2 years.


    The time horizon treatment manipulates the economic significance of time while holding
constant the number of discrete trading rounds and the quality of information signals. In
the short-horizon treatment, the event resolves in four days, making the outside investment
options economically negligible. In the long-horizon treatment, the event resolves in two
years, making the outside options economically meaningful.
    The outside option parameters are calibrated to approximate realistic financial market
conditions. The annualized risk-free rate of 4% reflects recent yields on short-term Treasury
securities, as well as the interest rates offered on position in Kalshi and Polymarket5 . The
   5
       As of this writing, Kalshi offers a 3.25% interest rate and PolyMarket offers a 4% rate.


                                                       16
risky asset parameters (10% expected return and 16% annual volatility) are calibrated to
long-run historical performance of the S&P 500, which has delivered average annual returns
of approximately 10% with a standard deviation of roughly 15–20% over the past century.
These parameters fall within the range of subjective return expectations documented in
survey evidence. Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) find that investor expectations for stock
market returns average around 6–10% annually, while Adam et al. (2021) show that subjec-
tive expected returns in survey data are on average close to unbiased relative to subsequent
realized returns.
   In both treatments, agents make a single post-trading allocation decision between the
risk-free asset and the risky asset. The parameters are scaled to the appropriate horizon
using standard financial compounding conventions. For the short horizon of four days (ap-
proximately 4/365 ≈ 0.011 years), the risk-free return is rf = (1.04)4/365 − 1 ≈ 0.044%. The
expected risky return scales as µr = 0.10 × (4/365) ≈ 0.11%, and volatility scales with the
                                   p
square root of time as σr = 0.16 × 4/365 ≈ 1.7%. For the long horizon of two years, the
compounded parameters are rf = (1.04)2 − 1 = 8.16% ≈ 8%, µr = (1.10)2 − 1 = 21% ≈ 20%,
               √
and σr = 0.16 × 2 ≈ 22.63%. This calibration ensures that in the long-horizon treatment,
agents face a meaningful opportunity cost: capital held in prediction market positions could
instead earn returns in the outside options. In the short-horizon treatment, this opportunity
cost is negligible.
   The interest treatment varies whether agents earn interest on capital invested in pre-
diction market positions. In the without-interest treatment, prediction market investments
earn no interest, and agents forgo the risk-free rate on any capital committed to prediction
market contracts. This represents the traditional opportunity cost structure where capital
locked in prediction markets cannot earn returns elsewhere. In the with-interest treatment,
agents earn interest at the risk-free rate on the market value of their prediction market port-
folio, calculated using prices from the final trading round. This models the policy innovation
recently adopted by platforms such as Kalshi and Polymarket. Importantly, this differs from


                                              17
the risk-free asset: while the interest rate is identical, the portfolio value on which interest is
calculated fluctuates with market prices, creating price risk that is absent from the risk-free
outside option.
    This 2 × 2 design enables direct pairwise comparisons that test the core hypotheses.
Comparing Cell 2 to Cell 1 identifies the baseline time-horizon effect in the absence of
interest. Comparing Cell 4 to Cell 2 isolates the effect of introducing portfolio value interest
in long-horizon markets. Comparing Cell 4 to Cell 3 reveals whether a time-horizon effect
persists even when interest is paid on positions. These pairwise comparisons provide clean
answers to the central policy question: does paying interest on prediction market positions
mitigate the long-horizon problem?
    Each of the four experimental cells contains 100 independent simulation sessions, with
50 sessions using p∗ = 0.05 and 50 sessions using p∗ = 0.95. This balanced design at
extreme probabilities serves two purposes. First, the regions very close to the boundaries
0, 1 are where the opportunity cost mechanism predicts the largest price distortions: at p∗ =
0.05, long positions require only $0.05 at risk while short positions require $0.95, creating
near maximum asymmetry in participation constraints, increasing statistical power. Second,
using symmetric extreme values allows pooling across sessions when measuring absolute
pricing errors, since the theoretical bias magnitude is symmetric around 0.50. The total of
400 independent simulation runs provides sufficient statistical power to detect economically
meaningful differences in price accuracy and trading volume across treatment conditions.



4     Hypotheses

My experiment is designed to test two primary hypotheses about how interest-bearing posi-
tions affect prediction market dynamics across time horizons.




                                                18
4.1    Hypothesis 1: The Long-Horizon Effect

The first hypothesis concerns the baseline time-horizon effect in the absence of portfolio value
interest. The opportunity cost framework developed by Antweiler (2012) predicts that when
capital committed to prediction markets earns no return, informed traders face an opportu-
nity cost that grows with the time until resolution. Over short horizons, this opportunity
cost is negligible: an agent holding a position for four days forgoes minimal returns from
outside options. Over longer horizons, however, the foregone returns are considerably larger.
In the two-year horizon treatment, the risk-free outside option offers an 8% return, while the
risky option offers an expected 20% return.
   To generate a quantitative benchmark for the expected magnitude of this effect, I extend
Antweiler’s model to incorporate the specific features of my experimental design, including
heterogeneous risk preferences and the availability of a risky outside option (see Appendix A
for details). The extended model predicts that at a two-year horizon with a true probability
of 0.05, the equilibrium price would be approximately 0.11, a bias of roughly 6 percentage
points toward 0.50. Likewise, a true probability of 0.95 would also result in a bias of roughly
6 percentage points. Evaluating the extended model at a four-day horizon results in a bias
of only 0.028 percentage points, with this negligible bias arising entirely because agents’
posterior mean beliefs are slightly shrunk toward 0.5 by the uniform prior.
   Empirical evidence from Page and Clemen (2013) provides additional context for cali-
brating expectations. Using over 500,000 transactions from Intrade, they find that markets
with more than 100 days to expiration exhibit systematic biases of 4.7–10.9 percentage points
when evaluated at prices of 0.20 and 0.80. However, their parametric model, when extrap-
olated to a two-year horizon and evaluated at true probabilities of 0.05 and 0.95, produces
implausibly large biases exceeding 30 percentage points, suggesting that the relationship
between time horizon and bias may be nonlinear or that other mechanisms attenuate the
effect at very long horizons.
   This leads to the first hypothesis:


                                              19
   H1: In the absence of interest on positions, long-horizon markets will exhibit greater mis-
pricing, lower trading activity, lower prediction market exposure, and wider bid-ask spreads
compared to short-horizon markets.
   I measure mispricing as the mean absolute error between market prices and true prob-
abilities, which captures the market’s accuracy relative to ground truth. Following the
convention used by major prediction market platforms such as Kalshi, I use the last trade
price as the primary price measure; robustness analyses using the bid-ask midpoint (as em-
ployed by Polymarket) are reported in Appendix C. I also examine the mean absolute error
between market prices and agents’ average probability beliefs, which captures whether prices
reflect the information that traders actually possess. The distinction matters theoretically.
If long-horizon markets exhibit higher price-truth errors but similar price-belief errors, this
would suggest that agents trade on their beliefs but those beliefs are somehow less accurate
in long-horizon settings; a pattern inconsistent with the experimental design, which holds
information quality constant. If instead long-horizon markets exhibit higher errors on both
measures, this indicates that agents fail to move prices toward their beliefs, consistent with
the opportunity cost mechanism discouraging informed trading.
   I examine three additional outcome measures. First, trading volume captures overall
market activity: the opportunity cost theory predicts that agents will trade less actively
when time horizons are long and foregone returns from outside options are large. Second,
prediction market exposure, defined as the value of an agent’s prediction market contracts
as a share of total wealth, captures the extent to which agents commit capital to the market.
Theory predicts lower exposure in long-horizon markets as agents prefer to keep capital
available for outside investment options. Third, bid-ask spreads measure market liquidity:
with fewer participants willing to commit capital, order books should thin out, leading to
wider spreads in long-horizon markets.
   To test H1, I compare Cell 2 (long horizon, no interest) against Cell 1 (short horizon,
no interest) using OLS regressions with treatment indicator variables. The coefficient on


                                              20
the long-horizon indicator captures the effect of extending the time horizon in the absence
of interest. For price accuracy measures and bid-ask spreads, I test whether Cell 2 exhibits
significantly higher values than Cell 1. For trading volume and prediction market exposure,
I test whether Cell 2 exhibits significantly lower values than Cell 1. These directional pre-
dictions follow from the opportunity cost theory. Non-parametric Mann-Whitney U tests
are reported in Appendix C as robustness checks.


4.2    Hypothesis 2: The Effect of Portfolio Value Interest

The second hypothesis concerns the effectiveness of portfolio value interest as a policy in-
tervention. If the opportunity cost of foregone risk-free interest is the binding constraint
that drives traders away from long-horizon markets, then paying interest on prediction mar-
ket positions should mitigate or eliminate this effect. The key empirical question is the
magnitude of this mitigation: does paying interest fully eliminate the time-horizon penalty,
substantially reduce it, or have only modest effects?
   H2: Paying interest on prediction market positions will reduce the gap in price accuracy,
trading activity, prediction market exposure, and bid-ask spreads between short-horizon and
long-horizon markets.
   Testing H2 requires two complementary comparisons. First, I compare Cell 4 (long
horizon, with interest) against Cell 2 (long horizon, no interest) to isolate the direct effect
of introducing portfolio value interest in long-horizon markets. If interest payments mitigate
the long-horizon problem, Cell 4 should exhibit lower pricing errors, higher trading volume,
higher prediction market exposure, and narrower bid-ask spreads than Cell 2. Second, I
compare Cell 4 against Cell 3 (short horizon, with interest) to determine whether a residual
time-horizon effect persists even when interest is paid. If paying interest fully eliminates the
opportunity cost mechanism, there should be no significant difference between Cell 4 and
Cell 3 on any outcome measure. If Cell 4 continues to exhibit higher pricing errors, lower
trading activity, lower prediction market exposure, and wider bid-ask spreads than Cell 3,


                                              21
this suggests that opportunity costs beyond the risk-free rate, such as the opportunity cost
of risk capital that could earn higher returns in the risky outside option, continue to deter
participation in long-horizon markets even when platforms pay interest on positions.
    I test H2 using OLS regressions that include an interaction term between the long-horizon
and interest treatment indicators. In the regression specification Yi = β0 +β1 ·LongHorizoni +
β2 · Interesti + β3 · (LongHorizoni × Interesti ) + εi , the interaction coefficient β3 directly
captures the extent to which interest payments mitigate the horizon effect. A negative β3
for pricing errors and bid-ask spreads (or a positive β3 for trading volume and prediction
market exposure) indicates that interest reduces the gap between short-horizon and long-
horizon market outcomes. The sum β1 + β3 measures the residual horizon effect that persists
even with interest payments: if this sum is close to zero and statistically insignificant, interest
payments fully eliminate the horizon penalty; if it remains significant, some horizon effect
persists. Non-parametric Mann-Whitney U tests for the pairwise comparisons are reported
in Appendix C as robustness checks.
    The combination of these tests provides a complete picture of the policy intervention’s
effectiveness. Confirmation of H1 paired with full mitigation under H2 would validate the
interest-bearing policy as an effective solution to the long-horizon problem. Confirmation of
H1 paired with only partial mitigation under H2 would suggest that additional mechanisms
are required to achieve parity between short-horizon and long-horizon markets.



5     Results

This section presents the main experimental findings. I begin with an overview of the
results, then examine treatment effects on each outcome measure using OLS regressions, and
conclude with an analysis of market dynamics over trading rounds. Non-parametric Mann-
Whitney U tests and robustness analyses using alternative price measures are reported in
Appendix C.



                                                22
5.1     Overview

The experimental results confirm the existence of the long-horizon problem in a controlled
setting: extending the time horizon reduces price accuracy, all else equal. However, while
the effect is statistically significant, its magnitude is considerably smaller than both the
theoretical predictions of Antweiler (2012) and the empirical estimates from Page and Clemen
(2013). Introducing portfolio value interest brings long-horizon market performance close to
short-horizon benchmarks.




                        Figure 2: Price Accuracy Measures by Treatment

Notes: Mean absolute error between market prices and true probabilities (left two groups) and between
market prices and average agent beliefs (right two groups). “Last” refers to the final trading round price;
“Mean” refers to the average across all rounds. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. N = 100 sessions
per treatment.


    Figure 2 provides a visual summary of the main price accuracy measures across all four
treatment cells. Long-horizon markets without interest exhibit the highest pricing errors,
while the three other treatment cells cluster together with lower errors. Notably, long-horizon
markets with interest show price accuracy that falls well within the 95% confidence intervals
of short-horizon markets, suggesting that interest payments largely eliminate the horizon
effect on price accuracy.

                                                    23
                                   Without Interest                   With Interest
                             Short (Cell 1)   Long (Cell 2)    Short (Cell 3)   Long (Cell 4)
 Last |Price − p∗ |               0.020             0.028          0.020            0.021
 Mean |Price − p∗ |               0.018             0.021          0.017            0.019
 Last |Price − Belief|            0.016             0.023          0.015            0.017
 Mean |Price − Belief|            0.014             0.017          0.013            0.015
 Last PM Exposure (%)              74.9              16.9           74.4            61.6
 Mean PM Exposure (%)             59.0               22.1           59.1             56.2
 Last Bid-Ask Spread              0.013             0.027          0.011            0.023
 Total Volume ($)                135,239           120,057        143,590          157,395
 Mean Bid-Ask Spread              0.012             0.017          0.011            0.014
 N (sessions)                      100              100             100              100

                      Table 2: Summary Statistics by Treatment Cell


   Table 2 presents summary statistics for the primary outcome variables across all four
experimental cells. Cell 2 (long horizon, no interest) exhibits the highest pricing errors,
lowest trading volume, lowest prediction market exposure, and widest bid-ask spreads, while
the three other cells cluster together with better performance.
   To test hypotheses H1 and H2 and obtain interpretable effect size estimates, I estimate
OLS regressions of the form:




    Yi = β0 + β1 · LongHorizoni + β2 · Interesti + β3 · (LongHorizoni × Interesti ) + εi     (1)


   where Yi is the outcome for session i, LongHorizoni is an indicator for the two-year
horizon treatment, and Interesti is an indicator for the portfolio value interest treatment.
The coefficient β1 captures the long-horizon effect in the absence of interest, directly testing
H1. The coefficient β3 captures whether interest payments mitigate the horizon effect, testing
H2. The intercept β0 represents the baseline (short horizon, no interest).




                                              24
5.2     Price Accuracy

Table 3 presents OLS regression results for the price accuracy measures. I examine both
the mean absolute error between market prices and true probabilities (Price-Truth MAE)
and the mean absolute error between market prices and agents’ average beliefs (Price-Belief
MAE), using both the the final round price and average across all trading rounds. The
final price is preferred in prediction market experiments, as it can take time for the private
information of the participants to be fully reflected in the market (Deck and Porter, 2013).

                                Price-Truth MAE                            Price-Belief MAE
                           Last Round               Mean              Last Round               Mean
Intercept                   0.0205***             0.0177***            0.0159***             0.0137***
                             (0.001)               (0.001)              (0.001)               (0.001)
Long Horizon                0.0072***             0.0032***            0.0071***             0.0029***
                             (0.002)               (0.001)              (0.002)               (0.001)
Interest                     −0.0006               −0.0004              −0.0009               −0.0005
                             (0.002)               (0.001)              (0.002)               (0.001)
Long × Interest             −0.0060**              −0.0019             −0.0054**              −0.0012
                             (0.003)               (0.001)              (0.002)               (0.001)
R2                             0.057                0.038                 0.064                0.041
N                               400                  400                   400                  400
Notes: OLS regressions of price accuracy measures on treatment indicators. Standard errors in parentheses.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

                        Table 3: OLS Regression Results: Price Accuracy


     The results confirm H1: the long-horizon effect is statistically significant across all price
accuracy measures. In the absence of interest, extending the time horizon from four days
to two years increases mean absolute error relative to true probabilities by 0.72 percentage
points (p < 0.001) for the final round price, and by 0.32 percentage points (p < 0.001) when
averaged across rounds. Effects on belief-price gaps are similar in magnitude, indicating that
agents fail to move prices toward their beliefs in long-horizon markets, consistent with the
opportunity cost mechanism discouraging informed trading.
     These results replicate the result that time horizon reduces prediction market accuracy.
However, the magnitude of the effect is markedly smaller than both theoretical and empirical

                                                   25
benchmarks. The extended Antweiler model discussed in Subsection 4.1 predicts a bias of
approximately 6 percentage points at a two-year horizon with true probabilities of 0.05 or
0.95. The empirical estimates from Page and Clemen (2013) find biases of 4.7–10.9 percentage
points for markets with more than 100 days to expiration. In contrast, the observed long-
horizon effect on final-round price accuracy is only 0.72 percentage points, roughly one-tenth
the magnitude predicted by theory.
   The interaction terms test H2. For final-round price accuracy, the interaction coefficient
is −0.60 percentage points (p = 0.022), indicating that interest payments reduce the horizon
effect by approximately 83% (from 0.72 to 0.12 percentage points). The residual horizon
effect with interest (β1 + β3 = 0.0012) is economically negligible, and as Figure 2 illustrates,
long-horizon markets with interest fall well within the confidence intervals of short-horizon
markets.


5.3     Prediction Market Exposure

Table 4 presents OLS regression results for prediction market exposure, defined as the market
value of an agent’s prediction market contracts as a share of total wealth.

                                       Last Round Exposure        Mean Exposure
                  Intercept                   0.749***                0.590***
                                               (0.013)                 (0.008)
                  Long Horizon               −0.580***               −0.369***
                                               (0.018)                 (0.012)
                  Interest                     −0.005                   0.001
                                               (0.018)                 (0.012)
                  Long × Interest            0.451***                 0.340***
                                               (0.026)                 (0.017)
                  R2                            0.612                   0.567
                  N                              400                     400
Notes: OLS regressions of prediction market exposure on treatment indicators. Standard errors in paren-
theses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

                Table 4: OLS Regression Results: Prediction Market Exposure


   The effect on prediction market exposure is significant and economically substantial,

                                                  26
strongly confirming H1. Agents in long-horizon markets without interest hold 58 percentage
points less of their wealth in prediction market contracts compared to short-horizon markets
(p < 0.001) in the last period, and 36.9 percentage points less on average. This large
reduction in capital commitment directly reflects the opportunity cost mechanism: when
outside options offer considerable returns over a two-year horizon, agents allocate less capital
to prediction markets.
   The interaction term of 45.1 percentage points (p < 0.001) indicates that interest pay-
ments offset 78% of the horizon effect, supporting H2. With interest payments, agents in
long-horizon markets hold 61.6% of their wealth in prediction market contracts at the end of
the final round, compared with 74.4% in short-horizon markets. The residual horizon effect
(β1 + β3 = −0.129) represents a 22% reduction from the no-interest horizon penalty.


5.4     Trading Volume

Table 5 presents OLS regression results for total trading volume.

                                           Total Volume (in thousands of $)
                      Intercept                           135***
                                                          (3.37)
                      Long Horizon                       −15.2***
                                                          (4.76)
                      Interest                             8.35*
                                                          (4.76)
                      Long × Interest                    29.0***
                                                          (6.73)
                      R2                                   0.079
                      N                                     400
Notes: OLS regression of total trading volume on treatment indicators. Results displayed in thousands of
dollars. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

                       Table 5: OLS Regression Results: Trading Volume


   Trading volume is significantly lower in long-horizon markets without interest, declining
by $15,182 (p = 0.002), consistent with H1. The interaction term of $28,986 (p < 0.001)
more than offsets this decline, supporting H2. Indeed, with interest payments, long-horizon

                                                  27
markets exhibit higher volume than short-horizon markets (β1 + β3 = $13, 804), suggesting
that interest payments successfully motivate active trading even over long time horizons.


5.5     Bid-Ask Spreads

Table 6 presents OLS regression results for bid-ask spreads, a measure of market liquidity.

                                            Last Round Spread         Mean Spread
                      Intercept                   0.0131***             0.0119***
                                                   (0.002)               (0.000)
                      Long Horizon                0.0142***             0.0049***
                                                   (0.004)               (0.001)
                      Interest                     −0.0017               −0.0009
                                                   (0.003)               (0.001)
                      Long × Interest              −0.0027              −0.0022**
                                                   (0.005)               (0.001)
                      R2                             0.050                 0.140
                      N                               400                   400
Notes: OLS regressions of bid-ask spread on treatment indicators. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

                        Table 6: OLS Regression Results: Bid-Ask Spread


    Bid-ask spreads are significantly wider in long-horizon markets without interest, increas-
ing by 1.42 percentage points in the final round (p < 0.001) and 0.49 percentage points
on average (p < 0.001), consistent with H1. The interaction term for last round spread
is −0.27 percentage points, indicating partial mitigation. However, it is not significant
(p = 0.585). The interaction term for average spread is −0.22 percentage points and is
significant at the 5% level (p = 0.017). A residual horizon effect remains, even with interest,
long-horizon markets exhibit spreads 1.15 percentage points wider than short-horizon mar-
kets (β1 + β3 = 0.0115). This suggests that while interest payments improve liquidity, they
do not fully eliminate the horizon effect on market depth.




                                                     28
5.6     Market Dynamics

The round-by-round evolution of market outcomes provides additional insight into how the
treatments affect market behavior. Figure 3 displays the mean absolute error between mar-
ket prices and true probabilities across trading rounds. Several patterns emerge. First, all
treatments show increasing pricing errors over rounds, suggesting that early price discov-
ery gives way to drift as trading continues. Second, the long-horizon treatment without
interest consistently exhibits the highest pricing errors throughout the trading period, with
the gap widening in later rounds. Third, the interest treatment brings long-horizon market
performance close to that of short-horizon markets, particularly in the final rounds.




                  Figure 3: Price Deviation from True Probability by Round

Notes: Absolute error between last trade price and true probability p∗ , by trading round and treatment.
Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. N = 100 sessions per treatment.


   Figure 4 shows the gap between agents’ average beliefs and market prices. The pat-
tern is similar to the price-truth deviation: long-horizon markets without interest exhibit
persistently larger belief-price gaps, and interest payments reduce this gap. The fact that
belief-price gaps grow over time, particularly in the long-horizon no-interest treatment, sug-
gests that agents increasingly choose not to trade on their information as rounds progress,

                                                  29
consistent with agents recognizing that their capital could be earning returns elsewhere and
becoming less willing to commit it to prediction market positions.




                              Figure 4: Belief-Price Gap by Round

Notes: Absolute error between average agent belief and last trade price, by trading round and treatment.
Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. N = 100 sessions per treatment.


   Figure 5 displays prediction market exposure across rounds. The most salient feature is
the large divergence between the long-horizon no-interest treatment and all other treatments.
In short-horizon markets, agents rapidly increase their prediction market exposure in early
rounds, reaching approximately 75% of wealth by round 6. Long-horizon markets with
interest follow a similar trajectory, though with a slight decline in the final rounds. In
contrast, long-horizon markets without interest show agents maintaining exposure below
30% throughout the trading period, with a notable decline in the final rounds as agents
reduce positions before the post-trading allocation decision.
   This pattern is even more pronounced when examining agents by risk tolerance. Figure
6 shows prediction market exposure for high risk tolerance agents, while Figure 7 shows the
same for medium risk tolerance agents. High risk tolerance agents in all treatments except
long-horizon no-interest reach exposure levels above 80%, while medium risk tolerance agents

                                                  30
                        Figure 5: Prediction Market Exposure by Round

Notes: Mean fraction of total wealth held in prediction market contracts, by trading round and treatment.
Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. N = 100 sessions per treatment.


plateau around 65%. In the long-horizon no-interest treatment, however, both agent types
maintain considerably lower exposure: high risk tolerance agents remain below 50%, and
medium risk tolerance agents below 20%. This demonstrates that the opportunity cost
mechanism affects all agent types, though its magnitude varies with risk preferences.
   Figure 8 shows trading volume by round. Volume peaks in round 1 across all treatments
as agents establish initial positions based on their private signals, then declines as the mar-
ket approaches equilibrium. The long-horizon no-interest treatment exhibits notably lower
volume throughout, consistent with reduced participation. Interestingly, the long-horizon
with-interest treatment shows volume comparable to or slightly exceeding the short-horizon
treatments, suggesting that interest payments successfully motivate active trading even over
long time horizons.




                                                   31
       Figure 6: Prediction Market Exposure by Round: High Risk Tolerance Agents

Notes: Mean fraction of total wealth held in prediction market contracts for agents with high risk tolerance,
by trading round and treatment. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals.




     Figure 7: Prediction Market Exposure by Round: Medium Risk Tolerance Agents

Notes: Mean fraction of total wealth held in prediction market contracts for agents with medium risk
tolerance, by trading round and treatment. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals.



                                                     32
                              Figure 8: Trading Volume by Round

Notes: Mean trading volume in dollars, by trading round and treatment. Error bars show 95% confidence
intervals. N = 100 sessions per treatment.


6     Conclusion

This paper provides the first experimental evaluation of interest-bearing positions as a solu-
tion to the long-horizon problem in prediction markets. Using LLM agent-based simulations
in a controlled 2 × 2 factorial design, I find that both hypotheses are supported by the data:
long horizons reduce market quality, and paying interest on positions mitigates this effect.
    The most striking finding is the discrepancy between the observed magnitude of the
long-horizon pricing bias and prior theoretical and empirical benchmarks. The extended
Antweiler model predicts a bias of approximately 6 percentage points at a two-year horizon
with extreme probabilities, and Page and Clemen (2013) find empirical biases of 4.7–10.9
percentage points for markets with more than 100 days to expiration. In contrast, the
observed horizon effect on final-round price accuracy is only 0.72 percentage points, roughly
one-tenth the theoretical prediction. This suggests that while opportunity costs do affect
prediction market pricing, their impact on price accuracy may be considerably overstated in
the existing literature.

                                                 33
   Several factors may explain this discrepancy. First, my experimental design holds infor-
mation quality constant across time horizons, eliminating the confound present in observa-
tional data where long-horizon markets often involve genuinely more uncertain events. Much
of the apparent mispricing in long-horizon markets may reflect legitimate uncertainty rather
than opportunity cost-induced bias. Second, LLM agents may respond differently to oppor-
tunity cost considerations than human traders, though evidence suggests LLMs if anything
exhibit more rational behavior than humans in economic experiments (Chen et al., 2023),
which should amplify rather than attenuate the opportunity cost mechanism.
   While the effect of interest on pricing bias is economically modest, reducing an already
small bias by approximately 83%, the effect on market participation is substantial and may
represent the more policy-relevant finding. In long-horizon markets without interest, agents
allocated only 16.9% of their wealth to prediction market positions, compared to 74.9% in
short-horizon markets. Introducing portfolio value interest increased long-horizon market
exposure to 61.6%.
   This dramatic increase in capital commitment has important implications. Recent work
by Rasooly and Rozzi (2025) demonstrates that prediction market manipulations can re-
main effective for extended periods, with thinner markets being easier to manipulate. By in-
creasing participation and trading volume, interest-bearing positions may make long-horizon
markets more resilient to manipulation attempts. This protective effect could prove more
valuable than the modest improvement in pricing accuracy, particularly for prediction mar-
kets addressing consequential long-term questions such as climate outcomes, technological
developments, or geopolitical events where manipulation incentives may be strong.
   These findings carry direct implications for prediction market platform design. The recent
adoption of interest-bearing positions by Kalshi and Polymarket appears well-justified: even
if the pricing accuracy benefits are smaller than theory suggests, the participation benefits
are substantial. Platform operators considering whether to implement such policies can
be reasonably confident that doing so will increase trader engagement with long-horizon


                                             34
markets. The interest rate need not exceed the risk-free rate to achieve these benefits, as
the policy operates primarily by reducing the opportunity cost gap rather than eliminating
it entirely.
    Several limitations warrant discussion. First, while LLM agents have demonstrated
human-like behavior across many economic domains, external validity remains an open ques-
tion for market experiments. The finding that LLM-populated markets are “too rational”
to generate bubbles (Henning et al., 2025) suggests that some behavioral phenomena may
not translate. However, for the opportunity cost mechanism, which operates through ratio-
nal capital allocation decisions rather than behavioral biases, LLM rationality may provide a
cleaner test of the theoretical mechanism. Second, the experimental design examines a single
binary prediction market rather than the portfolio of markets traders face in practice, where
opportunity cost considerations may interact across contracts. Third, the two-year horizon,
while long by prediction market standards, remains short relative to questions about climate
change or other multi-decade events where the long-horizon problem may be most severe.
    Future research could extend this analysis in several directions. Human subject experi-
ments could validate whether the findings generalize beyond LLM agents, though the cost
and time requirements of long-horizon market experiments with human participants are
substantial. Field experiments manipulating interest policies on actual prediction market
platforms could provide direct evidence on real-world effectiveness, though such experiments
face obvious practical and ethical constraints. Theoretical work could explore whether modi-
fied interest structures, such as interest rates that increase with time to resolution or interest
paid on committed capital rather than mark-to-market portfolio value, might further improve
long-horizon market performance.
    In conclusion, this paper contributes to the prediction market literature by demonstrat-
ing that interest-bearing positions effectively address the long-horizon problem, primarily
through their impact on market participation rather than pricing accuracy. The finding that
opportunity cost-induced pricing bias is smaller than previously believed provides a more


                                               35
optimistic outlook for long-horizon prediction markets. While they will always face partic-
ipation challenges, these challenges may not compromise their core function of aggregating
information into accurate probability forecasts.



References

Adam, K., Matveev, D., and Nagel, S. (2021). Do survey expectations of stock returns reflect
  risk adjustments? Journal of Monetary Economics, 117:723–740.
Antweiler, W. (2012). Long-term prediction markets. The Journal of Prediction Markets,
  6(3):43–61.
Berg, J. E., Nelson, F. D., and Rietz, T. A. (2008). Prediction market accuracy in the long
  run. International Journal of Forecasting, 24(2):285–300.
Chen, Y., Liu, T. X., Shan, Y., and Zhong, S. (2023). The emergence of economic rationality
  of gpt. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(51):e2316205120.
Deck, C. and Porter, D. (2013). Prediction markets in the laboratory. A Collection of
  Surveys on Market Experiments, pages 219–234.
del Rio-Chanona, R. M., Pangallo, M., and Hommes, C. (2025). Can generative ai agents
  behave like humans? evidence from laboratory market experiments.
Forsythe, R. and Lundholm, R. (1990). Information aggregation in an experimental market.
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 309–347.
Forsythe, R., Nelson, F., Neumann, G. R., and Wright, J. (1992). Anatomy of an experi-
  mental political stock market. The American Economic Review, pages 1142–1161.
Greenwood, R. and Shleifer, A. (2014). Expectations of returns and expected returns. The
  Review of Financial Studies, 27(3):714–746.
Hanson, R. (2003). Combinatorial information market design. Information Systems Fron-
  tiers, 5(1):107–119.
Hayek, F. A. (1945). The use of knowledge in society. American Economic Review, 35(4):519–



                                             36
  530.
Henning, T., Ojha, S. M., Spoon, R., Han, J., and Camerer, C. F. (2025). Llm agents do
  not replicate human market traders: Evidence from experimental finance.
Horton, J. J. (2023). Large language models as simulated economic agents: What can we
  learn from homo silicus? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lopez-Lira, A. (2025). Can large language models trade? testing financial theories with llm
  agents in market simulations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10789.
Manski, C. F. (2006). Interpreting the predictions of prediction markets. economics letters,
  91(3):425–429.
Mei, Q., Xie, Y., Yuan, W., and Jackson, M. O. (2024). A turing test of whether ai chatbots
  are behaviorally similar to humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  121(9):e2313925121.
Oliven, K. and Rietz, T. A. (2004). Suckers are born but markets are made: Individual
  rationality, arbitrage, and market efficiency on an electronic futures market. Management
  Science, 50(3):336–351.
Page, L. and Clemen, R. T. (2013). Do prediction markets produce well-calibrated probability
  forecasts? The Economic Journal, 123(568):491–513.
Plott, C. R. and Sunder, S. (1982). Efficiency of experimental security markets with insider
  information: An application of rational-expectations models. Journal of political economy,
  90(4):663–698.
Plott, C. R. and Sunder, S. (1988). Rational expectations and the aggregation of diverse
  information in laboratory security markets. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric
  Society, pages 1085–1118.
Rasooly, I. and Rozzi, R. (2025). How manipulable are prediction markets? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2503.03312.
Rhode, P. W. and Strumpf, K. S. (2004). Historical presidential betting markets. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 18(2):127–142.


                                             37
Rhode, P. W. and Strumpf, K. S. (2006). Manipulating political stock markets: A field
  experiment and a century of observational data. University of Arizona, mimeo.
Wang, S., Yao, Z., Zhang, S., Gai, J., Liu, T. X., and Zhong, S. (2025). When experimental
  economics meets large language models: Evidence-based tactics.
Wolfers, J. and Zitzewitz, E. (2004). Prediction markets. Journal of economic perspectives,
  18(2):107–126.
Wolfers, J. and Zitzewitz, E. (2006). Interpreting prediction market prices as probabilities.




                                             38
Appendix

A      Extension of Antweiler’s Opportunity Cost Model

This appendix extends the theoretical framework of Antweiler (2012) to incorporate the
specific features of my experimental design: heterogeneous risk preferences among traders
and the availability of a risky outside investment option alongside the risk-free asset.


A.1     Antweiler’s Original Framework

Antweiler (2012) models traders with exponential utility who face an opportunity cost when
committing capital to prediction markets. In his framework, a trader i with belief p̂i about
the probability of the event considers whether to take a position at market price p. The key
insight is the asymmetry between long and short positions: a long position (buying YES
contracts) at price p puts p dollars at risk per contract, while a short position (equivalently,
buying NO contracts) puts (1 − p) dollars at risk.
    In the presence of an outside investment opportunity earning return r over horizon T , the
opportunity cost creates a participation constraint. Defining θ = erT − 1 as the cumulative
return and ψ = θ/(1 + θ) as the transformed opportunity cost parameter, a trader will only
take a long position if 1 − p > ψ, and will only take a short position if p > ψ. This creates
a “no-trade region” around the market price where traders with moderate beliefs abstain.
    Building on the log-odds demand framework of Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2006), Antweiler
derives the demand for contracts by trader i adjusted for opportunity costs:

                                                                   
                         wi       p̂i              p − ψ · 1(qi < 0)
                    qi =     ln           − ln                                              (2)
                         αi     1 − p̂i          1 − p − ψ · 1(qi > 0)

where wi is initial wealth and 1(·) is the indicator function. The equilibrium price is deter-
                            P
mined by market clearing: i qi = 0.



                                              39
A.2     Extension to Heterogeneous Risk Preferences and Risky Out-

        side Options

My experimental design introduces two features absent from Antweiler’s baseline model.
First, traders have heterogeneous risk preferences rather than a common discount rate. Sec-
ond, traders can allocate their outside wealth between a risk-free asset (earning rf ) and a
risky asset (with expected return µm and volatility σm ).
   I model trader heterogeneity through a distribution of risk aversion parameters αi ∼
Lognormal(µα , σα ). Each trader optimally allocates between the risk-free and risky assets
according to the standard mean-variance portfolio choice:

                                                  µm − r f
                                        ωi∗ =          2
                                                                                           (3)
                                                   αi σm

where ωi∗ is the fraction invested in the risky asset, constrained to [0, 1] for no leverage or
short-selling.
   The trader’s optimal outside return is therefore:


                                    ri = rf + ωi∗ (µm − rf )                               (4)


   This generates trader-specific opportunity cost parameters:

                                                                θi
                                θi = eri T − 1,        ψi =                                (5)
                                                              1 + θi

   Traders with low risk aversion invest more heavily in the risky asset, earn higher expected
returns, and therefore face higher opportunity costs when committing capital to prediction
markets.




                                                  40
A.3     Belief Distribution

In the experiment, each trader observes n = 200 independent Bernoulli draws with true
probability p∗ . Applying Bayesian updating with a Beta(1, 1) (uniform) prior, a trader
observing k successes forms posterior belief:

                                                      1+k
                                              p̂i =                                       (6)
                                                      2+n

   The number of successes follows a Binomial distribution: k ∼ Binomial(n, p∗ ). This
generates a distribution of beliefs across traders that is centered near the true probability
but exhibits dispersion due to sampling variation.


A.4     Equilibrium Computation

The equilibrium price is computed by integrating demand over the joint distribution of beliefs
and risk aversion parameters. For a given price p, total demand is:

                             Z Z
                    D(p) =            q(p, p̂(k), α, ψ(α)) · f (k|p∗ ) · g(α) dk dα       (7)
                              α   k



where f (k|p∗ ) is the Binomial probability mass function and g(α) is the Lognormal density.
The equilibrium price p∗ satisfies D(p∗ ) = 0.
   I solve this numerically using a dense grid over the risk aversion distribution and exact
Binomial probabilities for the belief distribution. The equilibrium is found via root-finding
(Brent’s method) on the interval (0.001, 0.999).


A.5     Quantitative Predictions

Using the experimental parameters (T = 2 years, rf = 0.04, µm = 0.10, σm = 0.16, n = 200
signals, initial wealth w = $10,000) and assuming risk aversion parameters are distributed
Lognormal(0.5, 0.6), the model generates the following predictions for a true probability of


                                                   41
p∗ = 0.05:

                            Quantity                         Value

                            True event probability            0.050
                            Expected posterior belief       0.05446
                            Equilibrium market price        0.11488
                            Long-horizon bias (p − E[p̂])   0.06042

    The predicted bias of approximately 6 percentage points toward 0.50 reflects the asym-
metric participation constraints: at a true probability of 0.05, the short side of the market
requires more capital at risk, deterring participation by traders who would otherwise push
the price down toward the true value. Due to the symmetry of the model, the long-horizon
bias at a true probability of 0.95 is symmetric and identical in magnitude.



B      Experiment Transcript
    System Prompt

    Prediction Market Experiment


    You are participating in an economic experiment about prediction markets.

    The Experiment Structure


    There are 10 participants (including you). The experiment consists of 10 trading
    rounds.

    At the end of trading, a binary event will either occur or not occur. The event will
    resolve in 2 years. The event has a true probability of occurring that is fixed and lies
    in the interval [0.0, 1.0]. This true probability is unknown to all participants.

    All participants start with $10,000.00 in cash and no initial positions.


                                               42
Private Signals
At the start of the experiment, you (and the other participants) observe 200 inde-
pendent draws from a Bernoulli distribution with the TRUE event probability. You
will see how many of these draws were ”successes”.

Contracts
You trade two types of contracts:

   • YES contracts: Pay $1.00 if the event occurs, $0.00 if it does not

   • NO contracts: Pay $1.00 if the event does NOT occur, $0.00 if it does


Contract prices range from $0.00 to $1.00.

Outside Options
After trading concludes (but before the event resolves), you will have the option to
invest any cash you have remaining in two assets:

   • Risk-free asset: Earns 8% (guaranteed)

   • Risky asset: Expected 20% return, with a standard deviation of 22.63%


Position Interest
After trading concludes, you earn 8% interest on the market value of your prediction
market contracts.

   • Interest = (YES contracts × YES price at end of last round + NO contracts ×
     NO price at end of last round) × 8%

   • This interest is paid in cash after trading concludes.


Experiment Flow
The experiment follows this sequence: 1. You receive 200 private signals about


                                          43
the true event probability at the start 2. 10 Trading Rounds: You can place orders
to buy and sell prediction market contracts 3. Post-Trading Investment Decision:
After trading ends, you allocate your remaining cash between the risk-free asset and
the risky asset 4. Market Resolution: Returns on outside investments and position
interest are paid out. The event resolves and contracts pay out.

Trading
Each round, you may place limit orders to buy or sell YES and NO contracts:

   • Orders execute immediately if matched, otherwise wait in the order book

   • You can only sell contracts you own

   • Orders persist until filled or cancelled

   • Open buy orders reduce your cash available for trading. You may need to replace
     or cancel some orders to make room for new ones.

   • Similarly, open sell orders reduce your contracts available to sell. You may need
     to replace or cancel some orders to make room for new ones.

   • Order submission is shuffled each round before matching so no one has a fixed
     priority


Your Goal


Your objective is to maximize your final wealth.

Your Risk Profile


You have MEDIUM risk tolerance. You balance risk and return considerations, seeking
reasonable returns while avoiding excessive risk. You make decisions that balance


                                           44
potential gains with downside protection.

Response Formats


There are two types of decisions you will make:

Trade Decisions (during trading rounds)



Each trading round, provide:

Required Fields:

   • probability estimate (float 0-1): Your estimate of the event probability

   • orders (list): Orders you want to place

   • replace decision (string): How to handle existing orders

   • ”Add”: Keep existing orders, add new ones (requires AVAILABLE resources)

   • ”Cancel”: Cancel ALL existing orders

   • ”Replace”: Your orders list becomes complete set of active orders


Order Format:

   • contract type: ”YES” or ”NO”

   • decision: ”Buy” or ”Sell”

   • quantity: Number of contracts (integer)

   • price limit: Limit price (float 0-1)




                                            45
Post-Trading Investment Decision (after trading ends)



After trading is complete, you will decide how to allocate your remaining cash:

Required Fields:

   • risky allocation pct (float 0-1): Percentage of your remaining cash to invest
     in the risky asset

   • The remainder (1 - risky allocation pct) goes into the risk-free asset


Round 1 Trading Decision - Prompt

Round 1 trading round


Timing



   • Round: 1 of 10

Your Private Signals
You observed 12 successes out of 200 draws.

Current Market State


YES Contract Market



Best Prices




   • Best Bid (sell): None



                                         46
   • Best Ask (buy): None


Order Book

Sell Orders (Asks)

No sell orders Buy Orders (Bids)
No buy orders

NO Contract Market



Best Prices




   • Best Bid (sell): None

   • Best Ask (buy): None


The No order book is the inverse of the Yes book: a YES buy order at $0.23 is
equivalent to a NO sell order at $0.77.

Your Current Position




   • Total Cash: $10000.00

   • AVAILABLE for new orders: $10000.00

   • Cash remaining after trading can be invested in a risk-free asset (8% return) or
     a risky asset (expected 20% return, 22.63% std dev)

   • YES Contracts: 0 total (current value: $0.00)

   • AVAILABLE for new sell orders: 0



                                          47
   • NO Contracts: 0 total (current value: $0.00)

   • AVAILABLE for new sell orders: 0


Reminder: After trading concludes, you will earn 8% interest on the market value of
your contract holdings (based on end-of-trading prices).

Your Outstanding Orders

No outstanding orders

What is your trading decision?


Round 1 Trading Decision - Response
Reasoning Summary:

     Evaluating probability estimates

     I’m figuring out the probability estimates and order placements. First, I’ve
     calculated a private signal of 12 out of 200, which provides a probability of
     about 0.06. With a uniform prior and posterior of Beta(13,189), the mean
     works out to around 0.064356. This allows for the possibility of placing
     bids and asks around this estimate, noticing we can’t sell unless we own
     the asset. We could consider buying NO at 0.90, giving us exposure to a
     high probability of it not occurring.


     Analyzing expected value and bids

     So, buying at 0.90 gives an expected value of 0.036 per contract if the
     probability is 0.936. However, if we overpay, it’s better to place bids lower
     to capture any mispricing. I can anchor around 0.06 for the YES price,
     making the equivalent NO price 0.94. I think we should bid YES at around
     0.04-0.05 and also consider bidding NO at 0.92, which reflects a fair assess-


                                             48
ment of YES being overpriced at 0.08. Buying NO at 0.92 seems like a
good undervalued opportunity!


Assessing fair value and risk

I’m realizing that the fair value for NO is 0.936, so paying 0.92 is beneficial.
This means I can place bids for NO around 0.92 or 0.93, but there’s a chance
that buyers might scoop them up at 0.07-0.08. Buying YES at 0.05 seems
reasonable for a small amount, but I don’t want a long position unless it’s
really cheap. With a starting bankroll of 10k, each NO contract could yield
an ROI of 8.7%, but there’s a significant risk of loss if the event occurs, so
I shouldn’t bet all at once.


Planning allocation and trades

I’m thinking about allocating around 30% to this bet. If I buy 3,000 NO
contracts at 0.92, it would cost 2,760, and the loss would be manageable if
the event occurs. The expected gain seems small, about 48. If I go for 5,000
contracts at 0.92, the cost would be 4,600 with an expected gain of 80. I
can set limit orders at better prices like 0.85 to catch any opportunities
without risking it all.

I plan to place an order for:

- Buy 3,000 NO at 0.90, still below the fair price of 0.936. - Buy 2,000 NO
at 0.88 for a better deal. - Buy 500 YES at 0.04 as a low-cost option.

I’ll ensure the total reserve is acceptable for cash flow. If filled, I’d have
a significant NO position, which seems fine. I won’t set sell orders since I
don’t own any yet.


Updating probability estimate


                                      49
      I have a probability estimate of 0.064. It’s clear I need to replace a decision,
      since there’s no existing one at the moment. I’ll also provide an updated
      orders list to reflect this change. This new information will shape my future
      actions effectively. Let’s get everything aligned with this estimate and
      ensure all my orders are correctly set up to optimize the trading strategy.

Response:

{
    "probability_estimate": 0.0644,
    "orders": [
      {
          "decision": "Buy",
          "quantity": 3000,
          "contract_type": "NO",
          "order_type": "limit",
          "price_limit": 0.9
      },
      {
          "decision": "Buy",
          "quantity": 2000,
          "contract_type": "NO",
          "order_type": "limit",
          "price_limit": 0.88
      },
      {
          "decision": "Buy",
          "quantity": 500,


                                            50
          "contract_type": "YES",
          "order_type": "limit",
          "price_limit": 0.04
      }
    ],
    "replace_decision": "Add"
}

Post-Trading Investment Decision - Prompt

Post-Trading Investment Decision


Trading has ended. Now you must decide how to invest your remaining cash.

Your Investment Options



    • Risk-free asset: Earns 8% (guaranteed)

    • Risky asset: Expected 20% return, with a standard deviation of 22.63%


Your Current Financial State



    • Remaining Cash: $6295.65

    • YES Contracts Held: 56257.00 (current value: $3375.42) (Earns 8% on market
         value after trading)

    • NO Contracts Held: 0.00 (current value: $0.00) (Earns 8% on market value
         after trading)




                                       51
    Note: Your contracts will pay out when the event resolves. This decision is only about
    how to invest your remaining cash.

    What percentage of your remaining cash do you want to invest in the risky asset?


    Post-Trading Investment Decision - Response
    Response:

    {
        "risky_allocation_pct": 0.55
    }



C       Robustness Checks

This appendix reports robustness checks for the main results. Section C.1 presents non-
parametric Mann-Whitney U tests corresponding to the OLS regressions in the main text.
Section C.2 reports results using the bid-ask midpoint as the price measure rather than the
last trade price.


C.1       Non-Parametric Tests

While the main text reports OLS regressions with interpretable coefficient estimates, the
experimental economics literature often employs non-parametric tests that make fewer dis-
tributional assumptions. Tables 7–9 report one-sided Mann-Whitney U tests for all primary
outcomes using the last trade price. The results are consistent with the OLS findings.


C.2       Alternative Price Measure: Bid-Ask Midpoint

The main text uses the last trade price as the primary price measure, following the convention
employed by Kalshi. As a robustness check, I re-estimate all price accuracy results using the


                                             52
            Outcome                          Predicted Direction       U Statistic     p-value
            Price-Truth MAE (Last)           Cell 2 > Cell 1                6188.0      0.002
            Price-Truth MAE (Mean)           Cell 2 > Cell 1                6330.0     <0.001
            Price-Belief MAE (Last)          Cell 2 > Cell 1                6273.0     <0.001
            Price-Belief MAE (Mean)          Cell 2 > Cell 1                6588.0     <0.001
            PM Exposure (Last)               Cell 2 < Cell 1                  19.0     <0.001
            PM Exposure (Mean)               Cell 2 < Cell 1                   2.0     <0.001
            Trading Volume                   Cell 2 < Cell 1                3638.0     <0.001
            Bid-Ask Spread (Last)            Cell 2 > Cell 1                4354.5     <0.001
            Bid-Ask Spread (Mean)            Cell 2 > Cell 1                7818.0     <0.001
Notes: One-sided Mann-Whitney U tests comparing Cell 2 (long horizon, no interest) to Cell 1 (short horizon,
no interest). Each cell contains 100 independent simulation sessions.

        Table 7: Mann-Whitney U Tests: H1 Long-Horizon Effect (Cell 2 vs. Cell 1)

            Outcome                          Predicted Direction       U Statistic     p-value
            Price-Truth MAE (Last)           Cell 4 < Cell 2                3989.0      0.006
            Price-Truth MAE (Mean)           Cell 4 < Cell 2                4008.5      0.008
            Price-Belief MAE (Last)          Cell 4 < Cell 2                4027.0      0.009
            Price-Belief MAE (Mean)          Cell 4 < Cell 2                4053.0      0.010
            PM Exposure (Last)               Cell 4 > Cell 2                9863.0     <0.001
            PM Exposure (Mean)               Cell 4 > Cell 2                9988.0     <0.001
            Trading Volume                   Cell 4 > Cell 2                7806.0     <0.001
            Bid-Ask Spread (Last)            Cell 4 < Cell 2                1830.0      0.010
            Bid-Ask Spread (Mean)            Cell 4 < Cell 2                3316.0     <0.001
Notes: One-sided Mann-Whitney U tests comparing Cell 4 (long horizon, with interest) to Cell 2 (long
horizon, no interest). Each cell contains 100 independent simulation sessions.

      Table 8: Mann-Whitney U Tests: H2 Direct Effect of Interest (Cell 4 vs. Cell 2)

            Outcome                          Predicted Direction       U Statistic     p-value
            Price-Truth MAE (Last)           Cell 4 > Cell 3                5175.5      0.333
            Price-Truth MAE (Mean)           Cell 4 > Cell 3                5548.5      0.090
            Price-Belief MAE (Last)          Cell 4 > Cell 3                5419.0      0.153
            Price-Belief MAE (Mean)          Cell 4 > Cell 3                5846.0      0.019
            PM Exposure (Last)               Cell 4 < Cell 3                2585.0     <0.001
            PM Exposure (Mean)               Cell 4 < Cell 3                4050.0      0.010
            Trading Volume                   Cell 4 < Cell 3                6235.0      0.999
            Bid-Ask Spread (Last)            Cell 4 > Cell 3                4092.0     <0.001
            Bid-Ask Spread (Mean)            Cell 4 > Cell 3                7602.5     <0.001
Notes: One-sided Mann-Whitney U tests comparing Cell 4 (long horizon, with interest) to Cell 3 (short
horizon, with interest). Each cell contains 100 independent simulation sessions.

      Table 9: Mann-Whitney U Tests: H2 Residual Horizon Effect (Cell 4 vs. Cell 3)


                                                    53
bid-ask midpoint, following the convention employed by Polymarket.


C.2.1      OLS Results with Midpoint Price

Table 10 presents OLS regression results for price accuracy measures using the bid-ask mid-
point.

                                Price-Truth MAE                            Price-Belief MAE
                           Last Round               Mean              Last Round               Mean
Intercept                   0.0207***             0.0195***            0.0156***             0.0150***
                             (0.002)               (0.001)              (0.002)               (0.001)
Long Horizon                  0.0040              0.0025**               0.0038              0.0024***
                             (0.003)               (0.001)              (0.002)               (0.001)
Interest                     −0.0013               −0.0006              −0.0007               −0.0006
                             (0.002)               (0.001)              (0.002)               (0.001)
Long × Interest              −0.0024               −0.0021              −0.0027               −0.0018
                             (0.004)               (0.001)              (0.003)               (0.001)
R2                             0.013                0.019                 0.014                0.022
N                               400                  400                   400                  400
Notes: OLS regressions of price accuracy measures using bid-ask midpoint on treatment indicators. Standard
errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

             Table 10: OLS Regression Results: Price Accuracy (Midpoint Price)


     The results using the midpoint price are broadly consistent with those using the last
trade price, though with smaller effect sizes and reduced statistical significance. The horizon
effect remains significant for mean price accuracy (p = 0.012 for Price-Truth MAE) but is
not significant for final-round prices (p = 0.112). The interaction terms are not statistically
significant, though they have the expected negative sign. The weaker results with midpoint
prices may reflect that the midpoint is less sensitive to trading activity than the last trade
price.


C.2.2      Mann-Whitney U Tests with Midpoint Price

Tables 11–13 report Mann-Whitney U tests for price accuracy measures using the bid-ask
midpoint.

                                                   54
           Outcome                        Predicted Direction     U Statistic   p-value
           Price-Truth MAE (Last) Cell 2 > Cell 1                      3275.5     0.164
           Price-Truth MAE (Mean) Cell 2 > Cell 1                      6093.5     0.004
           Price-Belief MAE (Last) Cell 2 > Cell 1                     3302.0     0.142
           Price-Belief MAE (Mean) Cell 2 > Cell 1                     6227.0     0.001
Notes: One-sided Mann-Whitney U tests comparing Cell 2 to Cell 1 using bid-ask midpoint as the price
measure.

Table 11: Mann-Whitney U Tests (Midpoint): H1 Long-Horizon Effect (Cell 2 vs. Cell 1)




           Outcome                        Predicted Direction     U Statistic   p-value
           Price-Truth MAE (Last) Cell 4 < Cell 2                      1972.0    0.053
           Price-Truth MAE (Mean) Cell 4 < Cell 2                      3792.0    0.002
           Price-Belief MAE (Last) Cell 4 < Cell 2                     1946.5    0.043
           Price-Belief MAE (Mean) Cell 4 < Cell 2                     3622.0   <0.001
Notes: One-sided Mann-Whitney U tests comparing Cell 4 to Cell 2 using bid-ask midpoint as the price
measure.

Table 12: Mann-Whitney U Tests (Midpoint): H2 Direct Effect of Interest (Cell 4 vs. Cell
2)




           Outcome                        Predicted Direction     U Statistic   p-value
           Price-Truth MAE (Last) Cell 4 > Cell 3                      2906.5     0.621
           Price-Truth MAE (Mean) Cell 4 > Cell 3                      5185.0     0.326
           Price-Belief MAE (Last) Cell 4 > Cell 3                     2705.0     0.848
           Price-Belief MAE (Mean) Cell 4 > Cell 3                     5271.0     0.254
Notes: One-sided Mann-Whitney U tests comparing Cell 4 to Cell 3 using bid-ask midpoint as the price
measure.

Table 13: Mann-Whitney U Tests (Midpoint): H2 Residual Horizon Effect (Cell 4 vs. Cell
3)




                                                55
   The Mann-Whitney results using the midpoint price show that the horizon effect (H1)
is significant for mean price accuracy measures but not for final-round prices. The interest
mitigation effect (H2) is significant for mean measures and marginally significant for final-
round measures. Importantly, the residual horizon effect with interest is not significant for
any measure (p > 0.25 in all cases), consistent with the finding that interest payments largely
eliminate the horizon penalty.




                                              56
