                                           Accelerated Online Risk-Averse Policy Evaluation in POMDPs with Theoretical
                                           Guarantees and Novel CVaR Bounds
                                           YAACOV PARIENTE, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Israel
                                           VADIM INDELMAN, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Israel
                                           Risk-averse decision-making under uncertainty in partially observable domains represents a central challenge in artificial intelligence
                                           and is essential for developing reliable autonomous agents. The formal framework for such problems is typically the partially
                                           observable Markov decision process (POMDP), where risk sensitivity is introduced through a risk measure applied to the value
                                           function. Among these, the Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) has emerged as a particularly significant criterion. However, solving




arXiv:2602.23073v1 [math.ST] 26 Feb 2026
                                           POMDPs is computationally intractable in general, and approximate solution methods rely on computationally expensive simulations
                                           of possible future agent trajectories.
                                               This work introduces a theoretical framework for accelerating the evaluation of CVaR value functions in POMDPs while providing
                                           formal performance guarantees. As the mathematical foundation, we derive new bounds on the CVaR of a random variable 𝑋 using an
                                           auxiliary random variable 𝑌 , under assumptions relating their respective cumulative distribution and density functions; these bounds
                                           yield interpretable concentration inequalities and converge as the distributional discrepancy vanishes. Building on this foundation, we
                                           establish upper and lower bounds on the CVaR value function computable from a simplified belief-MDP, accommodating general
                                           simplifications of the transition dynamics—including reduced-complexity observation and transition models. We develop estimators
                                           for computing these bounds during online policy evaluation within a particle-belief MDP framework and provide probabilistic
                                           performance guarantees. These bounds are employed for computational acceleration via action elimination: actions whose bounds
                                           indicate suboptimality under the simplified model are safely discarded while ensuring consistency with the original POMDP.
                                               Empirical evaluation across multiple POMDP domains confirms that the bounds reliably separate safe from dangerous policies
                                           while achieving substantial computational speedups under the simplified model.

                                           1    Introduction
                                           Autonomous agents have emerged as a cornerstone of modern intelligent systems, with applications spanning healthcare,
                                           disaster response, education, industrial automation, and decentralized systems. From autonomous aerial vehicles
                                           coordinating firefighting efforts to multi-agent systems executing complex financial transactions, these agents are
                                           designed to perceive, reason, and act without continuous human oversight. However, ensuring that such systems
                                           behave safely and reliably in uncertain and partially observable environments remains a central challenge. In these
                                           settings, risk-aware decision-making frameworks, particularly those grounded in partially observable Markov decision
                                           processes (POMDPs), provide a principled foundation for modeling uncertainty and enforcing safety through explicit
                                           risk-sensitive optimization Ahmadi et al. 2023; Hou, Yeoh, and Varakantham 2016; Marecki and Varakantham 2010.
                                               Exact solution methods for POMDPs become computationally intractable when the state, observation, and action
                                           spaces are large Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1987a. To address this fundamental limitation, approximate planning
                                           algorithms utilize forward search trees constructed via simulation of future agent trajectories Silver and Veness 2010;
                                           Sunberg and Kochenderfer 2018. The sampling procedure is guided by the underlying reward function, which provides
                                           evaluative feedback for action selection. This approach enables practical online planning in partially observable domains
                                           by trading off solution optimality for computational tractability.
                                               Risk-averse decision-making frameworks in the literature encompass three primary approaches: distributionally
                                           robust optimization, which hedges against distributional uncertainty Xu and Mannor 2010; chance-constrained pro-
                                           gramming, which enforces probabilistic feasibility constraints Assis Santana, Thiébaux, and Williams 2016; Moss et al.
                                           2024b; and risk metric integration, wherein a risk measure—such as Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR)—is incorporated
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                       2


directly into the value function Chow et al. 2015. Risk metric integration is particularly appealing when the risk measure
is coherent, as coherent risk measures satisfy fundamental axioms—monotonicity, translation invariance, positive
homogeneity, and subadditivity—that ensure rational and consistent behavior under aggregation and scaling of uncertain
returns. These properties are especially important in sequential decision-making, where returns accumulate over time
and diversification across stochastic outcomes should not be penalized. Moreover, coherence guarantees convexity
of the resulting objective, enabling tractable optimization and facilitating theoretical analysis. Among coherent risk
measures, CVaR has emerged as a widely adopted choice due to its explicit focus on tail risk and its compatibility with
robust and distributional formulations. In the latter framework, CVaR is computed over the cumulative return, defined
as the sum of stage-wise costs across the planning horizon. Chance-constrained and CVaR-based formulations reflect
different perspectives on risk in sequential decision problems.
  Chance constraints enforce probabilistic restrictions on state visitation, thereby preventing the agent from entering
undesirable regions of the state space. Conversely, CVaR optimization targets the tail risk of the cumulative return,
prioritizing mitigation of poor reward realizations. These objectives are complementary rather than interchangeable.
Consider, for instance, an online algorithmic trading problem wherein the environment reward is defined as the
percentage portfolio gain relative to the preceding portfolio value, and the state is characterized by current asset prices.
In this setting, CVaR optimization of returns directly addresses the trader’s primary objective—managing downside risk
in cumulative gains—whereas formulating the problem as a chance constraint on state space would be less natural
and potentially misaligned with the risk management goal. Another example arises in sequential decision-making
problems with multiple objectives, such as a navigating robot that must account for fuel availability, obstacles, and
related operational constraints. In such settings, optimizing the cumulative reward provides a principled means of
jointly accommodating all constraints.
  Current state-of-the-art POMDP planning algorithms remain computationally demanding, as they rely on extensive
sampling from the original POMDP dynamics. To mitigate this issue, the simplification approach replaces the true
POMDP dynamics with a computationally tractable surrogate model, which is then employed during planning while still
admitting performance guarantees relative to the original dynamics. Simplification techniques for expectation-based
value functions are already available Barenboim and Indelman 2023; Lev-Yehudi, Barenboim, and Indelman 2024;
Zhitnikov, Sztyglic, and Indelman 2025 and have been shown to accelerate POMDP planning. However, risk-averse
simplification has remained largely unexamined; the only existing contribution in this direction employs a non-coherent
risk measure Zhitnikov and Indelman 2022, which offers weaker justification for risk-averse decision making Majumdar
and Pavone 2020.
  We begin by establishing the mathematical foundations of this work, deriving several CVaR bounds for a random
variable 𝑋 using an auxiliary random variable 𝑌 , under assumptions relating their respective CDFs and PDFs. Although
not all of these theoretical results are employed in our practical applications, they form a foundational framework that we
expect will support future research on simplification. Building on these foundations, we analyze the relationship between
the original value function—defined as the CVaR of the return—and its simplified belief transition-model counterpart. In
particular, we establish lower and upper bounds on the original value function in terms of the simplified value function
and provide corresponding performance guarantees. We then develop estimators for computing these bounds during
online planning and derive performance guarantees for these estimators as well. The primary contributions of this
work are as follows:
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                            3

                  Models                            Theory (Sec. 5–6)                              Estimation (Sec. 7)



             Original POMDP                      CVaR value function                                Probabilistic
                    𝑀                                   (original)                               computable bounds

                                                                                                              Thm. 7.4
                                                               Bounds (Thm. 6.2)
                                                                                                   Sample-based
                                                                                   sample            estimates
            Simplified POMDP                     CVaR value function
                    𝑀𝑠                                 (simplified)


Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed framework. The original POMDP yields the original CVaR value function. The simplified POMDP
𝑀𝑠 admits a simplified value function, related to the original via Theorem 6.2. In practice, the simplified value function and
distributional discrepancy are estimated from sample trajectories, yielding probabilistic computable bounds on the original value
function (Theorem 7.4).


      • Derivation of bounds on the CVaR of a random variable 𝑋 given another random variable 𝑌 . These bounds enable
         the approximation of CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) when direct access to 𝑋 is limited. They also yield interpretable concentration
         inequalities that characterize the CVaR of 𝑋 through the CVaR of 𝑌 under an adjusted confidence level, and we
         establish convergence of these bounds as the distributional discrepancy vanishes.
      • Derivation of lower and upper bounds on the theoretical value function in risk-averse POMDPs expressed
         through the action-value function from a simplified belief-MDP transition model, with corresponding bounds
         for simplified observation models.
      • Estimators for evaluating the simplified bounds during online planning, with probabilistic performance guaran-
         tees on the deviation between the theoretical action-value function and its estimated bounds computed using
         simplified belief-MDP and observation models within a particle-belief MDP framework.
      • Application of the derived bounds to computational acceleration via action elimination, in which actions whose
         bounds indicate suboptimality are safely discarded, and empirical demonstration of substantial speedups with
         negligible degradation in policy performance across multiple POMDP domains.
    An overview of the proposed framework is depicted in Figure 1. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 introduces the necessary preliminaries on POMDPs, particle belief MDPs, and
CVaR estimation. Section 4 formulates the problem of bounding the risk-averse value function under a simplified belief-
transition model. Section 5 derives the foundational CVaR bounds using auxiliary random variables. Section 6 establishes
value function bounds for the static CVaR value function under general and observation-model simplifications. Section 7
develops online estimators for computing these bounds during planning and provides corresponding performance
guarantees. Section 8 discusses the limitations of the framework. Section 9 presents the experimental evaluation across
multiple POMDP domains. Section 10 concludes the paper. Proofs and additional experimental details are provided in
the appendix.

2   Related Work
Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) Rockafellar, Uryasev, et al. 2000 is a principled and extensively studied risk measure
with broad applicability across domains involving uncertainty. A central property of CVaR is its dual representation
Artzner et al. 1999, which allows it to be interpreted as the expected loss in the worst-case tail of a cost distribution
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                         4


Chow et al. 2015. Unlike Value at Risk (VaR), which identifies only the quantile threshold of extreme losses at a chosen
confidence level, CVaR quantifies both the probability and the magnitude of such losses, yielding a more comprehensive
assessment of risk. This property makes CVaR especially relevant in safety-critical decision-making contexts, where both
the occurrence and severity of adverse outcomes are significant. Moreover, CVaR satisfies the axioms of coherent risk
measures—such as subadditivity and positive homogeneity—ensuring consistent and rational aggregation of risk across
time and decision stages Artzner et al. 1999. Practical estimators of CVaR are supported by concentration inequalities
and deviation guarantees from the true risk value Brown 2007; Thomas and Learned-Miller 2019, further reinforcing its
reliability in applied decision-making problems.
    Risk can be incorporated into planning under uncertainty through multiple paradigms, including chance constraints
Ono et al. 2015, exponential utility functions Koenig and Simmons 1994, distributionally robust optimization Cubuktepe
et al. 2021; Osogami 2015; Xu and Mannor 2010, and quantile regression methods Dabney et al. 2018. Among these,
distributionally robust formulations are particularly aligned with CVaR optimization, as both emphasize resilience to
rare but high-impact events Chow et al. 2015. Risk measures map random cost variables to real-valued evaluations
and are expected to satisfy fundamental axioms to ensure interpretability and consistency Majumdar and Pavone
2020. Coherent risk measures, by satisfying these axioms, provide a principled foundation for incorporating CVaR into
sequential decision-making. General coherent risk formulations have been employed as optimization objectives in
POMDPs, constrained MDPs, and shortest-path problems Ahmadi et al. 2020, 2021a,b; Dixit, Ahmadi, and Burdick 2023,
where CVaR arises as a key special case. Specifically, Chow et al. 2015 introduced the CVaR-MDP framework, defining
the value function as the CVaR of the return and deriving a value-iteration-based solution with formal error guarantees.
    Simplification techniques for POMDPs aim to reduce computational complexity while retaining performance guar-
antees, thereby facilitating real-time deployment of POMDP-based policies in practical systems Papadimitriou and
Tsitsiklis 1987b. Simplification refers to replacing one or more POMDP components with computationally tractable
approximations while providing formal performance guarantees that ensure decision quality with respect to the original
model. For instance, Lev-Yehudi, Barenboim, and Indelman 2024 examined simplification of the observation model
by introducing a less expensive surrogate while establishing finite-sample convergence bounds. Similarly, Barenboim
and Indelman 2026 studied simplification of the state and observation spaces, providing deterministic performance
guarantees and integrating them into state-of-the-art solvers. Furthermore, Zhitnikov and Indelman 2022 examined
the simplification of belief-dependent rewards and provided deterministic guarantees under the Value at Risk (VaR)
criterion. However, VaR is not a coherent risk measure and therefore lacks several essential properties for principled
risk-averse decision making. More broadly, the simplification of risk-averse planning remains largely unexplored, with
Zhitnikov and Indelman 2022 being the only prior work in this direction. To the best of our knowledge, no prior work
has addressed the problem of bounding the CVaR of a random variable using an auxiliary random variable with a
known distributional discrepancy, which constitutes a key contribution of this work.

3     Preliminaries
3.1    Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
A finite-horizon Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) is formally defined as the tuple (𝑋, 𝐴, 𝑍,𝑇 , 𝑂, 𝑐, 𝑏 0 ),
where 𝑋 , 𝐴, and 𝑍 denote the state, action, and observation spaces, respectively. The transition model 𝑇 (𝑥𝑡 +1 | 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ≜
𝑃 (𝑥𝑡 +1 | 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) specifies the conditional probability of transitioning from state 𝑥𝑡 to 𝑥𝑡 +1 given action 𝑎𝑡 , while the
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                 5


observation model 𝑂 (𝑧𝑡 | 𝑥𝑡 ) ≜ 𝑃 (𝑧𝑡 | 𝑥𝑡 ) defines the likelihood of observing 𝑧𝑡 when the system is in state 𝑥𝑡 . The
belief space 𝐵 is the set of all probability distributions over 𝑋 , and the stage-wise cost function is given by 𝑐 : 𝐵 × 𝐴 → R.
   At each time step 𝑡, the agent maintains a belief 𝑏𝑡 ∈ 𝐵, representing the posterior distribution over the latent state
conditioned on the history of observations and actions. The history is denoted by 𝐻𝑡 = {𝑧 1:𝑡 , 𝑎 0:𝑡 −1, 𝑏 0 }, and the belief
update is defined as 𝑏𝑡 (𝑥𝑡 ) ≜ 𝑃 (𝑥𝑡 | 𝐻𝑡 ) for each 𝑥𝑡 ∈ 𝑋 . A policy 𝜋𝑡 : 𝐵 → 𝐴 is a measurable mapping that prescribes
the action 𝑎𝑡 = 𝜋𝑡 (𝑏𝑡 ) based on the current belief state. The immediate expected cost under belief 𝑏𝑡 and action 𝑎𝑡 is

                                                      𝑐 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ≜ E𝑥∼𝑏𝑡 [𝑐 𝑥 (𝑥, 𝑎𝑡 )],                                         (1)

where 𝑐 𝑥 (𝑥, 𝑎𝑡 ) denotes the state-dependent cost, bounded as 𝑅min ≤ 𝑐 𝑥 (𝑥, 𝑎𝑡 ) ≤ 𝑅max .
   The cumulative cost, or return, over a finite horizon 𝑇 ∈ N is given by
                                                                       𝑇
                                                                      ∑︁
                                                           𝑅𝑡 :𝑇 ≜          𝑐 (𝑏𝜏 , 𝑎𝜏 ),                                          (2)
                                                                      𝜏=𝑡

which serves as the performance criterion starting at time 𝑡. The value function associated with policy 𝜋 and initial
belief 𝑏𝑘 is
                                                                               𝑇
                                                                              ∑︁
                                       𝑉 𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 ) ≜ E[𝑅𝑘:𝑇 | 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋] =                E[𝑐 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) | 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋],                     (3)
                                                                              𝑡 =𝑘
and the corresponding action-value function is

                                       𝑄 𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) ≜ E𝑧𝑘+1 [𝑐 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) + 𝑉 𝜋 (𝑏𝑘+1 ) | 𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ] .                            (4)

A POMDP can equivalently be formulated as a fully observable belief-MDP (BMDP), in which the belief 𝑏𝑡 serves as the
state variable and is a sufficient statistic for the interaction history. In this formulation, the dynamics are governed
by a belief transition kernel induced by the latent state-transition and observation models. Formally, the belief-MDP
associated with a POMDP 𝑀 is defined as
                                                           𝑀𝐵 ≜ (B, 𝐴, 𝜏, 𝜌, 𝛾),                                                   (5)
where B ≜ Δ(𝑋 ) denotes the space of probability distributions over the latent state space 𝑋 , 𝐴 is the action space, 𝜏
denotes the belief-transition kernel, 𝜌 is the expected cost, and 𝛾 is the discount factor. Given the state-transition and
observation models, the belief-transition model of the belief-MDP is given by
                                     ∫  ∫     ∫
               𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) =                   𝑃 (𝑥𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )𝑃 (𝑧𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 +1 )𝑏𝑡 (𝑥𝑡 )𝑑𝑥𝑡 𝑑𝑥𝑡 +1𝑑𝑧𝑡 +1 .              (6)
                                        𝑥𝑡 ∈𝑋   𝑥𝑡 +1 ∈𝑋   𝑧𝑡 +1 ∈𝑍

This BMDP formulation is exact but generally intractable, since the belief space B is infinite-dimensional, motivating
approximate representations such as particle belief MDPs.

3.2   Particle Belief MDP
In order to estimate the theoretical action-value function, we consider a particle belief MDP (PB-MDP) setting. Formally,
denote by 𝑀𝑃 ≜ (Σ, 𝐴, 𝜏, 𝜌, 𝛾) the PB-MDP that is defined with respect to the POMDP 𝑀 Lim et al. 2023 and 𝑁𝑝 ∈ N,
where
      • Σ ≜ {𝑏¯ : 𝑏¯ = {(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑤𝑖 )}𝑖=1𝑝 , 𝑥𝑖 ∈ 𝑋, ∀𝑖, 𝑤𝑖 ≥ 0, ∃𝑖 such that 𝑤𝑖 > 0} is the state space over the particle beliefs.
                                   𝑁

      • 𝐴 is the action space as defined in the POMDP 𝑀.
      • 𝜏 (𝑏¯𝑡 +1 |𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎) is the belief transition probability, for 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴, 𝑏¯ ∈ Σ.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                       6

                    Í𝑁 𝑝
           ¯ 𝑎) ≜    𝑗 =1 𝑤 𝑗 𝑐 (𝑥 𝑗 ,𝑎)
      • 𝜌 (𝑏,           Í𝑁 𝑝               is the belief-dependent cost.
                          𝑗 =1 𝑤 𝑗
      • 𝛾 as defined in the POMDP 𝑀.
This belief estimator maintains a finite set of state particles that serve as an approximation to the theoretical belief,
which, in principle, may involve an infinite number of states.

3.3   Conditional Value-at-Risk
Let 𝑋 be a random variable defined on a probability space (Ω, F , 𝑃), where F is the 𝜎-algebra, and 𝑃 : F → [0, 1] is a
probability measure. Assume further that E[|𝑋 |] < ∞. We denote the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the
random variable 𝑋 by 𝐹𝑋 (𝑥) = 𝑃 (𝑋 ≤ 𝑥). The value at risk at confidence level 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1) is the 1 − 𝛼 quantile of 𝑋 , i.e.,

                                                   VaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≜ inf {𝑥 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑋 (𝑥) > 1 − 𝛼 }                             (7)

For simplicity we denote 𝑞𝛼𝑋 = VaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) or 𝑞𝛼𝐹 = VaR𝛼 (𝑋 ). The conditional value at risk (CVaR) at confidence level 𝛼 is
defined as Rockafellar, Uryasev, et al. 2000
                                                                         1
                                               CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≜ inf {𝑤 +       E[(𝑋 − 𝑤) + ]|𝑤 ∈ R},                         (8)
                                                              𝑤 ∈R       𝛼
where (𝑥) + = max (𝑥, 0). For a smooth 𝐹 , it holds that Pflug 2000
                                                                                        ∫ 1
                                                                                    1
                                           CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) = E[𝑋 |𝑋 > VaR𝛼 (𝑋 )] =                  𝐹 −1 (𝑣)𝑑𝑣.               (9)
                                                                                    𝛼    1−𝛼
       iid
Let 𝑋𝑖 ∼ 𝐹 for 𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑛}. Denote by
                                                                                    1 ∑︁
                                                                                       𝑛
                                             𝐶ˆ𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≜ 𝐶ˆ𝛼 ({𝑋𝑖 }𝑛𝑖=1 ) ≜ inf 𝑥 +
                                                                                n                    o
                                                                                          (𝑋𝑖 − 𝑥) +                   (10)
                                                                           𝑥 ∈R    𝑛𝛼 𝑖=1

the estimate of CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) Brown 2007. Theorem 3.1, that bounds the deviation of the estimated CVaR and the true
CVaR, was proved in Brown 2007.

   Theorem 3.1. If supp(𝑋 ) ⊆ [𝑎, 𝑏] and 𝑋 has a continuous distribution function, then for any 𝛿 ∈ (0, 1],
                                                                   √︂
                                                                      5 ln(3/𝛿) 
                                 𝑃 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) − 𝐶ˆ𝛼 (𝑋 ) > (𝑏 − 𝑎)
                                   
                                                                                  ≤ 𝛿,                                 (11)
                                                                          𝛼𝑛
                                                                     √︂
                                                             (𝑏 − 𝑎) ln(1/𝛿) 
                                𝑃 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) − 𝐶ˆ𝛼 (𝑋 ) < −
                                   
                                                                                  ≤ 𝛿.                                 (12)
                                                                𝛼          2𝑛
   The estimator in (10) can be expressed as

                                                              1 ∑︁ (𝑖 )
                                                                𝑛−1                             +
                                           𝐶ˆ𝛼 (𝑋 ) = 𝑋 (𝑛) −
                                                                                    𝑖
                                                                    (𝑋 − 𝑋 (𝑖 −1) )    − (1 − 𝛼) ,                     (13)
                                                              𝛼 𝑖=1                  𝑛

where 𝑋 (𝑖 ) is the 𝑖th order statistic of 𝑋 1, . . . , 𝑋𝑛 in ascending order Thomas and Learned-Miller 2019. The results
presented in Theorems 3.2 and 3.3, following the work of Thomas and Learned-Miller 2019, yield tighter bounds on the
CVaR compared to those established by Brown 2007.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                   7


    Theorem 3.2. If 𝑋 1, . . . , 𝑋𝑛 are independent and identically distributed random variables and Pr(𝑋 1 ≤ 𝑏) = 1 for some
finite 𝑏, then for any 𝛿 ∈ (0, 0.5],
                                                                               √︂                           !+!
                                            1 ∑︁                                    ln(1/𝛿)
                                                     𝑛
                                                               𝑖
                   Pr CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 1 ) ≤ 𝑍𝑛+1 −       (𝑍𝑖+1 − 𝑍𝑖 )   −                          − (1 − 𝛼)              ≥ 1 − 𝛿,        (14)
                                            𝛼 𝑖=1              𝑛                      2𝑛

where 𝑍 1, . . . , 𝑍𝑛 are the order statistics (i.e., 𝑋 1, . . . , 𝑋𝑛 sorted in ascending order), 𝑍𝑛+1 = 𝑏, and 𝑥 + ≜ max{0, 𝑥 } for all
𝑥 ∈ R.

    Theorem 3.3. If 𝑋 1, . . . , 𝑋𝑛 are independent and identically distributed random variables and Pr(𝑋 1 ≥ 𝑎) = 1 for some
finite 𝑎, then for any 𝛿 ∈ (0, 0.5],
                                                                                    √︂                          !
                                      1 ∑︁                                               ln(1/𝛿) o
                                              𝑛−1          n 𝑖                                              +
               Pr CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 1 ) ≥ 𝑍𝑛 −       (𝑍𝑖+1 − 𝑍𝑖 ) min 1, +                                  − (1 − 𝛼)      ≥ 1 − 𝛿,         (15)
                                      𝛼 𝑖=0                    𝑛                           2𝑛

where 𝑍 1, . . . , 𝑍𝑛 are the order statistics (i.e., 𝑋 1, . . . , 𝑋𝑛 sorted in ascending order), 𝑍 0 = 𝑎, and 𝑥 + ≜ max{0, 𝑥 } for all
𝑥 ∈ R.

    Notably, Theorems 3.2 and 3.3 require only one-sided boundedness of the support and do not assume continuity of
the distribution function, in contrast to Theorem 3.1, which requires both two-sided boundedness and a continuous
distribution. The restriction to 𝛿 ∈ (0, 0.5] is mild in practice, as it corresponds to confidence levels of at least 50%.

4    Problem Formulation
In this work, we adopt a risk-averse formulation in which, instead of optimizing the expected return as in (3) and (4),
the value function is defined as the CVaR of the return. Let 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1), and denote the original POMDP by 𝑀. The value
and action-value functions at time 𝑘 are defined by
                                                                     𝑇
                                                                    ∑︁
                                          𝑉𝑀𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝛼) ≜ CVaR𝛼𝑃 [      𝑐 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝜋 (𝑏𝑡 ))|𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋],                                   (16)
                                                                    𝑡 =𝑘
                                                                                𝑇
                                                                               ∑︁
                                  𝜋
                                 𝑄𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≜ CVaR𝛼𝑃 [𝑐 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) +             𝑐 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝜋 (𝑏𝑡 ))|𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋].                   (17)
                                                                              𝑡 =𝑘+1
Figure 3a illustrates the difference between the standard expected value function and the CVaR value function.
    We consider cases in which the belief-MDP transition model is simplified for computational tractability. Let Ω𝐵 be the
sample space of the belief random variable and let Ω ≜ Ω𝑇𝐵 −𝑘+1 denote the corresponding product space, endowed with
a 𝜎-algebra F . We define two probability measures 𝑃, 𝑃𝑠 : F → [0, 1] on the measurable space (Ω, F ), corresponding
to the original and simplified belief models, respectively. The CDF of 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 under the original model is
                                             ∫                               𝑇
                                                                             Ö
                      𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) =          𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘:𝑇 , 𝜋)   𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋)𝑑𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇 ,                           (18)
                                                𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇 ∈𝐵𝑇 −𝑘                            𝑖=𝑘+1

and the simplified CDF of 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 is defined using only the simplified belief transition model:
                                            ∫                               𝑇
                                                                            Ö
                    𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) =          𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘:𝑇 , 𝜋)   𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋)𝑑𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇 .                           (19)
                                                𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇 ∈𝐵𝑇 −𝑘                            𝑖=𝑘+1
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                 8


                              Original POMDP 𝑀                                         𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼 )
                                                                                      𝑄𝑀   𝑘 𝑘


                                          discrepancy
                                          𝜖

                                                                                   Computable bounds
                             Simplified POMDP 𝑀𝑠                                     𝐿𝑠 ≤ 𝑄 𝑀
                                                                                            𝜋 ≤𝑈
                                                                                                 𝑠


                                                    𝜋 under the original model 𝑀 is computationally expensive. Instead, the simplified
Fig. 2. Conceptual overview. Direct evaluation of 𝑄 𝑀
                                            𝜋
model 𝑀𝑠 is used to compute bounds on 𝑄 𝑀 , where the bound quality is governed by the distributional discrepancy 𝜖 between their
belief transition models.


The belief-MDP transition model is defined using the state transition and observation models. Hence, simplification
of the belief-MDP transition model is general enough to include simplifications of state and observation models
simultaneously.
   Denote the simplified POMDP by 𝑀𝑠 . The value and action-value functions corresponding to 𝑀𝑠 are denoted by
𝑉𝑀𝑠 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝛼) and 𝑄 𝑀
 𝜋                 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼), respectively. These definitions are identical to those in (16) and (17), except that the
                    𝑠  𝑘 𝑘
return distribution is defined with respect to the simplified belief transition model 𝑃𝑠 .
    While the simplified model 𝑃𝑠 is computationally tractable, directly using 𝑄 𝑀
                                                                                 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼) as a surrogate for 𝑄 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼)
                                                                                  𝑠  𝑘 𝑘                            𝑀 𝑘 𝑘
may lead to incorrect risk assessments, since the return distributions under 𝑃 and 𝑃𝑠 differ. Our objective is to establish
lower and upper bounds, denoted by 𝐿𝑠 and 𝑈𝑠 , such that 𝐿𝑠 ≤ 𝑄 𝑀
                                                                𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈 , depending solely on quantities
                                                                    𝑘 𝑘          𝑠
computable from the simplified model (19); this conceptual approach is summarized in Figure 2. These bounds provide
formal guarantees on the true value function, enabling reliable action selection during online planning. As illustrated in
Figure 3, the key quantity governing these bounds is 𝜖, an upper bound on the discrepancy between the CDFs of the
return under 𝑃 and 𝑃𝑠 . Bounding this CDF discrepancy allows us to bound the difference in CVaR, as established in
subsequent sections.

5     CVaR Bounds
In the previous section, we introduced a simplified belief-transition model with distribution 𝑃𝑠 as a computationally
tractable approximation of the original belief-transition model 𝑃. This approximation induces two corresponding
random variables: 𝑋 , representing the return under the original model 𝑃, and 𝑌 , representing the return under the
simplified model 𝑃𝑠 . While direct evaluation of risk-sensitive criteria for 𝑋 is often computationally infeasible, sampling
and analysis of 𝑌 can be carried out efficiently.
    The goal of this section is to characterize how CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) can be bounded and estimated using information derived
from 𝑌 . To this end, we first establish distributional bounds that relate 𝑋 and 𝑌 , and then derive finite-sample guarantees
that allow these bounds to be estimated from data. Together, these results provide a principled framework for bounding
the CVaR of the true return using samples generated from the simplified model.

5.1    Theoretical CVaR Bounds
In this section, we establish bounds for the CVaR of the random variable 𝑋 by leveraging an auxiliary random
variable 𝑌 . Two forms of distributional relationships between their respective CDFs are considered: a uniform bound
and a non-uniform bound, as illustrated in Figure 4a and Figure 4b. These results provide the theoretical basis for
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                              9


                                                                                                                                   𝜖
                                                                                                    1
                                                                Upper 𝛼 tail




                                                                                        Cumulative Probability
                                                                 𝜋 (𝑏 )




      Probability Density
                                                                𝑉𝑀   𝑘
                                                                 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝛼 )
                                                                𝑉𝑀   𝑘




                                                                                                                          𝐹𝑌 (simplified)
                                                                                                                          𝐹𝑋 (original)
                                                                                                                          𝜖-band
                                                                                                    0
                                                                               Return                            Return
     (a) Comparison of expected                             𝜋 (𝑏 )
                                                     value 𝑉𝑀
                                                     and CVaR value                     (b) CDF discrepancy between original (𝐹𝑋 ) and sim-
                                                                𝑘
     𝑉𝑀𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝛼 ). The shaded region represents the worst 𝛼 fraction of                 plified (𝐹𝑌 ) models. The 𝜖-band bounds the discrep-
           𝑘
     outcomes.                                                                          ancy, enabling CVaR bounds.

Fig. 3. Problem formulation illustrations. (a) The CVaR value function focuses on the tail of the return distribution, unlike the expected
value. (b) The simplified model 𝑃𝑠 yields a computable CDF 𝐹𝑌 , while the original CDF 𝐹𝑋 is intractable. When |𝐹𝑋 (𝑟 ) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑟 ) | ≤ 𝜖,
bounds on CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) can be derived from 𝑌 .


subsequent sections, in which the derived bounds are applied to estimate the CVaR of random variables that are either
computationally intractable or prohibitively expensive to sample directly.
   Theorem 5.1 bounds CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) in terms of CVaR𝛼 (𝑌 ) under the sole condition that the cumulative distribution
functions of 𝑋 and 𝑌 differ by at most a known uniform bound. This representation enhances the interpretability of
the bound and constitutes a novel aspect of the result, made possible by framing the bounding problem in terms of
distributional discrepancies. In the next section, we demonstrate that the bounds established in Thomas and Learned-
Miller 2019 (theorems 3.2 and 3.3) arise as a special case of Theorem 5.1, thereby providing an interpretation for existing
CVaR bounds that are otherwise difficult to interpret.

   Theorem 5.1. Let 𝑋 and 𝑌 be random variables and 𝜖 ∈ [0, 1].
    (1) Upper Bound: assume that 𝑃 (𝑋 ≤ 𝑏𝑋 ) = 1, 𝑃 (𝑌 ≤ 𝑏𝑌 ) = 1 and ∀𝑧 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖, then
                            (a) If 𝛼 > 𝜖,
                                                                 𝜖                       𝜖
                                                    CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤     max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ) + (1 − ) CVaR𝛼 −𝜖 (𝑌 ).                                     (20)
                                                                 𝛼                       𝛼
                            (b) If 𝛼 ≤ 𝜖, then CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ).
    (2) Lower Bound: If 𝑃 (𝑋 ≥ 𝑎𝑋 ) = 1, 𝑃 (𝑌 ≥ 𝑎𝑌 ) = 1 and ∀𝑧 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖, then
                            (a) If 𝛼 + 𝜖 ≤ 1,
                                                                          𝜖                 𝜖
                                                      CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ (1 +     ) CVaR𝛼+𝜖 (𝑌 ) − CVaR𝜖 (𝑌 )                                        (21)
                                                                          𝛼                 𝛼
                            (b) If 𝛼 + 𝜖 > 1 and 𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛 = min(𝑎𝑋 , 𝑎𝑌 ),
                                                                  1
                                                   CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥     E[𝑌 ] − 𝜖 CVaR𝜖 (𝑌 ) + (𝛼 + 𝜖 − 1)𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛                                     (22)
                                                                                                           
                                                                  𝛼
   Proof. The proof is available in Appendix A.1.                                                                                                □

   The parameter 𝜖 quantifies the discrepancy between the random variables 𝑋 and 𝑌 , and is defined as a uniform
bound on the difference between their cumulative distribution functions. By construction, 𝜖 takes values in the interval
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                        10


[0, 1]. In the limiting case where 𝜖 = 1, 𝑌 provides no information about 𝑋 . In this setting, the bounds provided by
Theorem 5.1 reduce to trivial bounds on CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) involving the essential supremum of both 𝑋 and 𝑌 , rendering them
ineffective for practical use. When 𝜖 = 0, the cumulative distribution functions of 𝑋 and 𝑌 are identical, and thus the
bound becomes exact, yielding CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) = CVaR𝛼 (𝑌 ).

  Theorem 5.2. Under the definitions of 𝑋 , 𝑌 , 𝜖, and 𝛼 specified in Theorem 5.1, the lower and upper bounds established
therein converge to CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) as 𝜖 → 0.

  Proof. The proof is available in Appendix A.2.                                                                            □

  For both the upper and lower bounds to be informative, Theorem 5.1 shows that 𝛼 > 𝜖 and 𝛼 + 𝜖 ≤ 1 must hold,
thereby specifying the required relation between the distributional discrepancy 𝜖 and the CVaR confidence level 𝛼.
Under these conditions, the bounding problem reduces to (20) and (21). For 𝛼 > 𝜖, the upper bound on CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) is a
weighted average of the CVaR of 𝑌 at a confidence level shifted by the distributional discrepancy 𝜖 and the maximum of
the supports of 𝑋 and 𝑌 , where the weights are proportional to the amount of distributional discrepancy. For 𝛼 + 𝜖 ≤ 1,
the bound in (21) satisfies
                                                               𝜖
                                 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ CVaR𝛼+𝜖 (𝑌 ) +     (CVaR𝛼+𝜖 (𝑌 ) − CVaR𝜖 (𝑌 )).                             (23)
                                                               𝛼
The lower bound corresponds to the CVaR of 𝑌 evaluated at a confidence level adjusted by the distributional discrepancy
𝜖, augmented by a correction term that is proportional to the distributional discrepancy.
  Theorem 5.1 assumes that the parameter 𝜖 provides an upper bound on the pointwise difference between the
cumulative distribution functions 𝐹𝑋 and 𝐹𝑌 . As illustrated in Figure 4a, this bound is particularly conservative in the
vicinity of 𝑥 = −1, where the actual discrepancy between 𝐹𝑋 and 𝐹𝑌 is significantly smaller than the global bound 𝜖.
Ideally, a tighter bound on 𝐹𝑋 (𝑥) would allow for variation with respect to 𝑥, rather than relying on a uniform constant.
Specifically, one seeks a pointwise bound of the form 𝐹𝑋 (𝑥) ≤ 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) + 𝑔(𝑥) for some non-negative function 𝑔, as
illustrated in Figure 4b. In this paper, we defer the study of specific choices of the function 𝑔 to future work, and instead
provide general assumptions under which a feasible tighter bound can be established using such a function.




                           (a)                                                                  (b)

Fig. 4. Illustrations of bounds on 𝐹𝑋 (𝑥 ). (a) Bounds from Theorem 5.1. (b) Bounds from Theorem 5.3, where 𝑔 depends on 𝑥 and
yields a tighter result than 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥 ) + 𝜖.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                        11


  Theorem 5.3. (Tighter CVaR Lower Bound) Let 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1), 𝑋 and 𝑌 be random variables. Define the random variable 𝑌 𝐿
such that 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑦) ≜ min(1, 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) + 𝑔(𝑦)) for 𝑔 : R → [0, ∞). Assume lim𝑥→−∞ 𝑔(𝑥) = 0, 𝑔 is continuous from the right
and monotonic increasing. If ∀𝑥 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑋 (𝑥) ≤ 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) + 𝑔(𝑥), then 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 is a CDF and CVaR𝛼 (𝑌 𝐿 ) ≤ CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ).

  Proof. The proof is available in Appendix A.4.                                                                            □

  Theorem 5.3 defines a random variable 𝑌 𝐿 , constructed from 𝑌 and the function 𝑔, such that the distributional
discrepancy between 𝑌 𝐿 and 𝑋 is determined explicitly by 𝑔 rather than being uniformly bounded as in Theorem 5.1.
In addition, it offers a criterion for determining whether a given function 𝑔 can be used to derive a lower bound on
the CVaR. This bound extends the lower bound established in Theorem 5.1, which is obtained when 𝑔(𝑥) is constant
and equal to 𝜖 for all 𝑥 ∈ R. Intuitively, 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 is the largest valid CDF that remains within the pointwise discrepancy
band [𝐹𝑌 (𝑦), 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) + 𝑔(𝑦)]; since 𝐹𝑋 ≤ 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 by construction, monotonicity of CVaR yields the lower bound. Figure 4(c)
illustrates this tighter construction.
  Note that in Theorem 5.3, the function 𝑔 is assumed to be non-decreasing and right-continuous. If one assumes only
that |𝐹𝑋 (𝑥) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥)| ≤ 𝑔(𝑥) for some function 𝑔 : R → [0, ∞), which is not necessarily monotonic or continuous, then
the most general form of the CVaR bounds is given by
                             ∫ 1                                  ∫ 1
                           1                                    1
            CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) =          inf {𝑧 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏 ≥       inf {𝑧 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) + 𝑔(𝑧) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏,      (24)
                           𝛼 1−𝛼                                𝛼 1−𝛼
                             ∫ 1                                  ∫ 1
                           1                                    1
            CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) =          inf {𝑧 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏 ≤       inf {𝑧 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝑔(𝑧) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏 .     (25)
                           𝛼 1−𝛼                                𝛼 1−𝛼
Another option is to specify the distributional discrepancy through the density functions underlying the cumulative
distribution functions. Let 𝑓𝑥 and 𝑓𝑦 be the probability density functions of 𝑋 and 𝑌 , respectively, and let ℎ : R → [0, ∞)
describe the pointwise discrepancy between them. Theorem 5.4 specifies conditions on the function ℎ under which
a lower bound for the CVaR of 𝑋 can be obtained. A key advantage is that this bound takes the form of the CVaR
of a random variable, enabling its estimation with performance guarantees via CVaR concentration bounds given in
Theorems 3.1, 3.3, 3.2 and Theorem 5.5.

   Theorem 5.4. Let 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1), 𝑋 and 𝑌 be random variables. Define ℎ : R → [0, ∞) to be a continuous function,
𝑔(𝑧) ≜ −∞ ℎ(𝑥)𝑑𝑥 and 𝑌 𝐿 to be a random variable such that 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑦) ≜ min(1, 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) + 𝑔(𝑦)). If lim𝑧→−∞ 𝑔(𝑧) = 0 and
      ∫𝑧

∀𝑥 ∈ R, 𝑓𝑥 (𝑥) ≤ 𝑓𝑦 (𝑥) + ℎ(𝑥), then 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 is a CDF and CVaR𝛼 (𝑌 𝐿 ) ≤ CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ).

  Proof. The proof is available in Appendix A.5.                                                                            □

  Theorem 5.4 is obtained as a corollary of Theorem 5.3 by defining a function 𝑔, as illustrated in Figure 4b, in terms of
the function ℎ. This construction demonstrates that the function 𝑔 in Theorem 5.3 can be generated from a broad class
of density discrepancy functions.

5.2   Concentration Inequalities
In this section, we derive concentration inequalities for CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) based on samples drawn from an auxiliary random
variable 𝑌 . A notable special case of these inequalities arises when 𝑌 is taken to follow the empirical cumulative
distribution function (ECDF) of 𝑋 .
    Let 𝑋 1, . . . , 𝑋𝑛 ∼ 𝐹𝑋 , where 𝐹𝑋 is the CDF of a random variable 𝑋 . The ECDF based on these samples is defined by
                  𝑖.𝑖.𝑑.
                                                                                                            ˆ
𝐹ˆ𝑋 (𝑥) = 𝑛1 𝑛𝑖=1 1𝑋𝑖 ≤𝑥 , for 𝑥 ∈ R. Let 𝐸 𝐹ˆ𝑋 [𝑋 ] denote the expectation with respect to 𝐹ˆ𝑋 , and let 𝐶𝛼𝐹𝑋 denote the CVaR
               Í

computed under the empirical distribution 𝐹ˆ𝑋 .
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                           12


  Theorem 5.5. Let 𝑋 be a random variable, 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1], 𝛿 ∈ (0, 0.5), 𝜖 = ln(1/𝛿)/(2𝑛). Let 𝑋 1, . . . , 𝑋𝑛 ∼ 𝐹𝑋 be random
                                                                        √︁                                 𝑖𝑖𝑑

variables that define the ECDF 𝐹ˆ𝑋 .
    (1) Upper Bound: If 𝑃 (𝑋 ≤ 𝑏) = 1, then
                                                        ˆ
         (a) If 𝛼 > 𝜖 then 𝑃 (CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ (1 − 𝛼𝜖 )𝐶𝛼𝐹𝑋−𝜖 + 𝛼𝜖 𝑏) > 1 − 𝛿.
         (b) If 𝛼 ≤ 𝜖 then CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ 𝑏
    (2) Lower Bound: If 𝑃 (𝑋 ≥ 𝑎) = 1, then
                                                             ˆ         ˆ
         (a) If 𝛼 + 𝜖 < 1, then 𝑃 (CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ (1 + 𝛼𝜖 )𝐶𝛼+𝜖
                                                          𝐹𝑋
                                                              − 𝛼𝜖 𝐶𝜖𝐹𝑋 ) > 1 − 𝛿.
                                                                                     ˆ
         (b) If 𝛼 + 𝜖 ≥ 1, then 𝑃 (CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ 𝛼1 [(𝛼 + 𝜖 − 1)𝑎 + 𝐸 𝐹ˆ𝑋 [𝑋 ] − 𝜖𝐶𝜖𝐹𝑋 ]) > 1 − 𝛿.

   Proof. The proof is available in Appendix A.3.                                                                              □

   Theorem 5.5 provides concentration inequalities for CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) in a form that enables the user to specify a desired
bound consistency level 𝛿, which determines the probability that the bound holds. This result follows as a corollary
of Theorem 5.1, in which the auxiliary random variable 𝑌 is instantiated as the ECDF of 𝑋 , whereas 𝑋 denotes the
underlying true random variable, which is inaccessible in practice. The distributional discrepancy required by Theorem
5.1, denoted by 𝜖, is controlled in Theorem 5.5 via the Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz (DKW) inequality Dvoretzky,
Kiefer, and Wolfowitz 1956. The DKW inequality ensures that the supremum distance between the true CDF and the
                                            √
ECDF converges to zero at a rate of order 1/ 𝑛 as the number of samples 𝑛 increases. Corollary 5.6 establishes the
asymptotic convergence of the bounds given in Theorem 5.5 as the sample size tends to infinity.

   Corollary 5.6. Let 𝑋 be a random variable, 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1], 𝛿 ∈ (0, 0.5), 𝜖 = ln(1/𝛿)/(2𝑛), 𝑎 ∈ R, 𝑏 ∈ R. Let 𝑋 1, . . . , 𝑋𝑛 ∼
                                                                           √︁                                               𝑖𝑖𝑑

𝐹𝑋 be random variables that define the ECDF 𝐹ˆ𝑋 . Denote by 𝑈 (𝑛) and 𝐿(𝑛) the upper and lower bounds respectively from
Theorem 5.5, where 𝑛 is the number of samples, then
    (1) If 𝑃 (𝑋 ≤ 𝑏) = 1, then lim𝑛→∞ 𝑈 (𝑛) = CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ).
                                               𝑎.𝑠.

    (2) If 𝑃 (𝑋 ≥ 𝑎) = 1, then lim𝑛→∞ 𝐿(𝑛) = CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ).
                                              𝑎.𝑠.


where a.s. denotes almost sure convergence.

   Proof. The proof is available in Appendix A.6.                                                                              □

   The concentration bounds established by Thomas and Learned-Miller 2019 coincide with those given in Theorem 5.5,
rendering the results of Thomas and Learned-Miller 2019 a special case of Theorem 5.5. This equivalence arises because
both Theorem 5.5 and Thomas and Learned-Miller 2019 derive concentration bounds for CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) by constructing an
alternative CDF that stochastically dominates the true distribution 𝐹𝑋 , employing the DKW inequality to control the
discrepancy. The principal distinction between the two results lies in the formulation of the CVaR bound: Thomas and
Learned-Miller 2019 express the bound through a sum of reweighted order statistics (theorems 3.2 and 3.3), resulting in
a more intricate form, whereas Theorem 5.5 presents a more interpretable bound in terms of CVaR. The interpretability
of these bounds constitutes a contribution of this paper.
   Theorem 5.7 provides concentration inequalities for the theoretical CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) based on samples drawn from an
auxiliary random variable 𝑌 , assuming only a bound on the distributional discrepancy between 𝑋 and 𝑌 .

   Theorem 5.7. Let 𝑋 and 𝑌 be random variables, 𝜖 ∈ [0, 1], 𝛿 ∈ (0, 0.5), and 𝜂 = ln(1/𝛿)/(2𝑛), 𝜖 ′ = min(𝜖 + 𝜂, 1). Let
                                                                                         √︁

𝑌1, . . . , 𝑌𝑛 be independent and identically distributed samples from 𝐹𝑌 , and denote by 𝐹ˆ𝑌 the associated empirical cumulative
distribution function.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                          13


      (1) Upper Bound: If ∀𝑧 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 and 𝑃 (𝑋 ≤ 𝑏𝑋 ) = 1, 𝑃 (𝑌 ≤ 𝑏𝑌 ) = 1, then
                                                        ′                                 ′           ˆ
           (a) If 𝛼 > 𝜖 ′ then 𝑃 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ 𝜖𝛼 max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ) + (1 − 𝜖𝛼 ) CVaR𝛼𝐹𝑌−𝜖 ′                       > 1 − 𝛿.
          (b)   If 𝛼 ≤ 𝜖 ′ , then CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 )
      (2) Lower Bound: If ∀𝑧 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 and 𝑃 (𝑋 ≥ 𝑎𝑋 ) = 1, 𝑃 (𝑌 ≥ 𝑎𝑌 ) = 1, then
          (a) If 𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ ≤ 1, then
                                                     𝜖′        𝐹ˆ𝑌      𝜖′      ˆ
                                                                                    
                                𝑃 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ (1 + ) CVaR𝛼+𝜖        ′ −    CVaR𝜖𝐹𝑌′ > 1 − 𝛿.                               (26)
                                                       𝛼                 𝛼
          (b) If 𝛼 + 𝜖 > 1, then
                       ′

                                        1                         ˆ                    
                          𝑃 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥     E𝐹ˆ𝑌 [𝑌 ] − 𝜖 ′ CVaR𝜖𝐹𝑌′ +(𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ − 1)𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛 > 1 − 𝛿.                           (27)
                                         𝛼
    Proof. The proof is available in Appendix A.7.                                                                            □

    The parameter 𝜖 in Theorem 5.7 captures the distributional discrepancy between 𝑋 and 𝑌 , consistent with its role in
Theorem 5.1. Additionally, the theorem introduces 𝜖 ′ to represent the discrepancy between 𝐹𝑋 and 𝐹ˆ𝑌 , where 𝐹ˆ𝑌 denotes
the empirical CDF of 𝑌 constructed from the sample {𝑌𝑖 }𝑛𝑖=1 . The parameter 𝜂 accounts for the additional distributional
discrepancy beyond 𝜖, and captures the estimation error in approximating 𝐹𝑌 using the empirical sample {𝑌𝑖 }𝑛𝑖=1 . By
combining Theorem 5.1 with the DKW inequality Dvoretzky, Kiefer, and Wolfowitz 1956, we obtain probabilistic
guarantees for the estimated bounds.

6     Value Function Bounds for Static CVaR Value Function
In this section, we leverage the CVaR bounds from the previous section to establish bounds between the simplified
and original value functions as defined in (16), where the simplification is considered in a general form with respect
to the belief transition model. We then derive bounds for the specific case in which the simplification applies to the
observation model. The implications of these bounds for policy evaluation and open-loop POMDP planning will be
examined in the Experiments section.

6.1    Bounds for a General Belief Transition Model Simplification
In this section, we establish bounds on the difference between the CDFs of the returns, computed with respect to the
simplified and original belief transition models. These bounds are then used to bound the original value function in
terms of the simplified value function.
    Theorem 6.1 demonstrates that the difference between the CDFs of the returns, computed with respect to the
simplified and original belief transition models, can be characterized in terms of the difference between the simplified
and original belief transition models.

    Theorem 6.1. Let 𝑃 and 𝑃𝑠 denote the probability measures induced by the original and simplified belief-transition
models, respectively. Denote by E𝑠 the expectation taken with respect to the simplified belief-transition model. Then, the
following holds:
                                                                                         −1
                                                                                       𝑇∑︁
                          sup |𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜋) −𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜋)| ≤ E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ],        (28)
                          𝑙 ∈R                                                                 𝑡 =𝑘
where Δ𝑠 is the TV distance that is defined by
                                                        ∫
                                 Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 −1, 𝑎𝑡 −1 ) ≜               |𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 |𝑏𝑡 −1, 𝑎𝑡 −1 ) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 |𝑏𝑡 −1, 𝑎𝑡 −1 )|𝑑𝑏𝑡 .   (29)
                                                            𝑏𝑡 ∈𝐵
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                                    14


                                                                                                                                        𝑡 Δ𝑡
                                                 E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) |𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ]
                                                                                                                                        Í
                                                                                                                                   𝜖=      𝑠
                                                 Cumulative 𝜖
                                                 CVaR level 𝛼




          Distributional discrepancy
                                       𝛼



                                                                                                                                            tight
                                                                                  Δ𝑠𝑘+3                                                     bounds
                                                         Δ𝑠𝑘+1
                                           Δ𝑠𝑘


                                                                                                               ···
                                           𝑘              𝑘 +1             𝑘 +2   𝑘 +3           𝑘 +4                       𝑇 −1        Time step 𝑡

Fig. 5. Accumulation of distributional discrepancy over the planning horizon. Each bar represents the expected one-step TV distance
                                                                       Δ𝑡 (dashed) governs the bound quality: when 𝜖 < 𝛼 (below the
                                                                Í −1 𝑠
E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) | 𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ] at time 𝑡 . The cumulative sum 𝜖 = 𝑇𝑡 =𝑘
dash-dotted line), the CVaR bounds from Theorem 6.2 remain informative; when 𝜖 ≥ 𝛼, the bounds reduce to trivial extrema.


   Proof. The proof is available in Appendix C.1.                                                                                                       □

   The expression E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) | 𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ] quantifies the expected one-step distributional discrepancy at time 𝑡 between
the transition dynamics of the simplified and original belief-MDPs, conditioned on the planning process being initiated
at time 𝑘. Summing this quantity over the horizon accumulates the total distributional discrepancy, leading to the bound
in (28), which in turn bounds the cumulative distribution function of the return across the horizon. This accumulation
mechanism is illustrated in Figure 5.
   By leveraging Theorem 5.1 and combining it with the supremum norm bounds for the simplified and original return
CDFs in (28), we derive the following bounds on the value functions.

   Theorem 6.2. Let 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ∈ [0, 1], 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ∈ [0, 1] and denote
                                                                                      −1
                                                                                    𝑇∑︁
                                                           𝜖 ≜ 𝜖 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) ≜ min(         E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 , 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜋], 1),                        (30)
                                                                                     𝑖=𝑘

    (1) Upper Bound: assume that 𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 , then
         (a) If 𝜖 < 𝛼, then 𝑈𝑠 ≜ (1 − 𝛼𝜖 )𝑄 𝑀
                                            𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼 − 𝜖) + 𝜖 𝑑
                                             𝑠  𝑘 𝑘             𝛼 𝑚𝑎𝑥
         (b) If 𝜖 ≥ 𝛼 then 𝑈𝑠 ≜ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥
    (2) Lower Bound: assume that 𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 and 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 , then
         (a) If 𝜖 + 𝛼 < 1 then 𝐿𝑠 ≜ (1 + 𝛼𝜖 )𝑄 𝑀
                                               𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼 + 𝜖) − 𝜖 𝑄 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝜖)
                                                𝑠  𝑘 𝑘             𝛼 𝑀𝑠 𝑘 𝑘
         (b) If 𝜖 + 𝛼 ≥ 1 then 𝐿𝑠 ≜ 𝛼1 [−(𝛼 + 𝜖 − 1)𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 + 𝑄 𝑀
                                                             𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 ) − 𝜖𝑄 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝜖)]
                                                              𝑠  𝑘 𝑘         𝑀𝑠 𝑘 𝑘
               𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼)) > 1 − 𝛿
Then 𝑃 (𝐿𝑠 ≤ 𝑄 𝑀                      𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 and 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 .
                                                    𝜋
                   𝑘 𝑘

   Proof. The proof is available in Appendix C.3.                                                                                                       □

   The bounds established in Theorem 6.2 provide upper and lower bounds on the original value function in terms of
the simplified value function, evaluated at an adjusted confidence level that accounts for the distributional discrepancy
𝜖 between the simplified and original belief transition models.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                     15


6.2    Bounds for Observation Model Simplification
Simplification of the observation model is a special case of simplification of the belief transition model. Despite that,
computation of the belief transition model is still an open question in the field, and therefore the bounds from Theorem
6.2 should be adjusted for this specific simplification setting.
    Let 𝑞𝑧 denote the simplified observation model associated with the POMDP 𝑀𝑠 , and let 𝑝𝑧 denote the original
observation model associated with the POMDP 𝑀. The bounds for observation model simplification are exhibited in
Theorem 6.3.

    Theorem 6.3. In the case where the simplified and original observation models are denoted by 𝑞𝑧 and 𝑝𝑧 respectively, it
holds that
                                                                                       −1
                                                                                     𝑇∑︁
                        sup |𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜋) −𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜋)| ≤ E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ],                       (31)
                        𝑙 ∈R                                                           𝑡 =𝑘
where Δ𝑠 is the TV distance that is defined by
                                                       ∫
                                          Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑡 ) ≜            |𝑝𝑧 (𝑧𝑡 |𝑥𝑡 ) − 𝑞𝑧 (𝑧𝑡 |𝑥𝑡 )|𝑑𝑧𝑡 .                                     (32)
                                                        𝑧𝑡 ∈𝑍

    Proof. The proof is available in Appendix C.2.                                                                                       □

    Theorem 6.3 establishes a state-dependent upper bound on the sup-norm difference between the CDFs of the return.
This bound is amenable to practical computation. The state 𝑥𝑡 +1 appearing in (31) can be sampled from the distribution
                       𝑃 (𝑥𝑖+1 | 𝑥𝑖 , 𝜋𝑖 )𝑃 (𝑥𝑘 | 𝑏𝑘 ), where 𝜋𝑖 denotes the action selected by policy 𝜋 at time 𝑖.
                Î𝑡 −1
𝑃 (· | 𝑥𝑡 , 𝜋𝑡 ) 𝑖=𝑘+1
    By leveraging Theorem 6.2 with Theorem 6.3, we obtain Corollary 6.4, which provides computable CVaR bounds
based on state-dependent total variation distance.

    Corollary 6.4. The bound from Theorem 6.2 holds for 𝜖 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) =
                                                                                   Í𝑇 −1
                                                                                      𝑡 =𝑘 E [Δ (𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ].
                                                                                            𝑠  𝑠


    Proof. The proof is available in Appendix C.4.                                                                                       □

7     Online Bound Estimation
In this section, we derive practical estimators corresponding to the theoretical bounds presented in Section 6, and
describe how these bounds can be efficiently computed within the context of online policy evaluation and open-loop
planning. All estimators are constructed from samples generated by particle-based belief estimators drawn under
the simplified belief-transition distribution. Specifically, we develop estimators for the action–value function, the
distributional discrepancy 𝜖 appearing in Corollary 6.4, and the minimum and maximum values of the return, thereby
enabling computation of the complete bound stated in Corollary 6.4. Moreover, we provide performance guarantees for
these estimators, establishing their reliability when computed from a finite number of samples.

7.1    Action-Value Function Estimator
The action-value function is defined as the CVaR of the return 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≜                          𝑡 =𝑘 𝑐 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ), and can be estimated in a
                                                                                              Í𝑇

straightforward manner by generating sample trajectories of the return and computing the empirical CVaR from these
samples.
    To generate return samples, it is necessary to simulate belief trajectories from time 𝑘 to time 𝑇 . This is achieved
using a particle-based belief estimator, where the belief is represented by a weighted set of 𝑁𝑝 ∈ N particles. Given
a particle belief 𝑏¯𝑘 , provided by the user to represent the agent’s belief at time 𝑘, the agent generates 𝑁𝑏 simulated
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                            16


particle-belief trajectories {𝑏¯𝑡𝑖 }, where 𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑁𝑏 } indexes the trajectory and 𝑡 ∈ {𝑘, . . . ,𝑇 } denotes the time step.
For each simulated trajectory, a return sample is computed as 𝑅¯𝑖 = 𝑇 𝑐 (𝑏¯𝑖 , 𝜋 (𝑏¯𝑖 )), resulting in a collection of
                                                                                   Í
                                                                                        𝑘:𝑇         𝑡 =𝑘    𝑡     𝑡
                  𝑖 } 𝑁𝑏 . Let 𝑏¯𝑖 ≜ {(𝑥 𝑖,𝑗 , 𝑤 𝑖,𝑗 )} 𝑁𝑝 denote the 𝑖-th simulated particle belief at time 𝑡, where 𝑗 indexes
return samples {𝑅¯𝑘:𝑇 𝑖=1        𝑡      𝑡       𝑡       𝑗=1
                                                                           𝑖,𝑗
the particles. Define the normalized weights by 𝑤˜ 𝑡𝑖,𝑗 ≜ Í𝑁𝑝𝑡 𝑖,𝑗 . Assuming the cost function is state-dependent, the cost
                                                                      𝑤

                                                                      𝑗 =1 𝑤𝑡

associated with belief 𝑏¯𝑡𝑖 and action 𝑎 is given by 𝑐 (𝑏¯𝑡𝑖 , 𝑎) =                    ˜ 𝑡𝑖,𝑗 𝑐 (𝑥𝑡𝑖,𝑗 , 𝑎). By estimating CVaR according to (13),
                                                                                 Í𝑁 𝑝
                                                                                   𝑗=1 𝑤
we get the action-value function estimator

                                                                                 1 ∑︁
                                                                                   𝑁𝑏                                    +
                      𝑄ˆ 𝑀   (𝑏¯𝑘 , 𝑎, 𝛼) ≜ 𝐶ˆ ({𝑅𝑖 }𝑖=1
                                                                                                             𝑖
                         𝜋                           𝑁𝑏
                                                         )     = 𝑅 (𝑁𝑏 ) −             (𝑅 (𝑖 ) − 𝑅 (𝑖 −1) )     − (1 − 𝛼) .                  (33)
                           𝑃                                                     𝛼 𝑖=1                       𝑁𝑏

Detailed pseudo-code for the estimation of the action–value function is presented in Algorithm 1.

7.2   Online CDF Bound Estimation
The bound on the difference between return simplified and original CDFs, established in Theorem 6.3 and denoted by
𝜖 in Corollary 6.4, plays a central role in bounding the discrepancy between the simplified and original action-value
functions. Notably, it is the only term in the bound that explicitly captures the impact of the difference between the
simplified and original observation models. A challenge arises from the fact that the quantity 𝜖 cannot be directly
estimated during planning, as its computation requires access to the full observation model 𝑝𝑧 , which is typically too
expensive to evaluate online. For the purpose of online computation of the bound, we adopt the methodology proposed
in Lev-Yehudi, Barenboim, and Indelman 2024, which enables evaluation without real-time access to the original
observation model. This is achieved by decoupling the offline sampling phase—conducted using the original observation
model—from the online sampling phase, which relies solely on the simplified observation model. Specifically, the
offline–online decoupling strategy and the state-level importance-sampling estimator in (34) were introduced by Lev-
Yehudi, Barenboim, and Indelman 2024; the belief-level aggregation, horizon-level accumulation, and the probabilistic
guarantees developed in the remainder of this section are novel contributions of the present work. This offline–online
decoupling procedure is illustrated in Figure 6.
   Let 𝑄 0 be a distribution over the state space, and denote the TV-distance expectation given the previous state and
action by 𝑚. (34) shows how the one-step distributional discrepancy bound 𝑚 can be computed using importance
sampling.
                                                                         𝑃 (𝑥𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎) 𝑠
                   𝑚(𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎) ≜ E𝑥𝑡 +1 ∼𝑃 (· |𝑥𝑡 ,𝑎) [Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎]                  Δ (𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎].
                                                                                 = E𝑥𝑡 +1 ∼𝑄 0 [                     (34)
                                                                           𝑄 0 (𝑥𝑡 +1 )
Define the belief-dependent one-step distributional discrepancy 𝑚, and the belief-dependent total distributional discrep-
ancy bound of the CDFs difference at time 𝑡 by 𝜖𝑡 .

                                                       𝑚(𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎) ≜ E[𝑚(𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎)|𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎],                                                      (35)
                                                      −1
                                                    𝑇∑︁                                   −1
                                                                                        𝑇∑︁
                                    𝜖𝑡 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎) ≜          E[Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝜏+1 )|𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎] =              E[𝑚(𝑏𝜏 , 𝑎)|𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎].                          (36)
                                                    𝜏=𝑡                                 𝜏=𝑡
                                       Δ i.i.d.
In practice, a set of states {𝑥𝑛Δ }𝑛=1
                                   𝑁   ∼ 𝑄 0 is drawn from a user-specified distribution 𝑄 0 , and the TV-distance corre-
sponding to each sampled state is computed offline. During online planning, the precomputed TV distance estimates
are reweighted via importance sampling, thereby adapting the offline-computed distributional discrepancy to reflect
the actual distributional discrepancy encountered by the agent during execution, as described in (37). By utilizing {𝑥𝑛Δ },
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                              17

Algorithm 1 CVaR Value Function Estimation for Policy 𝜋
                                             Global Parameters: 𝑁𝑝 , 𝑁𝑏 ,𝑇 , 𝜋
   Input: Particle belief 𝑏, ¯ planning horizon 𝑇 , policy 𝜋, action 𝑎, risk level 𝛼, number of belief trajectories 𝑁𝑏 and
                                               number of belief particles 𝑁𝑝 .
                                        Output: Estimated value 𝑉ˆ 𝜋 ( ¯ 𝑏) or 𝑄ˆ 𝜋 ( ¯
                                                                                     𝑏, 𝑎)
 1: procedure GENPF( ¯      𝑏, 𝑎)                                   1: procedure GenerateReturnSample( ¯              𝑏, 𝑎, 𝜋)
       Sample 𝑥 0 from 𝑏¯ with prob. 𝑤𝑖 / 𝑖 𝑤𝑖                             trajectories ← GenBeliefTrajectories(𝑏,        ¯ 𝜋,𝑇 )
                                            Í
 2:                                                                 2:
 3:    𝑧 ← 𝐺 (𝑥 0, 𝑎)                                               3:     ReturnSample ← list()
 4:    for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑁𝑝 do                                           4:     for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑁𝑏 do
 5:         (𝑥𝑖′, 𝑟𝑖 ) ← 𝐺 (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑎)                                 5:          Return ← c(trajectories[0][𝑖], 𝑎)
 6:        𝑤𝑖′ ← 𝑤𝑖 · 𝑍 (𝑧 | 𝑎, 𝑥𝑖′ )                               6:          for 𝑡 = 1 to 𝑇 do
 7:    end for                                                      7:               Return         +=         c(trajectories[𝑡][𝑖],
       𝑏¯′ ← Í{(𝑥𝑖′, 𝑤𝑖′ )}𝑖=1𝑝
                           𝑁
 8:                                                                    𝜋(trajectories[𝑡][𝑖]))
 9:
                   𝑤𝑟
       𝜌 ← Í𝑖 𝑤𝑖 𝑖 𝑖                                                8:          end for
10:
                  𝑖
       return 𝑏 , 𝜌 ¯′                                              9:          append Return to ReturnSample
                                                                   10:     end   for
11: end procedure
12: procedure SampleNextBeliefs(beliefs, 𝜋)
                                                                   11:     return ReturnSample
                                                                   12: end procedure
13:    NextBeliefs ← 𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 ()
                                                                   13: procedure CVaREstimate(samp, 𝛼)
14:    for 𝑗 = 1 to 𝑁𝑏 do
15:        NextBelief             ←       GENPF(beliefs[j],        14:     Sort samp in ascending order as 𝑧 1, . . . , 𝑧𝑛 with
    𝜋(beliefs[j]))                                                     𝑧0 = 0
                                                                           return 𝑧𝑛 − 𝛼1 𝑛−1
                                                                                             Í                                 +
                                                                   15:
                                                                                                                 𝑖
16:        append NextBelief to NextBeliefs                                                    𝑖=0 (𝑧𝑖+1 − 𝑧𝑖 ) 𝑛 − (1 − 𝛼)
                                                                   16: end procedure
17:    end for
                                                                   17: procedure Estimate𝑉 𝜋 ( ¯
18:    return NextBeliefs                                                                          ¯
                                                                                                     𝑏, 𝛼)
19: end procedure
                                                                   18:     return     EstimateQ(   𝑏, 𝜋(¯𝑏), 𝛼)
                                             ¯                     19: end procedure
20: procedure GenBeliefTrajectories(𝑏, 𝜋,𝑇 )
                                                                   20: procedure EstimateQ(𝑏,       ¯ 𝑎, 𝛼)
21:    trajectories ← 𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 ()                                                                                      ¯
22:    for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑁𝑏 do                                          21:     samp    ←    GenerateReturnSample(      𝑏, 𝑎, 𝜋)
23:        append 𝑏¯ to trajectories                               22:     return     CVaREstimate(samp,𝛼)
                                                                   23: end procedure
24:    end for
25:    for 𝑡 = 0 to 𝑇 − 1 do
26:        NextBeliefs                                    ←
    SampleNextBeliefs(trajectories[𝑡], 𝜋)
27:        append NextBeliefs to trajectories
28:    end for
29:    return trajectories
30: end procedure



(34) and (35) can be estimated as follows
                                                              𝑁Δ
                                                           1 ∑︁ 𝑃 (𝑥𝑛Δ |𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎) 𝑠 Δ
                                            ˆ
                                            𝑚(𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎) =                        Δ (𝑥𝑛 ),                                        (37)
                                                          𝑁 Δ 𝑛=1 𝑄 0 (𝑥𝑛Δ )
                                                                  𝑁𝑝
                                                   𝑚(𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎) =
                                                                  ∑︁
                                                   ˆ                    𝑚(𝑥𝑡𝑖 , 𝑎)𝑤˜ 𝑡𝑖 ,
                                                                        ˆ                                                      (38)
                                                                  𝑖=1

for 𝑏¯𝑡 ≜ {(𝑥𝑡𝑖 , 𝑤𝑡𝑖 )} where 𝑤˜ 𝑡𝑖 are the normalized weights. Using the particle-belief trajectories {𝑏¯𝜏𝑖 }𝑖=1 introduced in
                                                                                                                𝑁𝑏

                                                                      ¯
Section 7.1, the TV-distance at time 𝜏 + 1 is estimated by using {𝑏 } as samples from the conditional distribution of
                                                                       𝑖 𝑁 𝑏
                                                                               𝜏 𝑖=1
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                           18



                        Offline (original 𝑝𝑧 )                                                       Online (simplified 𝑞𝑧 only)


                                   Δ }𝑁 ∼ 𝑄Δ                                                                 Given state 𝑥𝑡 , action 𝑎
                          Sample {𝑥𝑛  𝑛=1   0


                                    Δ ) using 𝑝 , 𝑞                                                              Reweight via IS:
                       Compute Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑛          𝑧 𝑧                                                                Δ |𝑥 ,𝑎)
                                                                     precomputed Δ𝑠                           𝑃 (𝑥𝑛        𝑠 Δ
                                                                                                                      Δ ) Δ (𝑥𝑛 )
                                                                                                                      𝑡
                                                                                                                𝑄 0 (𝑥𝑛
                                    Δ , Δ𝑠 (𝑥 Δ ) ) }
                          Store { (𝑥𝑛        𝑛
                                                                                                                         ˆ (𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎)
                                                                                                              Aggregate: 𝑚


                                                                                                              Accumulate: 𝜖ˆ (𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎)




Fig. 6. Offline–online decoupling for distributional discrepancy estimation. In the offline phase, states are sampled from a proposal
distribution 𝑄 0 and the TV distances Δ𝑠 are computed using the original observation model 𝑝𝑧 . During online planning, the
precomputed Δ𝑠 values are reweighted via importance sampling using only the state-transition model, eliminating the need to
evaluate 𝑝𝑧 in real time.


𝑏¯𝜏 given 𝑏¯𝑡 , as described below.
                                                                             1 ∑︁𝑏     𝑁
                                                    Ê[𝑚(𝑏𝜏 , 𝑎)|𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎] =        𝑚(𝑏¯𝜏𝑖 , 𝜋 (𝑏¯𝜏𝑖 )).
                                                                                   ˆ                                                         (39)
                                                                            𝑁𝑏 𝑖=1
The estimate of 𝜖 is then computed directly by
                                                                           −1
                                                                         𝑇∑︁
                                                         𝜖ˆ(𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎) =          Ê[𝑚(𝑏¯𝜏 , 𝜋𝜏 )|𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎].                                    (40)
                                                                         𝜏=𝑡

   Theorem 7.1 establishes performance guarantees for the distributional discrepancy estimator defined in (40), and
demonstrates that it converges exponentially fast to the true distributional discrepancy as the number of sampled
beliefs 𝑁𝑏 increases.

   Theorem 7.1. Let 𝜂 > 0, 𝛿 ∈ (0, 1). If Δ̂ is unbiased, then
                                                                                                            2𝜂 2 𝑁𝑏
                            𝑃 (|𝜖ˆ𝑡 (𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎) − 𝜖𝑡 (𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎)| ≥ 𝜂)
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                           ≤ 2 exp −                                                         (41)
                                                                                             𝐷 2 (𝑇 − 𝑘) 2 (𝑅    max − 𝑅min       )2
for 𝐷 = max𝑖 ∈ {𝑘+1,...,𝑇 −1} 𝐷𝑖 where 𝐷𝑖 = sup𝑥𝑖+1 𝑃 (𝑥𝑖+1 |𝑥𝑖 , 𝑎𝑖 )/𝑄 0 (𝑥𝑖+1 ).

   Proof. The proof is available in Appendix C.5.                                                                                              □

7.3   Online Return Bound Estimation
The bound in Theorem 6.2 requires knowledge of the upper and lower bounds on the return under both the original
and simplified distributions. Formally, we need estimators 𝑑ˆmin and 𝑑ˆmax for 𝑑 min and 𝑑 max in Theorem 6.2. A simple
choice is
                                          𝑑ˆmin = (𝑇 − 𝑘 + 1)𝑅min,                    𝑑ˆmax = (𝑇 − 𝑘 + 1)𝑅max,                               (42)
which, however, ignores the dependence of the return on the agent’s belief 𝑏𝑘 and policy 𝜋. For example, if the belief
indicates that the agent is far from any obstacle and the planning horizon is too short for a collision to occur, taking the
maximal possible return obscures this contextual information and results in a looser bound than necessary.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                          19


  To obtain tighter estimates, we define

                                    𝑑ˆmax
                                      𝜋
                                          (𝑏𝑘 ) =        max          𝑅𝑖 ,        𝑑ˆmin
                                                                                    𝜋
                                                                                        (𝑏𝑘 ) =         min           𝑅𝑖 ,                  (43)
                                                    𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }                                 𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }

where {𝑅𝑖 }𝑖=1 ∼ 𝑃𝑠 (·|𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) are the return samples used to estimate the action–value function. Theorem 7.2 provides
             𝑏 𝑁

performance guarantees for these estimators.

  Theorem 7.2. For the estimators 𝑑ˆmax
                                    𝜋 (𝑏 ) = max 𝑅𝑖 and 𝑑ˆ𝜋 (𝑏 ) = min 𝑅𝑖 , where 𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑁 }, 𝑅 1 , . . . , 𝑅 𝑁𝑏 ∼ 𝑃 ,
                                        𝑘       𝑖         min 𝑘       𝑖                            𝑏                         𝑠
and for 𝜖 as defined in (30), the following bounds hold.

                         𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑ˆ𝑚𝑖𝑛                                              𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑ˆ𝑚𝑎𝑥 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) ≥
                                                                𝑁𝑏                                                            𝑁𝑏
                                      𝜋
                                          (𝑏𝑘 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) ≥             ,                                                                     (44)
                                                               𝑁𝑏 + 1                                                        𝑁𝑏 + 1

                   𝑃 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑ˆ𝑚𝑖𝑛                                                 𝑃 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑ˆ𝑚𝑎𝑥
                                                       𝑁𝑏                                                                  𝑁𝑏
                              𝜋
                                  (𝑏𝑘 ) 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋 ≥               − 𝜖,                          𝜋
                                                                                                 (𝑏𝑘 ) 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋 ≥                      − 𝜖.   (45)
                                                        𝑁𝑏 + 1                                                                𝑁𝑏 + 1
  Proof. The proof is available in Appendix C.6.                                                                                              □

  The bounds for both the simplified and the original returns are computed using return samples generated from
the simplified belief-transition model. The uncertainty in the upper bound on the original return, induced by using
samples drawn from the simplified return distribution, is quantified by 𝜖, which represents the distributional discrepancy
between the original and simplified returns.

7.4    Performance Guarantees
In this section we provide performance guarantees for the bounds exhibited in previous sections, making them reliable
in practice.

7.4.1 Guarantees with Known Return Bounds. Theorem 7.3 establishes performance guarantees for the original action–
value function in terms of the simplified action–value function, under the assumption that the simplification is applied
to the belief–transition model. These bounds hold for a general 𝜌-POMDP, where the cost is belief-dependent.

  Theorem 7.3. Let 𝛿, 𝛿𝑑min , 𝛿𝑑max ∈ [0, 1], and let 𝑏𝑘 denote the initial belief. Consider samples 𝑅 1, . . . , 𝑅 𝑁𝑏 ∼ 𝑃𝑠 (· | 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋)
generated using the simplified belief-transition model. Define
                                                                         −1
                                                                       𝑇∑︁
                                      𝜖 ≜ 𝜖 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) ≜ min(                 E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 , 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜋], 1),                           (46)
                                                                       𝑖=𝑘
                                                  √︁
                                               𝜂 = ln(1/𝛿)/(2𝑁𝑏 ),                           𝜖 ′ = 𝜖 + 𝜂.                                   (47)
      (1) Upper Bound: assume that 𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 , then
          (a) If 𝜖 ′ < 𝛼, then 𝑈𝑠 ≜ (1 − 𝜖 )𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼 − 𝜖 ′ ) + 𝜖 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥
                                          ′                              ′
                                           𝛼       𝑀𝑠                              𝛼
          (b) If 𝜖 ′ ≥ 𝛼 then 𝑈𝑠 ≜ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥
      (2) Lower Bound: assume that 𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 and 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 , then
           (a) If 𝜖 ′ + 𝛼 < 1 then 𝐿𝑠 ≜ (1 + 𝜖 )𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ ) − 𝜖 𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜖 ′ )
                                              ′                              ′
                                               𝛼        𝑀𝑠                               𝛼     𝑀𝑠
          (b) If 𝜖 ′ + 𝛼 ≥ 1 then 𝐿𝑠 ≜ 𝛼1 [−(𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ − 1)𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 + 𝑄ˆ 𝑀
                                                                   𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 ) − 𝜖 ′𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝜖 ′ )]
                                                                    𝑠  𝑘 𝑘            𝑀𝑠 𝑘 𝑘
Then 𝑃 (𝐿𝑠 ≤ 𝑄 𝑀
               𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼)) > (1 − 𝛿)(1 − 𝛿
                   𝑘 𝑘                        𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ) and 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 ) > (1 − 𝛿)(1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ).
                                                              𝜋


  Proof. The proof is available in Appendix C.7.                                                                                              □
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                              20


  Estimation of the belief-transition model remains an open problem in the literature; consequently, the distributional
discrepancy 𝜖 in Theorem 7.3, when defined in terms of the belief-transition model, is currently intractable to estimate.
In the special case where only the observation model is simplified, the one-step distributional discrepancy Δ𝑠 is defined
with respect to the observation model rather than the belief-transition model (see Section 6.2). In this case, Theorem 7.3
holds when Δ𝑠 is defined using the original and simplified observation models, as characterized in Theorem 6.4, thereby
rendering the estimation of 𝜖 tractable.
  To attain standard bounds, one can set trivial bounds to the return 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 = (𝑇 − 𝑘 + 1)𝑅min and 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 = (𝑇 − 𝑘 + 1)𝑅max .
These bounds would produce 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 = 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 0 and guarantees of 1 − 𝛿 for the bounds in Theorem 7.3.

7.4.2 Guarantees with Estimated Return Bounds. In practice, it is preferable to estimate the return bounds 𝑑 min and 𝑑 max
with respect to the current belief and policy in order to obtain tighter bounds (see Section 7.3). Theorem 7.4 establishes
guarantees for the resulting simplified bounds, in which 𝑑 min and 𝑑 max are replaced by their estimators.

  Theorem 7.4. Let 𝑏𝑘 be an initial belief and let 𝑅 1, . . . , 𝑅 𝑁𝑏 ∼ 𝑃𝑠 (·|𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) be a sample that utilizes the simplified
belief-transition model. Denote
                                                                       −1
                                                                     𝑇∑︁
                                     𝜖 ≜ 𝜖 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) ≜ min(                E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 , 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜋], 1)               (48)
                                                                      𝑖=𝑘
                                                  √︁
                                               𝜂 = ln(1/𝛿)/(2𝑁𝑏 ),                     𝜖′ = 𝜖 + 𝜂                            (49)
                                   𝑑ˆmax
                                     𝜋
                                         (𝑏𝑘 ) =       max            𝑖
                                                                     𝑅,         𝑑ˆmin
                                                                                  𝜋
                                                                                      (𝑏𝑘 ) =       min            𝑖
                                                                                                                  𝑅,         (50)
                                                   𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }                              𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }

                                                                              𝜋 (𝑏¯ , 𝑎 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈 |𝑏 , 𝜋) ≥ (1 − 𝛿) 𝑁𝑏 − 𝜖
                                                                                                                            
    (1) Upper Bound: Under the following conditions, it holds that 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀          𝑘 𝑘          𝑠 𝑘                𝑁𝑏 +1
        (a) If 𝜖 ′ < 𝛼, then 𝑈𝑠 ≜ (1 − 𝜖 )𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼 − 𝜖 ′ ) + 𝜖 𝑑ˆ𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 )
                                        ′                              ′
                                           𝛼    𝑀𝑠                                𝛼 𝑚𝑎𝑥
         (b) If 𝜖 ′ ≥ 𝛼 then 𝑈𝑠 ≜ 𝑑ˆ𝑚𝑎𝑥
                                    𝜋 (𝑏 )
                                        𝑘
                                                                                 𝜋 (𝑏¯ , 𝑎 , 𝛼) ≥ 𝐿 |𝑏 , 𝜋) ≥ (1 − 𝛿) 𝑁𝑏 − 𝜖
                                                                                                                            
    (2) Lower Bound: Under the following conditions, it holds that 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀             𝑘 𝑘          𝑠 𝑘                 𝑁𝑏 +1
         (a) If 𝜖 ′ + 𝛼 < 1 then 𝐿𝑠 ≜ (1 + 𝜖𝛼 )𝑄ˆ 𝑀
                                                  𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ ) − 𝜖 ′ 𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝜖 ′ )
                                             ′
                                                   𝑠  𝑘 𝑘                𝛼 𝑀𝑠 𝑘 𝑘
         (b) If 𝜖 ′ + 𝛼 ≥ 1 then 𝐿𝑠 ≜ 1 [−(𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ − 1)𝑑ˆ𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 ) + 𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) − 𝜖 ′𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜖 ′ )]
                                       𝛼                         𝑚𝑖𝑛                𝑀𝑠                       𝑀𝑠

  Proof. The proof is available in Appendix C.8.                                                                                 □

  Recall that the theoretical bounds derived in Section 6 impose constraints on the relationship between the distribu-
tional discrepancy 𝜖 and the CVaR confidence level 𝛼. When these conditions are violated, the resulting bounds on the
action-value function become trivial. Employing estimators for the minimum and maximum return enables the agent to
act according to the guarantees in Theorem 7.4, even when these constraints are not satisfied.
  As an example (illustrated in Figure 7), consider 𝜖 = 𝛼 = 0.1, 𝑁𝑏 = 1000, and 𝛿 = 0.01, with planning horizon
𝑇 = 2. The agent must choose between a dangerous path that passes through an obstacle and a safe path that avoids
it. The agent incurs a cost of 1 for remaining in place and a cost of 100 upon colliding with an obstacle. In this
setting, even under partial observability, the probability of encountering an obstacle along the safe path, as well as
the probability of not encountering an obstacle along the dangerous path, may be small. Consequently, the estimators
satisfy 𝑑ˆ𝜋 (𝑏 0 ) = 𝑑ˆ𝜋 (𝑏 0 ) ≈ 1 × 2 for the safe path and 𝑑ˆ𝜋 (𝑏 0 ) = 𝑑ˆ𝜋 (𝑏 0 ) ≈ 100 × 2 for the dangerous path. This
         max         min                                                    max            min
allows the agent to distinguish between the two paths, in the sense that the CVaR of the dangerous path is strictly
larger than that of the safe path.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                    21



                     safe




        𝑆          obstacle     𝐺
                                             𝑑ˆmin ≈ 𝑑ˆmax ≈ 2                                        𝑑ˆmin ≈ 𝑑ˆmax ≈ 200
                                             Safe                                                                  Dangerous
                  dangerous                                                clearly separable



    𝑐 step = 1        𝑐 collision = 100                                                                                         Cost
                                                    2                                                        200

 (a) An agent at position 𝑆 must          (b) When 𝜖 ′ ≥ 𝛼, the CVaR bounds collapse to [𝑑ˆmin , 𝑑ˆmax ]. The return estimators for the
 choose between a safe path (blue,        safe path (≈ 2) and dangerous path (≈ 200) remain well-separated.
 cost 1 per step) and a dangerous
 path (red, passing through an ob-
 stacle with collision cost 100). The
 goal’s position is 𝐺.

Fig. 7. Illustration of bound-based action selection when 𝜖 ′ ≥ 𝛼. (a) The agent chooses between a safe path (cost ≈ 1 × 2 = 2) and
a dangerous path through an obstacle (cost ≈ 100 × 2 = 200). (b) Although the CVaR bounds collapse to [𝑑ˆmin , 𝑑ˆmax ], the return
estimators remain well-separated, enabling the agent to distinguish between the two paths.


  When the constraint 𝜖 ′ < 𝛼 required for the original bounds is violated—as in this example where 𝜖 = 𝛼 = 0.1 and
hence 𝜖 ′ ≥ 𝜖 ≥ 𝛼—the bounds in Theorem 7.4 reduce to 𝑑ˆmax and 𝑑ˆmin , causing the upper and lower bounds to coincide.
Nevertheless, decision making remains possible: the estimators for the safe and dangerous paths differ substantially
(≈ 2 versus ≈ 200), enabling the agent to distinguish between them.
     By Corollary 6.4, the guarantees stated in Theorem 7.4 and Theorem 7.3 also apply to the specific setting in which the
observation model is simplified, with the distributional discrepancy 𝜖 between the original and simplified observation
models defined as in Corollary 6.4. As shown in Section 7, this setting can be resolved within the framework of online
planning.

8     Limitations
The bounds in Theorem 6.2 depend on the accumulation of one-step distributional discrepancies over the planning
horizon, which may limit their effectiveness for long-horizon problems.
     Importantly, this accumulation does not necessarily grow linearly with the horizon and is highly problem dependent.
For example, in a Light–Dark environment, the agent receives observations only in light regions and relies exclusively
on the state-transition model in dark regions. As a result, no distributional discrepancy is accumulated in dark regions,
since the observation model is not invoked. Consequently, the effective distributional discrepancy can grow sublinearly
with the horizon. This behavior is examined empirically in the experiments section, where we also consider a more
challenging variant of the Light–Dark environment in which distributional discrepancy accumulates even in dark
regions.
   Moreover, even when the distributional discrepancy becomes large relative to 𝛼, the agent can still act. In this
case, the value function bounds collapse to their extrema; specifically, the upper value function bound reduces to 𝑑ˆmax
(Theorem 7.4), which is expected to be low in safe regions and high in dangerous ones. Analogous considerations hold
for the lower bound. Consequently, decision making relies on minimum and maximum return samples conditioned
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                         22


on the path and policy, while the simplified observation model continues to provide computational acceleration, as it
remains necessary for sampling return realizations.
    Finally, the proposed simplification framework yields computational gains only when sampling from the state-
transition model is cheaper than sampling from the observation model. The bounds in Theorem 6.2 require samples
from both the simplified observation model and the state-transition model to compensate for the absence of the original
observation model. Consequently, if the state-transition model is computationally more expensive than the original
observation model, the simplification approach would increase rather than decrease planning time. This limitation is
shared by other observation model simplification frameworks Lev-Yehudi, Barenboim, and Indelman 2024.

9     Experiments
In this section, we evaluate our derived bounds across several standard benchmark environments. We demonstrate the
efficacy of our bounds by examining their performance on selected action sequences, illustrating their capacity to dis-
tinguish between safe and unsafe trajectories while achieving computational acceleration relative to the baseline model.
We subsequently demonstrate the integration of these bounds into open-loop planning frameworks. All simulations
were conducted using the POMDPPlanners package Pariente and Indelman 2026. Detailed simulation configurations
are provided in Appendix E, and hardware specifications in Appendix G.

9.1    Theoretical CVaR Bounds
Specifically, we compare a truncated Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) and its corresponding truncated Normal approxi-
mation for CVaR estimation under bounded support. Such a setting arises, for example, in POMDP planning, where a
computationally expensive model used by the agent during online planning is replaced with a more tractable surrogate
model, thereby improving the agent’s decision-making speed Lev-Yehudi, Barenboim, and Indelman 2024. In these
settings, the agent’s decisions may rely on bounds for the original value function that are derived from the tractable
surrogate model Barenboim and Indelman 2022.
    The GMM consists of five components with means 𝜇 1 = 0.2, 𝜇 2 = −0.2, 𝜇 3 = −0.5, 𝜇 4 = 0.5, 𝜇 5 = 0.0, variances
𝜎12 = 0.5, 𝜎22 = 0.2, 𝜎32 = 0.1, 𝜎42 = 0.1, 𝜎52 = 0.3, and weights 𝑤 1 = 0.3, 𝑤 2 = 0.2, 𝑤 3 = 0.05, 𝑤 4 = 0.05, 𝑤 5 = 0.4. The
Normal approximation matches the GMM’s mean and variance but cannot reproduce its multi-modal structure or
outlier effects. All samples are truncated to the interval [−1, 1], which reshapes the tails and slightly distorts boundary
components. We compute CVaR at the 20% quantile for sample sizes ranging from 100 to 10,000, with 100 independent
repetitions per setting to ensure statistical reliability. The distributional discrepancy (𝜖 in Theorem 5.7) between
the truncated GMM and the truncated Normal distribution is assessed via simulation, by estimating their respective
cumulative distribution functions over a common set of bins and computing the maximum difference across all bins.
This setup enables a direct assessment of the trade-off between computational efficiency and statistical accuracy when
approximating a complex truncated mixture by a single truncated Normal distribution.
    Figure 8c presents the sampling time comparison between the truncated GMM and the truncated Normal distribution,
with an observed average time ratio of approximately 3.7 in favor of the Normal distribution. Figure 8d reports a total
computational speedup of approximately 3.1 when comparing the process of sampling from the truncated GMM and
estimating its CVaR to that of sampling from the truncated Normal and computing both upper and lower bounds as
given in Theorem 5.7. Figure 8a illustrates the convergence behavior of the CVaR bounds as a function of the number
of samples, comparing estimates obtained from the truncated GMM with bounds derived from the truncated Normal
surrogate. It is important to note that these bounds are obtained without requiring full knowledge of the underlying
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                              23




                                       (a)                                               (b)




                                       (c)                                               (d)

Fig. 8. Figure 8a shows the bounds established in Theorem 5.7, demonstrating how a simple truncated Normal distribution can be
employed to bound the CVaR of a truncated GMM. Figure 8b illustrates the sensitivity of the CVaR bounds to the distributional
discrepancy 𝜖, showing how the bound interval widens as 𝜖 increases, while the true CVaR remains contained within the bounds.
When 𝜖 exceeds the risk level 𝛼, the bounds become trivial, spanning the entire support; this is expected, as a large distributional
discrepancy implies that the surrogate random variable 𝑌 provides negligible information about the target random variable 𝑋 . Figure
8c presents a comparison of the sampling times for each distribution, while Figure 8d reports the total computation time required to
sample from the truncated GMM and estimate its CVaR, in contrast to sampling from the truncated Normal surrogate and computing
the associated concentration bounds. Figures 8a, 8c, and 8d were configured with confidence level 𝛼 = 0.2 and probability of error
𝛿 = 0.05. Figure 8b uses 𝛼 = 0.5. Figures 8c and 8d display 95% confidence intervals around the empirical means.


GMM distribution. Instead, they rely solely on the discrepancy between the corresponding CDFs. Figure 8b depicts
the sensitivity of the CVaR bounds to the distributional discrepancy 𝜖. In this experiment, the base distribution 𝐹
is a truncated Normal on [−1, 1] with mean 0 and standard deviation 1. For each value of 𝜖 ∈ [0, 0.5], a perturbed
distribution 𝐺 is constructed such that its CDF satisfies 𝐺 (𝑥) = min(𝐹 (𝑥) + 𝜖, 1), yielding a Kolmogorov–Smirnov
distance of exactly 𝜖 between 𝐹 and 𝐺 by construction. Samples from 𝐺 are obtained via inverse transform sampling.
The resulting bounds grow monotonically with 𝜖 while consistently enclosing the true CVaR of 𝐹 . When 𝜖 exceeds
the risk level 𝛼, the bounds become trivial, spanning the full support; this is expected, since a large distributional
discrepancy implies that 𝑌 provides negligible information about 𝑋 .
   We evaluated the concentration bounds established by Thomas and Learned-Miller 2019 alongside our proposed
bounds from Theorem 5.5 on a set of probability distributions: Beta(2, 2), Beta(0.5, 0.5), Beta(2, 5), Beta(5, 2), Beta(10, 2),
Beta(2, 10), and the Laplace(0, 1) distribution. These distributions were selected to match those used in the original study
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                      24


by Thomas and Learned-Miller 2019, enabling a direct comparison under identical conditions. For each distribution,
our bounds precisely coincide with those reported by Thomas and Learned-Miller 2019, resulting in complete overlap
between the two sets of bounds. The graphs exhibiting these results are available in Appendix B (Figure 16).

9.2   POMDP Environments
We evaluate our approach on three POMDP domains: 2D Light-Dark Navigation, Laser Tag, and Push. Each environment
contains dangerous areas where the likelihood of incurring high penalties is elevated, requiring the agent to balance
risk-aware decision-making with task completion. In the 2D Light-Dark POMDP, an agent must navigate from a start
position to a goal region while avoiding these dangerous areas. The observation noise is position-dependent, with lower
uncertainty near designated beacon locations, requiring the agent to balance information gathering with goal-directed
movement. In Laser Tag POMDP, the agent must locate and tag an opponent in a partially observable environment
using noisy range-bearing measurements from multiple sensors, resulting in an 8-dimensional observation space, while
navigating around dangerous regions. The Push POMDP involves manipulating an object to a target location while
managing partial observability about the object’s position through noisy 2-dimensional observations and avoiding
dangerous areas. For each domain, we construct two environment variants: an original environment with a complex
observation model represented by Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) capturing multi-modal observation distributions,
and a simplified environment where this complex distribution is approximated using a single Gaussian distribution. This
approximation introduces a controlled model mismatch, allowing us to evaluate the robustness of planning algorithms
when the true observation dynamics differ from the assumed model. The GMM-based observation models enable
realistic representation of sensor fusion, occlusions, and multi-hypothesis tracking, while the Gaussian approximation
provides computational tractability at the cost of distributional fidelity. Full environment specifications are provided in
Appendix D.

9.3   Online Distributional Discrepancy Estimation
To compute the distributional discrepancy 𝜖 appearing in Corollary 6.4, we define 𝑄 0 as the uniform distribution over
the axis-aligned square whose lower-left corner is 𝑥 start and upper-right corner is 𝑥 goal . Samples 𝑥𝑛Δ are drawn from the
mixture distribution (𝑝𝑍 + 𝑞𝑍 )/2; that is, with probability 0.5, a sample is drawn from the original GMM observation
model, and with probability 0.5, from the simplified observation model. The estimator Δ̂𝑠 (𝑥𝑛Δ ) is then defined as

                                                     𝑁 𝑧        𝑝𝑧 (𝑧𝑛𝑗 | 𝑥𝑛Δ ) − 𝑞𝑧 (𝑧𝑛𝑗 | 𝑥𝑛Δ )
                                       Δ̂ (𝑥𝑛Δ ) =
                                                     ∑︁
                                            𝑠
                                                           2·                                       ,                   (51)
                                                     𝑗=1        𝑝𝑧 (𝑧𝑛𝑗 | 𝑥𝑛Δ ) + 𝑞𝑧 (𝑧𝑛𝑗 | 𝑥𝑛Δ )

and is evaluated over 𝑁 Δ = 100 presampled states. Here, 𝑁𝑧 = 2000 denotes the number of sampled observations used
                                                                                                          𝑚(𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎) can
in the estimation procedure. Given equation (51), the belief-dependent one-step distributional discrepancy ˆ
be estimated accordingly. Since the state-transition model in (37) assigns exponentially small probability to states that
are far from the current state, we employ a K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) approach with 𝐾 = 10 to select a subset of
the samples {𝑥𝑛Δ } that lie in the vicinity of a given state 𝑥. The estimation is then performed over this localized subset,
rather than the entire collection {𝑥𝑛Δ }.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                   25


9.4   Empirical Static CVaR Bound Evaluation: Open-Loop Policies
To evaluate the bounds we define for each environment two action-sequences - one that dictates a safe path and the
other that dictates a dangerous path. Figure 9 shows that bounds based on the simplified observation models distinguish
between the two action sequences and would eliminate the dangerous path under action elimination. The estimated
distributional discrepancies are 𝜖 = 0.38 and 𝜖 = 0.36 for the dangerous and safe paths in Light-Dark, 𝜖 = 0.52 and
𝜖 = 0.53 in Laser Tag, and 𝜖 = 0.24 and 𝜖 = 0.20 in Push. Despite high distributional discrepancies across paths within
each environment, the bounds successfully discriminate between the two action sequences. Notably, in the Laser Tag
environment, the estimated 𝜖 exceeds 0.5, which is the value of the risk level 𝛼; nevertheless, the bounds remain
sufficiently tight to separate the safe and dangerous action sequences.
  Comparing the bounds computation time using the original observation models using the bounds of Thomas
and Learned-Miller 2019 to our bounds that use the simplified observation models, we gain approximately 20.89×
acceleration in Light-Dark POMDP, 8.87× in Laser Tag POMDP, and 7.62× in Push POMDP. Figure 10 illustrates how
the acceleration remains solid when the number of return samples and horizon changes.
  Figure 11 presents the evolution of the CVaR bounds as a function of the planning horizon for the same safe and
dangerous action sequences depicted in Figure 9, where each action sequence is decomposed into sub-sequences of
increasing horizon length. In the Light-Dark environment, the bounds are separated from the earliest horizon, since the
agent’s start state is close to the dangerous area and the dangerous path immediately traverses the high-cost region.
In Laser Tag and Push, the bounds of both paths are similar at early horizons, before the dangerous path enters the
hazardous region, confirming that the bound separation is driven by the actual risk difference rather than by an artifact
of the bounding mechanism. In Laser Tag, the separation is most pronounced: both paths have comparable bounds up
to horizon 4, after which the dangerous path’s bounds increase sharply as it enters the dangerous area, while the safe
path remains at low values throughout. In Push, the two paths overlap closely up to horizon 4, and the bounds diverge
around horizon 6 when the dangerous path approaches the hazardous region. These patterns are consistent across both
𝛼 = 0.5 and 𝛼 = 0.1, indicating that the bounds remain discriminative under a more risk-averse setting. The bottom row
of Figure 11 further examines the sensitivity of the bounds to the risk level 𝛼 at a fixed horizon. As 𝛼 decreases, the
CVaR focuses on worse-case outcomes, causing both the bound values and the bound intervals to increase; nevertheless,
the bounds maintain a clear separation between the safe and dangerous paths across the full range of 𝛼.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                     26




                         (a)                                              (b)                                      (c)




                          (d)                                       (e)                                      (f)

Fig. 9. Figures 9a, 9b, and 9c illustrate pairs of agent trajectories, consisting of a safe (orange) and a dangerous (blue) path. In Figure
9a, the agent moves from the lower-left to the upper-right goal location; the dangerous trajectory incurs higher cost. Figure 9b depicts
trajectories in the Laser Tag environment, where the dangerous path traverses a high-cost region indicated in red. Figure 9c shows
a similar pair of trajectories, with the dangerous path entering a hazardous region that leads to a terminal state. Across all three
environments, the theoretical bounds on the values of the corresponding action sequences successfully discriminate between the safe
and dangerous trajectories. Bounds are computed with probability of error 𝛿 = 0.05.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                27




                         (a)                                     (b)                                     (c)




                         (d)                                     (e)                                     (f)




                         (g)                                     (h)                                      (i)




                         (j)                                     (k)                                      (l)

Fig. 10. Sensitivity analysis of the computational acceleration with respect to the planning horizon and number of return samples, for
Light-Dark (left), Laser Tag (center), and Push (right), with 𝛼 = 0.5. Rows 1–2: computation time and acceleration ratio as a function
of the planning horizon. Rows 3–4: computation time and acceleration ratio as a function of the number of return samples. Error bars
indicate 95% confidence intervals.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                  28




                         (a)                                      (b)                                      (c)




                         (d)                                      (e)                                      (f)




                         (g)                                      (h)                                      (i)

Fig. 11. Sensitivity of the CVaR bounds for the Light-Dark (left), Laser Tag (center), and Push (right) environments, using the complete
safe (blue) and dangerous (red) action sequences depicted in Figure 9; solid and dashed lines indicate the upper and lower bounds,
respectively. Rows 1–2: bounds as a function of the planning horizon with 𝛼 = 0.5 and 𝛼 = 0.1, respectively. Row 3: bounds as a
function of the risk level 𝛼 at a fixed horizon. As the horizon increases, the accumulated distributional discrepancy grows, causing
the bounds to widen. As 𝛼 decreases (more risk-averse), the bounds increase and the bound intervals widen, yet they remain well
separated between the safe and dangerous paths across the full range of 𝛼. Bounds are computed with probability of error 𝛿 = 0.05.


9.5   Empirical Static CVaR Bound Evaluation: Closed-Loop Policy
The preceding evaluation assessed bounds on fixed open-loop action sequences. We now demonstrate that the framework
extends to closed-loop planners, using the Light-Dark POMDP as a test case. Specifically, we use the neural network
trained by BetaZero Moss et al. 2024a as a deterministic policy: BetaZero learns offline approximations of the optimal
policy and value function for POMDPs and combines them with online Monte Carlo tree search at test time. Here, we
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                               29


extract a deterministic closed-loop policy from the trained network by selecting at each belief state the action with
minimum predicted cost. The BetaZero configuration used in our experiments is detailed in Appendix F.
     We evaluate two objectives. First, we test whether the bounds computed under the simplified observation model
successfully distinguish between policies of differing risk levels. We compare the BetaZero policy against the same safe
and dangerous action sequences from the preceding subsection. As shown in Figures 12 and 13, the bounds clearly
separate the dangerous sequence from both the safe sequence and the BetaZero policy, with non-overlapping bound
intervals. The trajectory plot confirms this ordering: the dangerous sequence traverses the high-cost region, while the
BetaZero policy navigates through the illuminated safe zones. This separation persists across the full range of risk
levels 𝛼 and planning horizons.
     Second, we show that evaluating the bounds under the simplified observation model is substantially faster than
under the original model. Figure 14 shows a consistent ≈5× speedup, stable across planning horizons from 4 to 12 and
return sample counts from 100 to 1000.




                                             (a)                                    (b)

Fig. 12. Evaluation of the BetaZero neural network policy against the safe and dangerous action sequences in the Light-Dark POMDP
(𝛼 = 0.1, 𝐻 = 9), with bounds computed under the simplified observation model. Figure 12a: CVaR bounds for the dangerous sequence
(blue), safe sequence (orange), and BetaZero policy (green). The bound intervals of the policy and dangerous sequence do not overlap,
demonstrating that the bounds correctly identify the policy as less risky. Bounds are computed with probability of error 𝛿 = 0.05.
Figure 12b: agent trajectories; the BetaZero policy (green) and safe sequence (orange) navigate through the illuminated safe zones,
while the dangerous sequence (blue) traverses the high-cost region.



10     Conclusions
In this work we introduced a belief-simplification framework for risk-averse policy evaluation in POMDPs under a static
CVaR objective, with guaranteed bounds on the resulting action-value function estimators, enabling accelerated online
policy evaluation. Our approach establishes bounds on the true action-value function by leveraging an approximate
action-value function computed under a simplified belief-transition model. We further derived specialized bounds for
the case of a simplified observation model and showed how these bounds can be employed to accelerate online planning.
To support these results, we developed the requisite mathematical foundations for bounding the CVaR of a random
variable 𝑋 through an auxiliary random variable 𝑌 , under assumptions relating their respective cumulative and density
functions. These theoretical results are independent of the POMDP-planning setting and provide a general analytical
framework that can facilitate future research on risk-sensitive decision making.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                             30




                                       (a)                                              (b)

Fig. 13. Sensitivity of the CVaR bounds (computed under the simplified observation model) for the BetaZero policy, safe sequence,
and dangerous sequence in the Light-Dark POMDP; solid and dashed lines denote upper and lower bounds, respectively. Figure 13a:
bounds as a function of the risk level 𝛼 at horizon 𝐻 = 9. Figure 13b: bounds as a function of the planning horizon at 𝛼 = 0.1. The
dangerous sequence remains clearly separated from the policy and safe sequence across all conditions. Bounds are computed with
probability of error 𝛿 = 0.05.


   Our empirical evaluation, focused on observation model simplification, demonstrates the practical utility of the
framework in both open-loop and closed-loop settings. In the open-loop case, the bounds correctly distinguish action
sequences of differing risk levels across multiple environments and risk parameters. In the closed-loop case, using
a BetaZero neural-network policy, the bounds successfully rank policies by risk level with non-overlapping bound
intervals, while achieving a consistent ≈5× computational speedup over evaluation under the original model. The
theoretical framework accommodates general belief-transition model simplifications, including state-transition models,
whose empirical investigation we leave for future work.

References
Acerbi, Carlo and Dirk Tasche (2002). “On the coherence of expected shortfall”. In: Journal of banking & finance 26.7,
   pp. 1487–1503.
Ahmadi, Mohamadreza et al. (2020). “Risk-averse planning under uncertainty”. In: 2020 American Control Conference
  (ACC). IEEE, pp. 3305–3312.
Ahmadi, Mohamadreza et al. (2021a). “Constrained risk-averse Markov decision processes”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI
   Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 35. 13, pp. 11718–11725.
Ahmadi, Mohamadreza et al. (2021b). “Risk-averse stochastic shortest path planning”. In: 2021 60th IEEE Conference on
   Decision and Control (CDC). IEEE, pp. 5199–5204.
Ahmadi, Mohamadreza et al. (2023). “Risk-averse decision making under uncertainty”. In: IEEE Transactions on Automatic
   Control 69.1, pp. 55–68.
Artzner, Philippe et al. (1999). “Coherent measures of risk”. In: Mathematical finance 9.3, pp. 203–228.
Assis Santana, Pedro Rodrigues Quemel e, Sylvie Thiébaux, and Brian Williams (Mar. 2016). “RAO*: An Algorithm for
   Chance-Constrained POMDP’s”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 30.1. doi: 10.1609/
   aaai.v30i1.10423. url: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/10423.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                            31




                                      (a)                                               (b)




                                       (c)                                              (d)

Fig. 14. Computational speedup from evaluating CVaR bounds under the simplified observation model relative to the original model
for the BetaZero policy in the Light-Dark POMDP (𝛼 = 0.1). Row 1: computation time and speedup ratio as a function of the planning
horizon. Row 2: computation time and speedup ratio as a function of the number of return samples. The simplified model achieves a
consistent ≈5× speedup across all conditions. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.


Barenboim, Moran and Vadim Indelman (July 2022). “Adaptive Information Belief Space Planning”. In: Proceedings of
   the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-22. Ed. by Lud De Raedt. Main Track.
   International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, pp. 4588–4596. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2022/637.
   url: https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2022/637.
– (2023). “Online POMDP Planning with Anytime Deterministic Guarantees”. In: Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems. Ed. by A. Oh et al. Vol. 36. Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 79886–79902. url: https://proceedings.
   neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/fc6bd0eef19459655d5b097af783661d-Paper-Conference.pdf.
– (2026). “Online POMDP planning with anytime deterministic optimality guarantees”. In: Artificial Intelligence 350,
   p. 104442. issn: 0004-3702. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2025.104442. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
   science/article/pii/S0004370225001614.
Brown, David B (2007). “Large deviations bounds for estimating conditional value-at-risk”. In: Operations Research
   Letters 35.6, pp. 722–730.
Chow, Yinlam et al. (2015). “Risk-sensitive and robust decision-making: a cvar optimization approach”. In: Advances in
   neural information processing systems 28.
Cubuktepe, Murat et al. (2021). “Robust finite-state controllers for uncertain POMDPs”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI
   Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 35. 13, pp. 11792–11800.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                       32


Dabney, Will et al. (2018). “Distributional reinforcement learning with quantile regression”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI
  conference on artificial intelligence. Vol. 32. 1.
Dixit, Anushri, Mohamadreza Ahmadi, and Joel W Burdick (2023). “Risk-averse receding horizon motion planning for
  obstacle avoidance using coherent risk measures”. In: Artificial Intelligence 325, p. 104018.
Dvoretzky, A., J. Kiefer, and J. Wolfowitz (1956). “Asymptotic Minimax Character of the Sample Distribution Function
  and of the Classical Multinomial Estimator”. In: The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 27.3, pp. 642 –669. doi:
  10.1214/aoms/1177728174. url: https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177728174.
Hou, Ping, William Yeoh, and Pradeep Varakantham (2016). “Solving risk-sensitive POMDPs with and without cost
  observations”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 30. 1.
Koenig, Sven and Reid G Simmons (1994). “Risk-sensitive planning with probabilistic decision graphs”. In: Principles of
  Knowledge Representation and Reasoning. Elsevier, pp. 363–373.
Lev-Yehudi, Idan, Moran Barenboim, and Vadim Indelman (Mar. 2024). “Simplifying Complex Observation Models in
  Continuous POMDP Planning with Probabilistic Guarantees and Practice”. In: vol. 38. 18, pp. 20176–20184. doi:
  10.1609/aaai.v38i18.29997. url: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/29997.
Lim, Michael H et al. (2023). “Optimality guarantees for particle belief approximation of POMDPs”. In: Journal of
  Artificial Intelligence Research 77, pp. 1591–1636.
Majumdar, Anirudha and Marco Pavone (2020). “How should a robot assess risk? towards an axiomatic theory of risk in
  robotics”. In: Robotics Research: The 18th International Symposium ISRR. Springer, pp. 75–84.
Marecki, Janusz and Pradeep Varakantham (2010). “Risk-sensitive planning in partially observable environments”. In:
  AAMAS, pp. 1357–1368.
Moss, Robert J. et al. (2024a). “BetaZero: Belief-State Planning for Long-Horizon POMDPs using Learned Approxima-
  tions”. In: Reinforcement Learning Conference (RLC).
Moss, Robert J. et al. (2024b). “ConstrainedZero: Chance-Constrained POMDP Planning Using Learned Probabilistic
  Failure Surrogates and Adaptive Safety Constraints”. In: International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI).
Ono, Masahiro et al. (2015). “Chance-constrained dynamic programming with application to risk-aware robotic space
  exploration”. In: Autonomous Robots 39, pp. 555–571.
Osogami, Takayuki (2015). “Robust partially observable Markov decision process”. In: International Conference on
  Machine Learning. PMLR, pp. 106–115.
Papadimitriou, Christos H. and John N. Tsitsiklis (Aug. 1987a). “The Complexity of Markov Decision Processes”. In:
  Math. Oper. Res. 12.3, 441–450. issn: 0364-765X.
– (1987b). “The Complexity of Markov Decision Processes”. In: Math. Oper. Res. 12, pp. 441–450. url: https://api.
  semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:29322444.
Pariente, Yaacov and Vadim Indelman (2026). POMDPPlanners: Open-Source Package for POMDP Planning. arXiv:
  2602.20810 (cs.AI). url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.20810.
Pflug, Georg Ch (2000). “Some remarks on the value-at-risk and the conditional value-at-risk”. In: Probabilistic constrained
  optimization: Methodology and applications, pp. 272–281.
Rockafellar, R Tyrrell, Stanislav Uryasev, et al. (2000). “Optimization of conditional value-at-risk”. In: Journal of risk 2,
  pp. 21–42.
Silver, David and Joel Veness (2010). “Monte-Carlo planning in large POMDPs”. In: Advances in neural information
  processing systems 23.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                               33


Sunberg, Zachary and Mykel Kochenderfer (2018). “Online algorithms for POMDPs with continuous state, action, and
  observation spaces”. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling. Vol. 28,
  pp. 259–263.
Thomas, Philip and Erik Learned-Miller (June 2019). “Concentration Inequalities for Conditional Value at Risk”. In:
  Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov. Vol. 97. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, pp. 6225–6233. url: https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v97/thomas19a.html.
Xu, Huan and Shie Mannor (2010). “Distributionally robust Markov decision processes”. In: Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems 23.
Zhitnikov, A. and V. Indelman (2022). “Simplified Risk Aware Decision Making with Belief Dependent Rewards in
  Partially Observable Domains”. In: Artificial Intelligence, Special Issue on “Risk-Aware Autonomous Systems: Theory
  and Practice".
Zhitnikov, Andrey, Ori Sztyglic, and Vadim Indelman (2025). “No compromise in solution quality: Speeding up belief-
  dependent continuous partially observable Markov decision processes via adaptive multilevel simplification”. In:
  The International Journal of Robotics Research 44.2, pp. 157–195. doi: 10.1177/02783649241261398. eprint: https:
  //doi.org/10.1177/02783649241261398. url: https://doi.org/10.1177/02783649241261398.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                        34


A    CVaR Bounds Proofs
    Theorem A.1. Let 𝑋 and 𝑌 be random variables and 𝜖 ∈ [0, 1].
     (1) Upper Bound: assume that 𝑃 (𝑋 ≤ 𝑏𝑋 ) = 1, 𝑃 (𝑌 ≤ 𝑏𝑌 ) = 1 and ∀𝑧 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖, then
          (a) If 𝛼 > 𝜖,
                                               𝜖                       𝜖
                                    CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤   max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ) + (1 − ) CVaR𝛼 −𝜖 (𝑌 ).                                  (52)
                                               𝛼                       𝛼
          (b) If 𝛼 ≤ 𝜖, then CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ).
     (2) Lower Bound: If 𝑃 (𝑋 ≥ 𝑎𝑋 ) = 1, 𝑃 (𝑌 ≥ 𝑎𝑌 ) = 1 and ∀𝑧 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖, then
          (a) If 𝛼 + 𝜖 ≤ 1,
                                                          𝜖                 𝜖
                                     CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ (1 +      ) CVaR𝛼+𝜖 (𝑌 ) − CVaR𝜖 (𝑌 )                                   (53)
                                                          𝛼                 𝛼
          (b) If 𝛼 + 𝜖 > 1 and 𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛 = min(𝑎𝑋 , 𝑎𝑌 ),
                                                 1
                                  CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥     E[𝑌 ] − 𝜖 CVaR𝜖 (𝑌 ) + (𝛼 + 𝜖 − 1)𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛                                 (54)
                                                                                          
                                                 𝛼
    Proof. The strategy of the proof is to construct two distributions derived from 𝐹𝑌 , denoted 𝐹𝑌𝐿 and 𝐹𝑌𝑈 , such that 𝐹𝑋
is stochastically bounded between them; that is, 𝐹𝑌𝐿 ≤ 𝐹𝑋 ≤ 𝐹𝑌𝑈 . Consequently, since CVaR is a coherent risk measure, it
follows that
                                                     𝐹𝐿                       𝐹𝑈
                                               CVaR𝛼𝑌 ≤ CVaR𝛼𝐹𝑋 ≤ CVaR𝛼𝑌 ,                                                (55)
          𝐹𝐿                     𝐹𝑈
where CVaR𝛼𝑌 , CVaR𝛼𝐹𝑋 , and CVaR𝛼𝑌 denote the CVaR at level 𝛼 corresponding to the distributions 𝐹𝑌𝐿 , 𝐹𝑋 , and 𝐹𝑌𝑈 ,
respectively.
    Let 𝑎 min = min(𝑎𝑋 , 𝑎𝑌 ) and 𝑏 min = min(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ). Define the interval [𝑏 min, 𝑏𝑋 ) to be ∅ if 𝑏 min = 𝑏𝑋 , and equal to
[𝑏𝑌 , 𝑏𝑋 ) otherwise. Analogously, define [𝑎 min, 𝑎𝑋 ) in the same manner. We then define upper and lower bounds for 𝐹𝑌
as follows (see Figure 15):

                                            0                        𝑦 < max(𝑎𝑋 , 𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 )
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                           min(𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) − 𝜖, 1 − 𝜖)
                                          
                                                                    𝑦 ∈ [max(𝑎𝑋 , 𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 ), 𝑏𝑚𝑖𝑛 )
                                                                                                                          (56)
                                          
                                𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) =
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                           1−𝜖                      𝑦 ∈ [𝑏𝑚𝑖𝑛 , 𝑏𝑋 )
                                          
                                          1                         𝑦 ≥ max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ),
                                          
                                          
                                          

                                                0
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                                                    𝑦 < 𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              𝜖
                                                                    𝑦 ∈ [𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛 , 𝑎𝑌 )
                                                                                                                          (57)
                                              
                                    𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑦) =
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                               min(𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) + 𝜖, 1)   𝑦 ∈ [𝑎𝑌 , min(𝑞𝑌𝜖 , 𝑏𝑋 ))
                                              
                                              1                     𝑦 ≥ min(𝑞𝑌𝜖 , 𝑏𝑋 ).
                                              
                                              
                                              
    As a first step, we verify that 𝐹𝑌𝐿 and 𝐹𝑌𝑈 are valid CDFs and that they satisfy 𝐹𝑌𝐿 ≤ 𝐹𝑋 ≤ 𝐹𝑌𝑈 . To establish that 𝐹 is a
CDF, it suffices to verify the following properties:
     (1) 𝐹 is non-decreasing;
     (2) 𝐹 : R → [0, 1] with lim𝑥→∞ 𝐹 (𝑥) = 1 and lim𝑥→−∞ 𝐹 (𝑥) = 0;
     (3) 𝐹 is right-continuous.
Proof that 𝐹𝑌𝐿 is a CDF:
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                          35




             Fig. 15. Illustration of the upper and lower bounds 𝐹𝑌𝑈 and 𝐹𝑌𝐿 on the cumulative distribution function 𝐹𝑋 .


    (1) On the interval [𝑎𝑌 , min(𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 , 𝑏𝑋 )), the function 𝐹𝑌𝐿 is monotone increasing, since 𝐹𝑌 is monotone increasing
        by virtue of being a CDF. Outside this interval, 𝐹𝑌𝐿 is constant and consequently preserves monotonicity.
    (2) By definition, lim𝑦→∞ 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑦) = 1 and lim𝑦→−∞ 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑦) = 0. We need to show that 𝐹𝑌𝐿 is bounded between 0 and 1.
        By its definition, 𝐹𝑌𝐿 is bounded between 0 and 1.
    (3) Within the interval [𝑎𝑌 , min(𝑞𝑌𝜖 , 𝑏𝑋 )), 𝐹𝑌𝐿 is right-continuous since 𝐹𝑌 is right-continuous as a CDF. Outside
        this interval, 𝐹𝑌𝐿 is constant and hence also right-continuous.
Proof that 𝐹𝑌𝑈 is a CDF:
    (1) On the interval [max(𝑎𝑋 , 𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 ), 𝑏𝑚𝑖𝑛 ), the function 𝐹𝑌𝑈 is monotone increasing, since 𝐹𝑌 is monotonically in-
        creasing by virtue of being a CDF. Outside this interval, 𝐹𝑌𝑈 is constant and consequently preserves monotonicity.
    (2) By definition, lim𝑦→∞ 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) = 1 and lim𝑦→−∞ 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) = 0. By its definition, 𝐹𝑌𝑈 is bounded between 0 and 1.
    (3) Within the interval [max(𝑎𝑋 , 𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 ), 𝑏𝑚𝑖𝑛 ), 𝐹𝑌𝑈 is right-continuous since 𝐹𝑌 is right-continuous as a CDF. Outside
        this interval, 𝐹𝑌𝑈 is constant and hence also right-continuous.
Proof that 𝐹𝑌𝐿 ≤ 𝐹𝑋 ≤ 𝐹𝑌𝑈 : To establish that 𝐹𝑌𝐿 ≤ 𝐹𝑋 ≤ 𝐹𝑌𝑈 , we need to show that for all 𝑧 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑧) ≥ 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≥ 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑧).
Let 𝑧 ∈ R.
     • If 𝑧 < 𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛 then 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑧) = 0 = 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧).
     • If 𝑧 ∈ [𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛 , 𝑎𝑌 ) then 𝐹𝑋 (𝑦) = 𝐹𝑋 (𝑦) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) + 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) ≤ |𝐹𝑋 (𝑦) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦)| + 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) ≤ 𝜖 + 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) = 𝜖 = 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑦).
     • If 𝑧 ∈ [𝑎𝑌 , min(𝑞𝑌𝜖 , 𝑏𝑋 )) we assume that 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) + 𝜖 ≤ 1 because otherwise 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑧) = 1 and the inequality holds.
        𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑧) = 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) + 𝜖 = 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) + 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) + 𝜖 ≥ 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) − |𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧)| + 𝜖 ≥ 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧).
     • If 𝑧 ≥ min(𝑞𝑌𝜖 , 𝑏𝑋 ) then 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑧) = 1 ≥ 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧).
and therefore 𝐹𝑌𝐿 ≤ 𝐹𝑋 . Note that the last proof holds when 𝑏𝑋 = ∞, making 𝐹𝑌𝐿 a valid CDF when the support of 𝑋 is
not bounded from above.
     • If 𝑧 < max(𝑎𝑋 , 𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 ) then 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑧) = 0 ≤ 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧).
     • If 𝑧 ∈ [max(𝑎𝑋 , 𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 ), 𝑏𝑚𝑖𝑛 ) then 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑧) ≤ 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) −𝜖 = 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) + 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) −𝜖 ≤ |𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧)| + 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) −𝜖 ≤
        𝜖 + 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) − 𝜖 = 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧).
     • If 𝑧 ∈ [𝑏𝑚𝑖𝑛 , 𝑏𝑋 ) then 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑧) = 1−𝜖 = 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) −𝜖 = 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) −𝜖 +𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) −𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) −𝜖 +|𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) −𝐹𝑋 (𝑧)| ≤ 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧)
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                             36


and therefore 𝐹𝑋 ≤ 𝐹𝑌𝑈 . Note that the last proof holds when 𝑎𝑋 = −∞, making 𝐹𝑌𝑈 a valid CDF when the support of 𝑋 is
not bounded from below.
  Next, we derive bounds for the CVaR associated with 𝐹𝑌𝑈 and 𝐹𝑌𝐿 .
                               𝐹𝑈
  Upper bound for CVaR𝛼𝑌 : From Acerbi and Tasche 2002, CVaR is equal to an integral of the VaR
                       ∫ 1                                    ∫ 1+𝜖
                𝐹𝑈   1                                      1
           CVaR𝛼𝑌 =          inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏 =         inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 − 𝜖}𝑑𝜏                            (58)
                     𝛼 1−𝛼                                  𝛼 1−𝛼+𝜖
If 𝛼 ≤ 𝜖, then 1 − 𝛼 + 𝜖 ≥ 1, rendering the bound in the preceding equation trivial, as it attains the maximum value of
the support of both 𝑋 and 𝑌 .
                    ∫ 1+𝜖                                   ∫ 1+𝜖
                  1                                       1
                          inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 − 𝜖} ≤         max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 )𝑑𝜏 = max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ).                             (59)
                 𝛼 1−𝛼+𝜖                                  𝛼 1−𝛼+𝜖
That is, CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ).
  If 𝛼 > 𝜖, then 1 − 𝛼 + 𝜖 < 1, and the integral may be decomposed into one term that is trivially bounded by the
maximum of the support and another term that can be computed explicitly
                        ∫ 1+𝜖                                     ∫ 1+𝜖
                𝐹𝑈   1                                         1
          CVaR𝛼𝑌 =            inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 − 𝜖}𝑑𝜏 = [       inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 − 𝜖}𝑑𝜏
                     𝛼 1−𝛼+𝜖                                   𝛼 1
                                                                  |               {z                  }
                                                                                                  ≜𝐴1
                           ∫ 1                                                                                                 (60)
                       +            inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 − 𝜖}𝑑𝜏 ]
                            1−𝛼+𝜖
                           |                  {z                    }
                                              ≜𝐴2

The term 𝐴1 is bounded, in a manner analogous to (59), by 𝜖 max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ), which is essentially the tightest bound
attainable given the definition of 𝐹𝑌𝑈 . The term 𝐴2 can be expressed in terms of the CVaR of 𝑌 , evaluated at a shifted
confidence level. Specifically, the variable 𝜏 − 𝜖 in 𝐴2 lies within the interval [1 − 𝛼, 1 − 𝜖]. Over this range, for
all 𝑦 ∈ [max(𝑎𝑋 , 𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 ), 𝑏 min ], the inequality 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) ≤ 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) − 𝜖 holds. This follows because if 𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 ≥ 𝑎𝑋 , then by
definition 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) = min(𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) − 𝜖, 1 − 𝜖), and if 𝑎𝑋 > 𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 , then 𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) = 0 ≤ 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) − 𝜖 for 𝑦 ∈ [𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 , 𝑎𝑋 ] and again
𝐹𝑌𝑈 (𝑦) = min(𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) − 𝜖, 1 − 𝜖) for 𝑦 ∈ [𝑎𝑋 , 𝑏𝑚𝑖𝑛 ].
         ∫ 1                                           ∫ 1
   𝐴2 ≤        inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) − 𝜖 ≥ 𝜏 − 𝜖}𝑑𝜏 =                     inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏 = (𝛼 − 𝜖) CVaR𝛼 −𝜖 (𝑌 ).   (61)
          1−𝛼+𝜖                                            1− (𝛼 −𝜖 )

Note that the confidence level is valid, as 𝛼, 𝜖 ∈ (0, 1) and 𝛼 > 𝜖 imply 𝛼 − 𝜖 ∈ (0, 1). By combining the previous two
expressions, we obtain a single bound:
                                             𝐹𝑈     max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 )       𝜖
                                      CVaR𝛼𝑌 ≤ 𝜖                  + (1 − ) CVaR𝛼 −𝜖 (𝑌 ).                                      (62)
                                                        𝛼               𝛼
In the case where 𝑎𝑋 = −∞, we have max(𝑎𝑋 , 𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 ) = 𝑞𝑌1−𝜖 , and the definition of 𝐹𝑌𝑈 no longer involves 𝑎𝑋 . Therefore,
the inequality remains valid in the case of 𝑎𝑋 = −∞.
                               𝐹𝐿
  Lower bound for CVaR𝛼𝑌 : From Acerbi and Tasche 2002, CVaR is equal to an integral of the VaR
                      ∫ 1                                    ∫ 1−𝜖
               𝐹𝐿   1                                      1
           CVaR𝛼𝑌 =         inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏 =             inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 + 𝜖}𝑑𝜏 .                       (63)
                    𝛼 1−𝛼                                  𝛼 1− (𝜖+𝛼 )
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                37


It holds that 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑦) ≤ 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) + 𝜖 and therefore
                             ∫ 1−𝜖                                               ∫ 1−𝜖
                    𝐹𝐿    1                                                    1
             CVaR𝛼𝑌 ≥                  inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) + 𝜖 ≥ 𝜏 + 𝜖}𝑑𝜏 =                 inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏
                         𝛼 1− (𝜖+𝛼 )                                           𝛼 1− (𝜖+𝛼 )
                    ∫ 1                                      ∫ 1
                 1                                                                                                                (64)
             = [              inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏 −       inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏]
                𝛼 1− (𝜖+𝛼 )                                   1−𝜖
                 1
             = [(𝛼 + 𝜖) CVaR𝛼+𝜖 (𝑌 ) − 𝜖 CVaR𝜖 (𝑌 )].
                𝛼
In the case where 𝜖 + 𝛼 > 1,
                              ∫ 1−𝜖
                     𝐹𝐿     1
              CVaR𝛼𝑌 =                  inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 + 𝜖}𝑑𝜏
                           𝛼 1− (𝜖+𝛼 )
                               ∫ 1−𝜖                                     ∫ 0
                            1                                                                                                     (65)
                        = [           inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 + 𝜖}𝑑𝜏 +             inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 + 𝜖}𝑑𝜏 ].
                           𝛼 0                                            1− (𝜖+𝛼 )
                               |                 {z                 } |                      {z                   }
                                                ≜𝐴3                                            ≜𝐴4
               ∫ 1−𝜖                                   ∫ 1                                   ∫ 1
        𝐴3 ≥           inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏 =         inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏 −          inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏
                0                                       0                                     1−𝜖                                 (66)
            = E[𝑌 ] − 𝜖 CVaR𝜖 (𝑌 )
In the case of 𝐴4 , after the change of variable, 𝜏 ranges from 1 − 𝛼 to 𝜖, and therefore
                                      ∫ 𝜖
                                 𝐴4 =       inf {𝑦 ∈ R : 𝐹𝑌𝐿 (𝑦) ≥ 𝜏 }𝑑𝜏 ≥ (𝛼 + 𝜖 − 1)𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛                                        (67)
                                         1−𝛼

By combining the last equations to one bound we get
                                                𝐹𝐿     1
                           CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ CVaR𝛼𝑌 ≥         E[𝑌 ] − 𝜖 CVaR𝜖 (𝑌 ) + (𝛼 + 𝜖 − 1)𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛 .                                 (68)
                                                                                               
                                                       𝛼
                                                                                                                                    □

   Theorem A.2. Given the definition of 𝑋, 𝑌, 𝜖 and 𝛼 as in Theorem 5.1, the lower and upper bounds of Theorem 5.1
converge to CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) as 𝜖 → 0.

   Proof. Let 𝑓 and 𝑔 be continuous functions such that 𝑓 (0) and 𝑔(0) are finite. Then lim𝑥→0 𝑓 (𝑥)𝑔(𝑥) = lim𝑥→0 𝑓 (𝑥)                  lim𝑥→0 𝑔(𝑥) .
                                                                                                                                                   

This property will be used throughout the proof.
  Assume that 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 for all 𝑧 ∈ R. Since we consider the limit as 𝜖 → 0, we further assume that 𝛼 > 𝜖
when computing the bound. Noting that CVaR is continuous with respect to the confidence level, it follows that
lim𝜖→0 CVaR𝛼 −𝜖 (𝑌 ) = CVaR𝛼 (𝑌 ).
      𝜖                    𝜖                         𝜖                         𝜖
  lim max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ) + (1 − ) CVaR𝛼 −𝜖 (𝑌 ) = lim (1 − ) CVaR𝛼 −𝜖 (𝑌 ) = lim 1 − lim CVaR𝛼 −𝜖 (𝑌 ) = CVaR𝛼 (𝑌 )
  𝜖→0 𝛼                    𝛼                 𝜖→0     𝛼                  𝜖→0    𝛼 𝜖→0
                                                                                                                                  (69)
   If 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 for all 𝑧 ∈ R, then, since we consider the limit as 𝜖 → 0, we assume in the derivation of the
bound that 𝛼 + 𝜖 ≤ 1.
           𝜖               𝜖                    𝜖                       𝜖
  lim (1 + ) CVaR𝛼+𝜖 (𝑌 ) − CVaR𝜖 (𝑌 ) = lim 1 + lim CVaR𝛼+𝜖 (𝑌 ) − lim lim CVaR𝜖 (𝑌 ) = CVaR𝛼 (𝑌 ).                              (70)
  𝜖→0     𝛼                𝛼             𝜖→0    𝛼 𝜖→0               𝜖→0 𝛼 𝜖→0

                                                                                                                                    □
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                     38


  Theorem A.3. Let 𝑋 be a random variable, 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1], 𝛿 ∈ (0, 0.5), 𝜖 = ln(1/𝛿)/(2𝑛). Let 𝑋 1, . . . , 𝑋𝑛 ∼ 𝐹𝑋 be random
                                                                        √︁                                 𝑖𝑖𝑑

variables that define the ECDF 𝐹ˆ𝑋 .
   (1) Upper Bound: If 𝑃 (𝑋 ≤ 𝑏) = 1, then
                                                          ˆ
        (a) If 𝛼 > 𝜖 then 𝑃 (CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ (1 − 𝛼𝜖 )𝐶𝛼𝐹𝑋−𝜖 + 𝛼𝜖 𝑏) > 1 − 𝛿.
        (b) If 𝛼 ≤ 𝜖 then CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ 𝑏
   (2) Lower Bound: If 𝑃 (𝑋 ≥ 𝑎) = 1, then
                                                              ˆ       ˆ
        (a) If 𝛼 + 𝜖 < 1, then 𝑃 (CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ (1 + 𝛼𝜖 )𝐶𝛼+𝜖
                                                         𝐹𝑋
                                                             − 𝛼𝜖 𝐶𝜖𝐹𝑋 ) > 1 − 𝛿.
                                                                                    ˆ
        (b) If 𝛼 + 𝜖 ≥ 1, then 𝑃 (CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ 𝛼1 [(𝛼 + 𝜖 − 1)𝑎 + 𝐸 𝐹ˆ𝑋 [𝑋 ] − 𝜖𝐶𝜖𝐹𝑋 ]) > 1 − 𝛿.

  Proof. From DKW inequality the following inequalities can be derived Thomas and Learned-Miller 2019
                                     √︂         !                                  √︂         !
                                        ln(1/𝛿)                                       ln(1/𝛿)
             Pr sup 𝐹ˆ (𝑥) − 𝐹 (𝑥) ≤              ≥ 1 − 𝛿, Pr sup 𝐹ˆ (𝑥) − 𝐹 (𝑥) ≥              ≥ 1 − 𝛿.               (71)
                                                                               
                 𝑥 ∈R                     2𝑛                  𝑥 ∈R                      2𝑛
       √︃
Let 𝜖 = ln(1/𝛿 )
           2𝑛 . By using Theorem 5.1 we get the following.
  If 𝛼 > 𝜖 then
                      𝛼 − 𝜖 𝐹ˆ𝑋                      𝛼 − 𝜖 𝐹ˆ𝑋
                                                          𝐶𝛼 −𝜖 + 𝑏 sup ( 𝐹ˆ𝑋 − 𝐹𝑋 ) ≤ 𝜖) 𝑃 (sup ( 𝐹ˆ𝑋 − 𝐹𝑋 ) ≤ 𝜖)
                                  𝜖                               𝜖
   𝑃 (CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤         𝐶𝛼 −𝜖 + 𝑏) = 𝑃 (𝐶𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤
                        𝛼         𝛼                    𝛼         𝛼 𝑧 ∈R                      𝑧 ∈R
                                        |                      {z                       }|            {z         }
                                                                    =1                                >1−𝛿
                                                       𝛼 − 𝜖 𝐹ˆ𝑋
                                                            𝐶𝛼 −𝜖 + 𝑏 sup ( 𝐹ˆ𝑋 − 𝐹𝑋 ) > 𝜖) 𝑃 (sup ( 𝐹ˆ𝑋 − 𝐹𝑋 ) > 𝜖)   (72)
                                                                    𝜖
                                        + 𝑃 (𝐶𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤
                                                         𝛼         𝛼 𝑧 ∈R                      𝑧 ∈R
                                          |                      {z                       }|            {z         }
                                                                    ≥0                                 ≥0

                                        > 1 − 𝛿.
Observe that, conditional on the event
                                                   sup 𝐹ˆ𝑋 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖,
                                                                       
                                                   𝑧 ∈R
the bound in Theorem 5.1 holds deterministically. Consequently, the probability that
                                                              𝛼 − 𝜖 𝐹ˆ𝑋   𝜖
                                                𝐶𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤          𝐶𝛼 −𝜖 + 𝑏
                                                                𝛼         𝛼
holds, given
                                                   sup 𝐹ˆ𝑋 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖,
                                                                       
                                                   𝑧 ∈R
is equal to one. The same observation is necessary through the rest of the proof in a similar manner. If 𝛼 + 𝜖 < 1, then
                      𝜖 𝐹ˆ𝑋  𝜖 ˆ                        𝜖 𝐹ˆ𝑋    𝜖 ˆ
  𝑃 (𝐶𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ (1 +    )𝐶   − 𝐶 𝐹𝑋 ) = 𝑃 (𝐶𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ (1 + )𝐶𝛼+𝜖 − 𝐶𝜖𝐹𝑋 sup (𝐹𝑋 − 𝐹ˆ𝑋 ) ≤ 𝜖) 𝑃 (sup (𝐹𝑋 − 𝐹ˆ𝑋 ) ≤ 𝜖)
                      𝛼 𝛼+𝜖 𝛼 𝜖                         𝛼        𝛼    𝑧 ∈R                    𝑧 ∈R
                                       |                       {z                        }|          {z          }
                                                                         =1                                  >1−𝛿
                                                           𝜖 𝐹ˆ𝑋    𝜖 ˆ
                                        + 𝑃 (𝐶𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ (1 + )𝐶𝛼+𝜖 − 𝐶𝜖𝐹𝑋 sup (𝐹𝑋 − 𝐹ˆ𝑋 ) > 𝜖) 𝑃 (sup (𝐹𝑋 − 𝐹ˆ𝑋 ) > 𝜖)
                                                           𝛼        𝛼    𝑧 ∈R                    𝑧 ∈R
                                          |                       {z                        }|          {z          }
                                                                         ≥0                                   ≥0

                                        > 1−𝛿
                                                                                                                       (73)
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                    39


If 𝛼 + 𝜖 ≥ 1, then
                           1                                 ˆ
              𝑃 (𝐶𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥   [(𝛼 + 𝜖 − 1)𝑎 + 𝐸 𝐹ˆ𝑋 [𝑋 ] − 𝜖𝐶𝜖𝐹𝑋 ])
                           𝛼
                              1                                  ˆ
              = 𝑃 (𝐶𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ [(𝛼 + 𝜖 − 1)𝑎 + 𝐸 𝐹ˆ𝑋 [𝑋 ] − 𝜖𝐶𝜖𝐹𝑋 ] sup (𝐹𝑋 − 𝐹ˆ𝑋 ) ≤ 𝜖) 𝑃 (sup (𝐹𝑋 − 𝐹ˆ𝑋 ) ≤ 𝜖)
                              𝛼                                    𝑧 ∈R                   𝑧 ∈R
                |                                  {z                                }|          {z          }
                                                   =1                                           >1−𝛿                 (74)
                            1                                ˆ
              + 𝑃 (𝐶𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ [(𝛼 + 𝜖 − 1)𝑎 + 𝐸 𝐹ˆ𝑋 [𝑋 ] − 𝜖𝐶𝜖𝐹𝑋 ] sup (𝐹𝑋 − 𝐹ˆ𝑋 ) > 𝜖) 𝑃 (sup (𝐹𝑋 − 𝐹ˆ𝑋 ) > 𝜖)
                            𝛼                                     𝑧 ∈R                    𝑧 ∈R
                |                               {z                                   }|          {z          }
                                                   ≥0                                            ≥0

               > 1−𝛿
                                                                                                                        □

  Theorem A.4. (Tighter CVaR Lower Bound) Let 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1), 𝑋 and 𝑌 be random variables. Define a random variable 𝑌 𝐿
such that 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑦) ≜ min(1, 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) + 𝑔(𝑦)) for 𝑔 : R → [0, ∞). Assume lim𝑥→−∞ 𝑔(𝑥) = 0, 𝑔 is continuous from the right
and monotonic increasing. If ∀𝑥 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑋 (𝑥) ≤ 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) + 𝑔(𝑥), then 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 is a CDF and CVaR𝛼 (𝑌 𝐿 ) ≤ CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ).

  Proof. In order to prove that 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 is a CDF we need to prove that 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 is:
    (1) Monotonic increasing
    (2) 𝐹 : R → [0, 1], lim𝑥→∞ 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑥) = 1, lim𝑥→−∞ 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑥) = 0
    (3) Continuous from the right
  Monotonic increasing: Note that for every 𝑓𝑖 : R → R, 𝑖 = 1, 2 that are monotonic increasing, 𝑓1 (𝑓2 (𝑥))) is also
monotonic increasing in x. Denote 𝑓 (𝑥) := min(𝑥, 1) and 𝑓2 (𝑥) := 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) +𝑔(𝑥). 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) is a CDF and therefore monotonic
increasing, so 𝑓2 (𝑥) is monotonic increasing as a sum of monotonic increasing functions. 𝑓1 is also monotonic increasing,
and 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑥) = 𝑓1 (𝑓2 (𝑥)). Therefore 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑥) is monotonic increasing.


  Limits:
                1 ≥ lim 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑥) = lim min(1, 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) + 𝑔(𝑥)) ≥ lim min(1, 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥)) = lim 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) = 1                   (75)
                       𝑥→∞           𝑥→∞                           𝑥→∞                   𝑥→∞
and therefore lim𝑥→∞ 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑥) = 1.

       0 ≤ lim 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑥) = lim min(1, 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) + 𝑔(𝑥)) ≤ lim 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) + 𝑔(𝑥) = lim 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) + lim 𝑔(𝑥) = 0
            𝑥→−∞             𝑥→−∞                           𝑥→−∞                  𝑥→−∞            𝑥→−∞

and therefore lim𝑥→−∞ 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑥) = 0. By definition ∀𝑥 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑥) ≤ 1, and ∀𝑥 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑥) ≥ 0 because both g and 𝐹𝑌 𝐿
are non negative functions.


  Continuity from the right: 𝐹𝑌 is continuous from the right because it is a CDF, and 𝑔 is continuous from the right
by assumption. Their sum 𝐹𝑌 + 𝑔 is therefore continuous from the right, and since the constant function 1 is continuous,
𝐹𝑌 𝐿 = min(1, 𝐹𝑌 + 𝑔) is continuous from the right as the minimum of two right-continuous functions.
Thus, 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 is a CDF.


  Bound proof: If 𝑌 𝐿 ≤ 𝑋 , then CVaR𝛼 (𝑌 𝐿 ) ≤ CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) because CVaR is a coherent risk measure. Note that if
𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) + 𝑔(𝑥) < 1 then
                                             𝐹𝑋 (𝑥) ≤ 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) + 𝑔(𝑥) = 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑥),
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                      40


and if 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) + 𝑔(𝑥) ≥ 1, 1 = 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑥) ≥ 𝐹𝑋 (𝑥). Therefore 𝑌 𝐿 ≤ 𝑋 .                                                      □

   Theorem A.5. Let 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1), 𝑋 and 𝑌 be random variables. Define ℎ : R → [0, ∞) to be a continuous function,
𝑔(𝑧) := −∞ ℎ(𝑥)𝑑𝑥 and 𝑌 𝐿 to be a random variable such that 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 (𝑦) := min(1, 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) + 𝑔(𝑦)). If lim𝑧→−∞ 𝑔(𝑧) = 0 and
       ∫𝑧

∀𝑥 ∈ R, 𝑓𝑥 (𝑥) ≤ 𝑓𝑦 (𝑥) + ℎ(𝑥), then 𝐹𝑌 𝐿 is a CDF and CVaR𝛼 (𝑌 𝐿 ) ≤ CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ).

  Proof. We will show the g satisfies the properties of Theorem 5.3, and therefore this theorem holds. We need to
prove that
    (1) lim𝑧→−∞ 𝑔(𝑧) = 0
    (2) g is continuous from the right.
    (3) g is monotonic increasing.
    (4) 𝐹𝑋 (𝑦) ≤ 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) + 𝑔(𝑦)
It is given in the theorem’s assumptions that lim𝑧→−∞ 𝑔(𝑧) = 0, so (1) holds. h is non negative and therefore 𝑔 is
monotonic increasing, so (3) holds. 𝑔 is continuous if its derivative exists for all 𝑧 ∈ R. Let 𝑧 ∈ R and 𝑎 < 𝑧.
                             ∫ 𝑧                  ∫ 𝑎            ∫ 𝑧                  ∫ 𝑧
               𝑑          𝑑                   𝑑                                   𝑑
                  𝑔(𝑧) =         ℎ(𝑥)𝑑𝑥 =       [     ℎ(𝑥)𝑑𝑥 +       ℎ(𝑥)𝑑𝑥] =            ℎ(𝑥)𝑑𝑥 = ℎ(𝑧)          (76)
               𝑑𝑧        𝑑𝑧 −∞               𝑑𝑧 −∞                𝑎               𝑑𝑧 𝑎
where the third equality holds because −∞ ℎ(𝑥)𝑑𝑥 = 𝑔(𝑎) is a constant that does not depend on z. The last equality
                                          ∫𝑎

holds from the fundamental theorem of calculus because ℎ is continuous. Finally, (4) holds because
                                 ∫ 𝑦             ∫ 𝑦
                        𝐹𝑋 (𝑦) ≜      𝑓𝑥 (𝑥)𝑑𝑥 ≤      𝑓𝑦 (𝑥) + ℎ(𝑥)𝑑𝑥 ≜ 𝐹𝑌 (𝑦) + 𝑔(𝑦).                                  (77)
                                            −∞              −∞
                                                                                                                          □

  Corollary A.6. Let 𝑋 be a random variable, 𝛼 ∈ (0, 1], 𝛿 ∈ (0, 1), 𝜖 = ln(1/𝛿)/(2𝑛), 𝑎 ∈ R, 𝑏 ∈ R. Let 𝑋 1, . . . , 𝑋𝑛 ∼
                                                                         √︁                                              𝑖𝑖𝑑

𝐹𝑋 be random variables that define the ECDF 𝐹ˆ𝑋 . Denote by 𝑈 (𝑛) and 𝐿(𝑛) the upper and lower bounds respectively from
Theorem 5.5, where 𝑛 is the number of samples, then
    (1) If 𝑃 (𝑋 ≤ 𝑏) = 1, then lim𝑛→∞ 𝑈 (𝑛) = CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ).
                                                   𝑎.𝑠.

    (2) If 𝑃 (𝑋 ≥ 𝑎) = 1, then lim𝑛→∞ 𝐿(𝑛) = CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ).
                                                   𝑎.𝑠.


where a.s. denotes almost sure convergence.

  Proof.
                                                𝜖 𝐹ˆ𝑋       𝜖 𝑎.𝑠         ˆ           ˆ
                         lim 𝑈 (𝑛) = lim (1 −            + 𝑏 = lim 𝐶𝛼𝐹𝑋−𝜖 = lim 𝐶𝛼𝐹𝑋 = 𝐶𝛼𝐹𝑋                           (78)
                                      𝑎.𝑠
                                                  )𝐶
                         𝑛→∞                𝑛→∞ 𝛼 𝛼 −𝜖 𝛼           𝑛→∞        𝑛→∞
where the first and second equalities follow from the fact that 𝜖 → 0 as 𝑛 → ∞; the third equality holds by the continuity
of CVaR with respect to 𝛼; and the fourth equality holds by the almost sure convergence of the empirical CVaR of i.i.d.
samples to the true CVaR. For the same reason,
                                                  𝜖 𝐹ˆ𝑋  𝜖 ˆ 𝑎.𝑠      𝐹ˆ𝑋 𝑎.𝑠     ˆ 𝑎.𝑠
                    lim 𝐿(𝑛) = lim (1 +                 − 𝐶 𝐹𝑋 = lim 𝐶𝛼+𝜖 = lim 𝐶𝛼𝐹𝑋 = lim 𝐶𝛼𝐹𝑋 .                       (79)
                               𝑎.𝑠
                                                   )𝐶
                   𝑛→∞               𝑛→∞          𝛼 𝛼+𝜖 𝛼 𝜖      𝑛→∞          𝑛→∞       𝑛→∞

                                                                                                                           □

   Theorem A.7. Let 𝑋 and 𝑌 be random variables, 𝜖 ∈ [0, 1], and 𝜂 = ln(1/𝛿)/(2𝑛), 𝜖 ′ = min(𝜖 +𝜂, 1). Let 𝑌1, . . . , 𝑌𝑛 be
                                                                       √︁

independent and identically distributed samples from 𝐹𝑌 , and denote by 𝐹ˆ𝑌 the associated empirical cumulative distribution
function.
    (1) Upper Bound: If ∀𝑧 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 and 𝑃 (𝑋 ≤ 𝑏𝑋 ) = 1, 𝑃 (𝑌 ≤ 𝑏𝑌 ) = 1, then
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                        41


           (a) If 𝛼 > 𝜖 ′ then
                                          𝜖′                   𝜖′      ˆ
                                                                              
                             𝑃 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ) + (1 − ) CVaR𝛼𝐹𝑌−𝜖 ′ > 1 − 𝛿.                                   (80)
                                           𝛼                    𝛼
           (b) If 𝛼 ≤ 𝜖 ′ , then CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 )
    (2) Lower Bound: If ∀𝑧 ∈ R, 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 and 𝑃 (𝑋 ≥ 𝑎𝑋 ) = 1, 𝑃 (𝑌 ≥ 𝑎𝑌 ) = 1, then
           (a) If 𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ ≤ 1, then
                                                      𝜖′        𝐹ˆ𝑌      𝜖′      ˆ
                                                                                     
                                 𝑃 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥ (1 + ) CVaR𝛼+𝜖        ′ −    CVaR𝜖𝐹𝑌′ > 1 − 𝛿.                            (81)
                                                        𝛼                 𝛼
           (b) If 𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ > 1, then
                                         1                         ˆ                    
                           𝑃 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≥     E𝐹ˆ𝑌 [𝑌 ] − 𝜖 ′ CVaR𝜖𝐹𝑌′ +(𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ − 1)𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑛 > 1 − 𝛿.                        (82)
                                          𝛼
   Proof. We begin by establishing that 𝜖 ′ bounds the distributional discrepancy between 𝐹ˆ𝑌 and 𝐹𝑋 , under the
assumption that sup𝑥 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑥) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) ≤ 𝜂. Let 𝑥 ∈ R,
                                     

                                        𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑥) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑥) = 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑥) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) + 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑥)
                                                                                                                     (83)
                                    ≤ | 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑥) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑥)| + |𝐹𝑌 (𝑥) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑥)| ≤ 𝜂 + 𝜖 = 𝜖 ′ .

Assume that 𝛼 > 𝜖 ′ . Note that, conditional on the event sup𝑧 ∈R 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 ′ , the upper bound in Theorem 5.1
                                                                                     

holds deterministically. Consequently, the probability that
                                                        𝜖′                     𝜖′      ˆ
                                        CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤       max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ) + (1 − ) CVaR𝛼𝐹𝑌−𝜖 ′                             (84)
                                                        𝛼                      𝛼
holds is equal to one. From the law of total probability,
                   𝜖′                      𝜖′        ˆ
                                                            
  𝑃 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ) + (1 − ) CVaR𝛼𝐹𝑌−𝜖 ′
                    𝛼                       𝛼
                        𝜖′                     𝜖′         ˆ
   = 𝑃 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ) + (1 − ) CVaR𝛼𝐹𝑌−𝜖 ′ sup 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 ′ 𝑃 (sup 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 ′ )
                                                                                                      
                        𝛼                      𝛼              𝑧 ∈R                   𝑧 ∈R
                        𝜖′                     𝜖′       𝐹ˆ𝑌
   + 𝑃 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤ max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ) + (1 − ) CVaR𝛼 −𝜖 ′ sup 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) > 𝜖 𝑃 (sup 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) > 𝜖 ′ )
                                                                                 
                                                                               ′                        
                        𝛼                      𝛼              𝑧 ∈R                   𝑧 ∈R

   = 𝑃 (sup 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 ′ )
                            
           𝑧 ∈R
                       𝜖′                     𝜖′      ˆ
                          max(𝑏𝑋 , 𝑏𝑌 ) + (1 − ) CVaR𝛼𝐹𝑌−𝜖 ′ sup 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) > 𝜖 ′ 𝑃 (sup 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) > 𝜖 ′ )
                                                                                      
   + 𝑃 CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) ≤
                                                                                                              
                       𝛼                      𝛼              𝑧 ∈R                          𝑧 ∈R

   ≥ 𝑃 (sup 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 ′ )
                            
           𝑧 ∈R
                                                                                                                          (85)
From DKW Dvoretzky, Kiefer, and Wolfowitz 1956 inequality the following inequalities can be derived Thomas and
Learned-Miller 2019
                                          √︂           !                                        √︂           !
                                               ln(1/𝛿)                                               ln(1/𝛿)
              Pr sup 𝐹ˆ (𝑥) − 𝐹 (𝑥) ≤                    ≥ 1 − 𝛿,     Pr sup 𝐹ˆ (𝑥) − 𝐹 (𝑥) ≥                  ≥ 1 − 𝛿.   (86)
                                                                                           
                  𝑥 ∈R                           2𝑛                       𝑥 ∈R                         2𝑛
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                                                     42



                        𝑃 (sup 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 ′ ) ≥ 𝑃 (sup 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) + sup 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑋 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜖 ′ )
                                                                                                     
                              𝑧 ∈R                                          𝑧 ∈R                               𝑧 ∈R

                                                                       ≥ 𝑃 (sup 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) + 𝜖 ≤ 𝜖 + 𝜂)
                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                       (87)
                                                                            𝑧 ∈R

                                                                       = 𝑃 (sup 𝐹ˆ𝑌 (𝑧) − 𝐹𝑌 (𝑧) ≤ 𝜂) > 1 − 𝛿.
                                                                                                         
                                                                            𝑧 ∈R
The first inequality follows from the triangle inequality; the second holds since 𝜖 bounds the distributional discrepancy
between 𝑋 and 𝑌 ; and the third follows from (86).
  As with the preceding equations, all bounds in Theorem 5.1 hold deterministically for a given distributional discrep-
ancy, where the discrepancy between 𝐹ˆ𝑌 and 𝐹𝑋 is 𝜖 ′ . Consequently, the remaining probabilistic guarantees hold with
probability at least 1 − 𝛿.                                                                                                                                              □

B    Comparison with the Concentration Bounds of Thomas et al. Thomas and Learned-Miller 2019
See Figure 16.

C    Static CVaR Simplification Proofs
    Theorem C.1.
                                                                                              −1
                                                                                            𝑇∑︁
                               sup |𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜋) −𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜋)| ≤ E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ],                                              (88)
                               𝑙 ∈R                                                                     𝑡 =𝑘

where Δ𝑠 is the TV distance that is defined by
                                               ∫
                          Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 −1, 𝑎𝑡 −1 ) ≜                           |𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 |𝑏𝑡 −1, 𝑎𝑡 −1 ) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 |𝑏𝑡 −1, 𝑎𝑡 −1 )|𝑑𝑏𝑡 .                                         (89)
                                                                 𝑏𝑡 ∈𝐵

    Proof. By expanding the belief path from time 𝑘 + 1 to time 𝑇 we get
                   𝑇
                  ∑︁                           ∫                             𝑇
                                                                             Ö
               𝑃 ( 𝑐 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) =        𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘:𝑇 , 𝜋)   𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 )𝑑𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇
                            𝑡 =𝑘                                 𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇 ∈𝐵𝑇 −𝑘
                                                                                                                                                                       (90)
                                                                                                               𝑖=𝑘+1
                                                                ∫                             𝑇
                                                                                              Ö
                                                           =                       1𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤𝑙           𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 )𝑑𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇 ,
                                                                 𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇 ∈𝐵𝑇 −𝑘                𝑖=𝑘+1

where the second equality holds because 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 is constant given 𝜋 and 𝑏𝑘:𝑇 . Hence, the subtraction between the simplified
and original return CDFs can be exhibited using the difference between the multiplication of the belief transition
models.
                                                           ∫                                𝑇
                                                                                            Ö                                 𝑇
                                                                                                                              Ö
 𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) =                                1𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤𝑙 [           𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 ) −           𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 )]𝑑𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇
                                                               𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇 ∈𝐵𝑇 −𝑘                𝑖=𝑘+1                             𝑖=𝑘+1
                                                                                                                                                                       (91)
By applying the triangle inequality we get the following bound
                                                   ∫              𝑇
                                                                  Ö                         𝑇
                                                                                            Ö
  |𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋)| ≤     1𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤𝑙 |   𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 ) −   𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑑𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇
                                                                 𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇 ∈𝐵𝑇 −𝑘                𝑖=𝑘+1                             𝑖=𝑘+1
        ∫                    𝑇
                             Ö                                 𝑇
                                                               Ö
    ≤                   |            𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 ) −           𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑑𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇 = 𝑔(𝑇 ),
        𝑏𝑘+1:𝑇 ∈𝐵𝑇 −𝑘       𝑖=𝑘+1                              𝑖=𝑘+1
                                                                                                                                                                       (92)
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                 43




Fig. 16. Comparison of concentration inequalities for CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) established by Theorem 5.5 (this work) and by Thomas and Learned-
Miller 2019, evaluated on Beta(2, 2), Beta(0.5, 0.5), Beta(2, 5), Beta(5, 2), Beta(10, 2), Beta(2, 10), and Laplace(0, 1) distributions.
The two sets of bounds coincide for all tested distributions.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                                                              44


where                                     ∫                        𝑡
                                                                   Ö                                 𝑡
                                                                                                     Ö
                              𝑔(𝑡) ≜                           |        𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 ) −             𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑑𝑏𝑘+1:𝑡 .                                 (93)
                                          𝑏𝑘+1:𝑡 ∈𝐵𝑡 −𝑘+1 𝑖=𝑘+1                                     𝑖=𝑘+1
We will prove that
                                                         𝑔(𝑡 + 1) ≤ 𝑔(𝑡) + E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ] = 𝜖𝑡                                                                  (94)
for 𝑡 ∈ {𝑘 + 1, . . . ,𝑇 }, where 𝜖𝑘 = 0, and therefore

                                                         |𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑡 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑡 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋)| ≤ 𝜖𝑡 .                                                               (95)

For the case where 𝑡 = 𝑘, 𝑏𝑡 is constant, and therefore the 𝑐 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) does not depend on the belief transition model.
Hence, 𝑃𝑠 (𝑐 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) = 𝑃 (𝑐 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ). Therefore we get

                                              𝑃 (𝑐 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑐 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 )| = 0 = 𝜖𝑘 .                                                   (96)

The rest of the proof will use induction over 𝑡 ∈ {𝑘 + 1, . . . ,𝑇 }.
   Base case, 𝑡 = 𝑘 + 1:
                                    ∫                 𝑘+1
                                                      Ö                               𝑘+1
                                                                                      Ö
                  𝑔(𝑘 + 1) =                      |         𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 ) −           𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑑𝑏𝑘+1:𝑘+1
                                      𝑏𝑘+1 ∈𝐵 𝑖=𝑘+1                                   𝑖=𝑘+1
                                                                                                                                                                             (97)
                       ∫
                   =                |𝑃 (𝑏𝑘+1 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋, 𝑎𝑘 ) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑘+1 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋, 𝑎𝑘 )|𝑑𝑏𝑘+1 = Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) = E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ]
                         𝑏𝑘+1 ∈𝐵

                   = 𝜖𝑘+1

   Induction step: Assume that the claim is true for 𝑡 ∈ {𝑘 + 1, . . . ,𝑇 − 1} and prove for 𝑡 + 1.
   Our proof’s strategy is to express 𝑔(𝑡 + 1) recursively, using 𝑔(𝑡), and separate the bound at time 𝑡 + 1 into 2
components - one at time 𝑡 and one at time 𝑡 + 1. We then bound the term at time 𝑡 + 1, and use the induction step to
bound the recursive part of 𝑔 at time 𝑡.
   For all 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ∈ R,
  +1
 𝑡Ö             +1
               𝑡Ö              +1
                              𝑡Ö                      𝑡
                                                      Ö                    𝑡
                                                                           Ö               +1
                                                                                          𝑡Ö                     𝑡
                                                                                                                 Ö              𝑡
                                                                                                                                Ö                                  𝑡
                                                                                                                                                                   Ö
        𝑥𝑖 −           𝑦𝑖 =           𝑥𝑖 − 𝑥𝑡 +1              𝑦𝑖 + 𝑥𝑡 +1           𝑦𝑖 −           𝑦𝑖 = 𝑥𝑡 +1 (           𝑥𝑖 −           𝑦𝑖 ) + (𝑥𝑡 +1 − 𝑦𝑡 +1 )           𝑦𝑖 .
𝑖=𝑘+1          𝑖=𝑘+1          𝑖=𝑘+1                   𝑖=𝑘+1                𝑖=𝑘+1          𝑖=𝑘+1                  𝑖=𝑘+1          𝑖=𝑘+1                             𝑖=𝑘+1
                                                                                                                                                                             (98)
By denoting 𝑥𝑖 = 𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝑎𝑖 −1 ) and 𝑦𝑖 = 𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝑎𝑖 −1 ) we get
 𝑡 +1
 Ö                                 𝑡 +1
                                   Ö
        𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 ) −           𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 )
𝑖=𝑘+1                             𝑖=𝑘+1
                                                        𝑡
                                                        Ö                                                        𝑡
                                                                                                                 Ö                                𝑡
                                                                                                                                                  Ö
= [𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )]                𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝑎𝑖 −1 ) + 𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) [           𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 ) −            𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 )].
                                                      𝑖=𝑘+1                                                    𝑖=𝑘+1                              𝑖=𝑘+1
                                                                                                                                                                             (99)
By combining the equation above with the triangle inequality, we get

                                                                           𝑔(𝑡 + 1) ≤ 𝐴1 + 𝐴2                                                                              (100)

for                                           ∫                                                          𝑡
                                                                                                         Ö
                           𝐴1 ≜                         |𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|             𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝑎𝑖 −1 )𝑏𝑘+1:𝑡 ,                            (101)
                                                                                                        𝑖=𝑘+1
                                   𝑏𝑘+1:𝑡 +1   ∈𝐵𝑡 −𝑘
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                                                       45

                                    ∫                                  𝑡
                                                                       Ö                                  𝑡
                                                                                                          Ö
                    𝐴2 ≜                        𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|           𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 ) −            𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑑𝑏𝑘+1:𝑡                      (102)
                                                                       𝑖=𝑘+1                              𝑖=𝑘+1
                          𝑏𝑘+1:𝑡 +1   ∈𝐵𝑡 −𝑘
𝐴1 is the expectation over the TV-distance of the belief at time t.

                                                               𝐴1 = E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ].                                                                      (103)

As we see below, 𝐴2 does not depend on the belief integration at time 𝑡 + 1, and therefore equals to 𝑔(𝑡). From the
induction assumption, we get that 𝑔(𝑡) ≤ 𝜖𝑡 .
                     ∫                           𝑡
                                                 Ö                         𝑡
                                                                           Ö
             𝐴2 =           𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|   𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 ) −   𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑑𝑏𝑘:𝑡 +1
                                                              𝑖=𝑘+1                               𝑖=𝑘+1
                       𝑏𝑘+1:𝑡 ∈𝐵𝑡 −𝑘
                         ∫              𝑡                                   𝑡                                 ∫
                                                                                                                                                                      (104)
                                        Ö                                   Ö
                =                   |           𝑃 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 ) −             𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 |𝑏𝑖 −1, 𝜋, 𝑎𝑖 )|           𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )𝑑𝑏𝑡 +1 𝑑𝑏𝑘+1:𝑡
                                        𝑖=𝑘+1                               𝑖=𝑘+1                             𝑏𝑡 +1
                    𝑏𝑘+1:𝑡 ∈𝐵𝑡 −𝑘                                                                             |                {z             }
                                                                                                                               =1

                = 𝑔(𝑡) ≤ 𝜖𝑡
By combining the computations of 𝐴1 and 𝐴2 ,

                                                𝑔(𝑡 + 1) ≤ 𝐴1 + 𝐴2 = 𝑔(𝑡) + E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ].                                                              (105)

The last equation completes the induction proof. Utilizing the recursive relation of 𝜖𝑡 , we get the bound we want to
prove.
                                                                                                                                      −1
                                                                                                                                    𝑇∑︁
 |𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋)| ≤ 𝑔(𝑇 ) ≤ 𝑔(𝑇 − 1) + E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑇 −1, 𝑎𝑇 −1 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ] ≤                                    E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ].
                                                                                                                                    𝑡 =𝑘
                                                                                                                                                                      (106)
                                                                                                                                                                          □

   Theorem C.2. In the case where the simplified and original observation models are denoted by 𝑞𝑧 and 𝑝𝑧 respectively, it
holds that
                                                                                     −1
                                                                                   𝑇∑︁
                                sup |𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) −𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋)| ≤ E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ],                                                        (107)
                                𝑙 ∈R                                                               𝑡 =𝑘
where Δ𝑠 is the TV distance that is defined by
                                                                        ∫
                                                        Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑡 ) ≜               |𝑝 (𝑧𝑡 |𝑥𝑡 ) − 𝑞(𝑧𝑡 |𝑥𝑡 )|𝑑𝑧𝑡 .                                                      (108)
                                                                         𝑧𝑡 ∈𝑍

   Proof. We show that for each 𝑡 ∈ {𝑘, . . . ,𝑇 − 1},

                                                     E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ] ≤ E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ],                                                         (109)

and therefore
                                                                  −1
                                                                𝑇∑︁                              −1
                                                                                               𝑇∑︁
             sup |𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) −𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋)| ≤ E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ] ≤      E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ].                                        (110)
             𝑙 ∈R                                                               𝑡 =𝑘                                    𝑡 =𝑘
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                                                   46


     We start by expressing the belief transition model using the observation and state-transition models. Here we assume
that 𝑏𝑡 is known. That is, 𝑏𝑡 = {(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑤𝑖 )}𝑛𝑖=1 , where 𝑥𝑖 and 𝑤𝑖 are constants.
                                  ∫
            𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) =                            𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑧𝑡 +1, 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑥𝑡 +1 )𝑃 (𝑧𝑡 +1, 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑥𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )𝑑𝑧𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡
                                   𝑥𝑡 ∈𝑋 ,𝑥𝑡 +1 ∈𝑋 ,𝑧𝑡 +1 ∈𝑍
               ∫                                                                                                                                                    (111)
             =                           𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑧𝑡 +1, 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑥𝑡 +1 )𝑝 (𝑧𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 +1 ) × 𝑃 (𝑥𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )𝑏 (𝑥𝑡 )𝑑𝑧𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡 .
                        𝑥𝑡 ∈𝑋 ,𝑥𝑡 +1 ∈𝑋 ,𝑧𝑡 +1 ∈𝑍

Similarly,
                            ∫
 𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) =                                   𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑧𝑡 +1, 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑥𝑡 +1 )𝑞(𝑧𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 +1 )𝑃 (𝑥𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )𝑏 (𝑥𝑡 )𝑑𝑧𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡 .       (112)
                              𝑥𝑡 ∈𝑋 ,𝑥𝑡 +1 ∈𝑋 ,𝑧𝑡 +1 ∈𝑍

Note that 𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑧𝑡 +1, 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑥𝑡 +1 ) = 𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑧𝑡 +1, 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑥𝑡 +1 ), as both terms do not depend on the observation
model. By subtracting the simplified and original belief transition models, we can separate the simplified and original
observation models.
     |𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|
          ∫
      =|                              𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑧𝑡 +1, 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑥𝑡 +1 )𝑃 (𝑥𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )𝑏 (𝑥𝑡 )(𝑝 (𝑧𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 +1 ) − 𝑞(𝑧𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 +1 ))𝑑𝑧𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡 |
            𝑥𝑡 ∈𝑋 ,𝑥𝑡 +1 ∈𝑋 ,𝑧𝑡 +1 ∈𝑍
         ∫
      ≤                              𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑧𝑡 +1, 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑥𝑡 +1 )𝑃 (𝑥𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )𝑏 (𝑥𝑡 )|𝑝 (𝑧𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 +1 ) − 𝑞(𝑧𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑑𝑧𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡 .
          𝑥𝑡 ∈𝑋 ,𝑥𝑡 +1 ∈𝑋 ,𝑧𝑡 +1 ∈𝑍
                                                                                                                                                                    (113)
where the inequality holds from the triangle inequality. It holds that
                ∫
Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) =         |𝑃 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|𝑑𝑏𝑡 +1
                 𝑏 ∈𝐵
   ∫          ∫ 𝑡 +1
≤                                     𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑧𝑡 +1, 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑥𝑡 +1 )𝑃 (𝑥𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )𝑏 (𝑥𝑡 )|𝑝 (𝑧𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 +1 ) − 𝑞(𝑧𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑑𝑧𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡 𝑑𝑏𝑡 +1
     𝑏 ∈𝐵 𝑥𝑡 ∈𝑋 ,𝑥𝑡 +1 ∈𝑋 ,𝑧𝑡 +1 ∈𝑍
   ∫ 𝑡 +1                                    ∫                                                    ∫
=                 𝑃 (𝑥𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )𝑏 (𝑥𝑡 )            |𝑝 (𝑧𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 +1 ) − 𝑞(𝑧𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 +1 )|              𝑃𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 +1 |𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑧𝑡 +1, 𝑥𝑡 , 𝑥𝑡 +1 )𝑑𝑏𝑡 +1 𝑑𝑧𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡
      𝑥𝑡 ∈𝑋 ,𝑥𝑡 +1 ∈𝑋                                 𝑧𝑡 +1 ∈𝑍                                            𝑏𝑡 +1 ∈𝐵
                                                                                                         |                       {z                             }
                                                                                                                                  =1
     ∫           ∫
 =                                  𝑃 (𝑥𝑡 +1 |𝑥𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )𝑏 (𝑥𝑡 )Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑡 +1 )𝑑𝑥𝑡 +1𝑑𝑥𝑡
      𝑏𝑡 +1 ∈𝐵   𝑥𝑡 ∈𝑋 ,𝑥𝑡 +1 ∈𝑋

 = E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ]
                                                                                                                                                                    (114)
where the first inequality holds from (113). From the last equation and expectation monotonicity, we get that E𝑠 [Δ(𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )] ≤
E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ], and therefore the claim holds for each 𝑡. Summing over 𝑡 and applying the tower property yields
the result.

     E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ] = E𝑠 [E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )|𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ]|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ] ≤ E𝑠 [E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑏𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ]|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ] = E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ].
                                                                                                                                                                    (115)
                                                                                                                                                                       □

     Theorem C.3. Let 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ∈ [0, 1], 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ∈ [0, 1] and denote
                                                                                   −1
                                                                                 𝑇∑︁
                                                    𝜖 ≜ 𝜖 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) ≜ min(             E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 , 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜋], 1),                                         (116)
                                                                                  𝑖=𝑘
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                     47


    (1) Upper Bound: assume that 𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 , then
          (a) If 𝜖 < 𝛼, then 𝑈𝑠 ≜ (1 − 𝛼𝜖 )𝑄 𝑀
                                             𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼 − 𝜖) + 𝜖 𝑑
                                              𝑠  𝑘 𝑘             𝛼 𝑚𝑎𝑥
          (b) If 𝜖 ≥ 𝛼 then 𝑈𝑠 ≜ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥
    (2) Lower Bound: assume that 𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 and 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 , then
          (a) If 𝜖 + 𝛼 < 1 then 𝐿𝑠 ≜ (1 + 𝛼𝜖 )𝑄 𝑀
                                                𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼 + 𝜖) − 𝜖 𝑄 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝜖)
                                                 𝑠  𝑘 𝑘             𝛼 𝑀𝑠 𝑘 𝑘
          (b) If 𝜖 + 𝛼 ≥ 1 then 𝐿𝑠 ≜ 𝛼1 [−(𝛼 + 𝜖 − 1)𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 + 𝑄 𝑀
                                                              𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 ) − 𝜖𝑄 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝜖)]
                                                               𝑠  𝑘 𝑘         𝑀𝑠 𝑘 𝑘

                                      𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 and 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 .
               𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼)) > 1 − 𝛿
Then 𝑃 (𝐿𝑠 ≤ 𝑄 𝑀                                    𝜋
                   𝑘 𝑘

   Proof. From the law of total probability,
                              𝜋                             𝜋
                         𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 ) = 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 |𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )
                                                             𝜋
                                                      + 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 |𝑅𝑘:𝑇 > 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 > 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )
                                                             𝜋
                                                                                                                                      (117)
                                                      ≥ 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 |𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )
                                                             𝜋
                                                      > 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 |𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )(1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ).
Similarly,
                                𝜋
                           𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀                             𝜋
                                  (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≥ 𝐿𝑠 ) > 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≥ 𝐿𝑠 |𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 )(1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ).                        (118)
From Theorem C.1, for all 𝑙 ∈ R
                                                                                    −1
                                                                                  𝑇∑︁
                        |𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋)| ≤                 E𝑏𝑘+1:𝑖 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 , 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋] = 𝜖,          (119)
                                                                                 𝑖=𝑘+1

The action-value function is defined as the CVaR of the return. Let 𝑋 and 𝑌 be random variables distributed according
to the original and simplified models 𝑃 and 𝑃𝑠 , respectively. Theorem 5.1 establishes bounds on CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) in terms of
CVaR of 𝑌 , under a known discrepancy between the cumulative distribution functions of 𝑋 and 𝑌 . In our setting, this
distributional discrepancy is bounded by 𝜖, and thus the result applies directly.                                                        □

   Corollary C.4. The bound from Theorem 6.2 holds for 𝜖 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) =
                                                                                            Í𝑇 −1
                                                                                              𝑡 =𝑘 E [Δ (𝑥𝑡 +1 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ].
                                                                                                    𝑠  𝑠


   Proof. Theorem 6.2 establishes bounds on the value and action-value functions under a quantified distributional
discrepancy 𝜖 between the original and simplified return distributions. As long as this discrepancy between their
CDFs remains bounded by 𝜖, the result remains valid. Consequently, by bounding the belief-based discrepancy 𝜖 in
Theorem 6.2 via the state-based discrepancy bound established in Theorem C.2, we recover the same form of the bound
for the newly defined 𝜖.                                                                                                                 □

   Theorem C.5. Let 𝜂 > 0, 𝛿 ∈ (0, 1). If Δ̂ is unbiased, then
                                                                                                 2𝜂 2 𝑁𝑏
                           𝑃 (|𝜖ˆ𝑡 (𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎) − 𝜖𝑡 (𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎)| ≥ 𝜂) ≤ 2 exp −
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                      (120)
                                                                                    𝐷 2 (𝑇 − 𝑘) 2 (𝑅   max − 𝑅min   )2
for 𝐷 = max𝑖 ∈ {𝑘+1,...,𝑇 −1} 𝐷𝑖 where 𝐷𝑖 = sup𝑥𝑖+1 𝑃 (𝑥𝑖+1 |𝑥𝑖 , 𝑎𝑖 )/𝑄 0 (𝑥𝑖+1 ).

                                  𝑚(𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎) is an unbiased estimator for 𝑚(𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎).
   Proof. We start by proving that ˆ

                                                                                𝑃 (𝑥𝑛Δ |𝑥𝑡𝑖 , 𝑎)
                                        𝑁 𝑝                          𝑁 𝑝                                        𝑁 𝑝

                        𝑚(𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎)] =                                                                Δ
                                        ∑︁                           ∑︁                                         ∑︁
                      E[ ˆ                    E[ ˆ
                                                𝑚(𝑥𝑡𝑖 , 𝑎)]𝑤˜ 𝑡𝑖 =         E[                    Δ(𝑥   )] ˜
                                                                                                          𝑤 𝑖
                                                                                                              =     𝑚(𝑥𝑡𝑖 , 𝑎)𝑤˜ 𝑡𝑖
                                                                                  𝑄 0 (𝑥𝑛Δ )                                          (121)
                                                                                                     𝑛      𝑡
                                        𝑖=1                          𝑖=1                                        𝑖=1

                       = 𝑚(𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎).
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                                                        48


It follows that the estimator 𝜖ˆ(𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎) of the total distributional discrepancy is an unbiased estimator of 𝜖 (𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎).
                           −1
                         𝑇∑︁                                                    −1
                                                                              𝑇∑︁                                         −1
                                                                                                                        𝑇∑︁
    E[𝜖ˆ(𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎)] =            E[Ê[𝑚(𝑏¯𝜏 , 𝜋𝜏 )|𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎]|𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎] =                  𝑚(𝑏¯𝜏1 , 𝜋 (𝑏¯𝜏1 ))|𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎] =
                                                                                     E[ ˆ                                          𝑚(𝑏¯𝜏1 , 𝜋 (𝑏¯𝜏1 ))|𝑏¯𝜏1 ]|𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎]
                                                                                                                               E[E[ ˆ
                                                                                                                                                                         (122)
                         𝜏=𝑡                                                   𝜏=𝑡                                      𝜏=𝑡
                           −1
                         𝑇∑︁
                     =          E[𝑚(𝑏¯𝜏1 , 𝜋 (𝑏¯𝜏1 ))|𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎] = 𝜖 (𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎)
                         𝜏=𝑡

   Define
                                                                                      𝑇 −1
                                                                                 1 ∑︁ ¯𝑖
                                                                        𝑋𝑖 ≜           𝑚(𝑏𝜏 , 𝜋 (𝑏¯𝜏𝑖 )),
                                                                                       ˆ                                                                                 (123)
                                                                                𝑁𝑏 𝜏=𝑡
and note that
                                                                              𝑁𝑏
                                                                                     𝑋𝑖 = 𝜖ˆ𝑡 (𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎).
                                                                              ∑︁
                                                                                                                                                                         (124)
                                                                              𝑖=1
Since the total variation distance is bounded by 2, each 𝑋𝑖 satisfies the bound
                                                               2𝐷 (𝑇 − 𝑡)𝑅min        2𝐷 (𝑇 − 𝑡)𝑅max
                                                                              ≤ 𝑋𝑖 ≤                .                                                                    (125)
                                                                     𝑁𝑏                    𝑁𝑏
Moreover, the 𝑋𝑖 are independent and identically distributed, and thus Hoeffding’s inequality applies.

                                                                                                                                      2𝜂 2
                                                             𝑁𝑏
     𝑃 (|𝜖ˆ𝑡 (𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎) − 𝜖𝑡 (𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎)| ≥ 𝜂) = 𝑃 (|                  𝑋𝑖 − 𝜖𝑡 (𝑏¯𝑡 , 𝑎)| ≥ 𝜂) ≤ 2 exp(−
                                                             ∑︁
                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                             𝐷 2 (𝑇 − 𝑘) 2 (𝑅                   2
                                                                                                                                    max − 𝑅min ) /𝑁𝑏 × 𝑁𝑏
                                                              𝑖=1                                                                                                        (126)
                                                                                                                 2𝜂 2 𝑁𝑏
                                                                                               ≤ 2 exp(− 2                           ).
                                                                                                        𝐷 (𝑇 − 𝑘) 2 (𝑅max − 𝑅min ) 2
                                                                                                                                                                            □

   Theorem C.6. For the estimators 𝑑ˆmax
                                     𝜋 (𝑏 ) = max
                                         𝑘
                                                                        ˆ𝜋                                         1
                                                 𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 } 𝑅 and 𝑑 min (𝑏𝑘 ) = min𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 } 𝑅 , where 𝑅 , . . . , 𝑅
                                                                  𝑖                                      𝑖                      𝑁𝑏 ∼

𝑃𝑠 (·|𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋), and for 𝜖 as defined in (30), the following bounds hold.

                                     𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑ˆ𝑚𝑖𝑛                                          𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑ˆ𝑚𝑎𝑥
                                                                              𝑁𝑏                                            𝑁𝑏
                                                  𝜋
                                                      (𝑏𝑘 )) ≥                      ,                       𝜋
                                                                                                                (𝑏𝑘 )) ≥                                                 (127)
                                                                             𝑁𝑏 + 1                                       𝑁𝑏 + 1

                     𝑃 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑ˆ𝑚𝑖𝑛                                                            𝑃 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑ˆ𝑚𝑎𝑥
                                                                     𝑁𝑏                                                     𝑁𝑏
                                𝜋
                                    (𝑏𝑘 ) 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋 ≥                           − 𝜖,                         𝜋
                                                                                                              (𝑏𝑘 ) 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋 ≥         − 𝜖.                                (128)
                                                                      𝑁𝑏 + 1                                                  𝑁𝑏 + 1

   Proof. Note that {𝑅𝑖 }𝑖=1 ∼ 𝑃𝑠 (·|𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) are sampled from the simplified distribution. Observe that 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 , 𝑅 1, . . . , 𝑅 𝑁𝑏
                           𝑏          𝑁

constitute an i.i.d. sample of size 𝑁𝑏 + 1 from the simplified distribution. For each 𝑗 ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 𝑁𝑏 }, define the event
𝐴 𝑗 = {𝑋 𝑗 is strictly the largest among all 𝑁𝑏 + 1 samples}, where 𝑋 0 = 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 and 𝑋𝑖 = 𝑅𝑖 for 𝑖 ≥ 1. These events are
mutually exclusive, and by the i.i.d. assumption 𝑃𝑠 (𝐴 𝑗 ) is the same for all 𝑗. Since 𝑗=0 𝑃𝑠 (𝐴 𝑗 ) ≤ 1, it follows that
                                                                                       Í𝑁𝑏

                                                                                    1
                                                                 
                                     𝑃𝑠 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 > max 𝑅𝑖 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋 = 𝑃𝑠 (𝐴0 ) ≤               .                                (129)
                                               𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }                   𝑁𝑏 + 1
Similarly, 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 < min𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 } 𝑅𝑖 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) ≤ 𝑁 1+1 . Therefore,
                                                                         𝑏

                                                                              𝑁𝑏                                                                𝑁𝑏
                     𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤               max           𝑅𝑖 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) ≥           ,          𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥        min           𝑅𝑖 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) ≥          .                  (130)
                                          𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }                    𝑁𝑏 + 1                          𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }                   𝑁𝑏 + 1
   When bounding 𝑃 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ max𝑖 ∈1,...,𝑁𝑏 𝑅𝑖 , observe that 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 is drawn from the original distribution 𝑃, whereas the
                                           

samples {𝑅𝑖 }𝑖=1 are drawn from the simplified distribution 𝑃𝑠 . Consequently, the symmetry argument used in the
               𝑏 𝑁

previous bound does not apply. To address this mismatch, we employ the bound from Theorem 6.1 to bound the CDF of
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                                49


the return computed with the original model, using the CDF computed using the simplified belief-transition model.
                           ∫                                                   
  𝑃 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ max 𝑅𝑖 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋 =              𝑃 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ max 𝑅𝑖 𝑅 1, . . . , 𝑅 𝑁𝑏 , 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅 1, . . . , 𝑅 𝑁𝑏 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋)𝑑𝑅 1 . . . 𝑑𝑅 𝑁𝑏
                𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }                        𝑅 1 ,...,𝑅 𝑁𝑏                 𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }
      ∫                                                                                  
  ≥                    𝑃𝑠 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤             max           𝑅𝑖 𝑅 1, . . . , 𝑅 𝑁𝑏 , 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋 − 𝜖 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅 1, . . . , 𝑅 𝑁𝑏 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋)𝑑𝑅 1, . . . , 𝑑𝑅 𝑁𝑏
      𝑅 1 ,...,𝑅 𝑁𝑏                      𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }
      h                                                                               i
                                                   1
  = E𝑠 𝑃𝑠 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤                  max         𝑖
                                             𝑅 𝑅 ,...,𝑅           𝑁𝑏
                                                                           − 𝜖 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋
                           𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }
                                         
  = 𝑃𝑠 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤             max           𝑅𝑖 − 𝜖
                      𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }
     𝑁𝑏
  ≥        − 𝜖.
    𝑁𝑏 + 1
                                                                                                                                                 (131)
The first inequality follows directly from Theorem 6.1, and the last inequality holds from the symmetry argument used
above.
   Similarly,                                                                                           
                                                                                                                   𝑁𝑏
                                                             𝑃 𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤             min           𝑅𝑖 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋 ≥              − 𝜖.                    (132)
                                                                              𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }                     𝑁𝑏 + 1
                                                                                                                                                    □

   Theorem C.7. Let 𝛿, 𝛿𝑑min , 𝛿𝑑max ∈ [0, 1], and let 𝑏𝑘 denote the initial belief. Consider samples 𝑅 1, . . . , 𝑅 𝑁𝑏 ∼ 𝑃𝑠 (· | 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋)
generated using the simplified belief-transition model. Define
                                                                                              −1
                                                                                            𝑇∑︁
                                                       𝜖 ≜ 𝜖 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) ≜ min(                     E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 , 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜋], 1),           (133)
                                                                                            𝑖=𝑘
                                                                     √︁
                                                                  𝜂 = ln(1/𝛿)/(2𝑁𝑏 ),                           𝜖 ′ = 𝜖 + 𝜂.                     (134)
    (1) Upper Bound: assume that 𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 , then
        (a) If 𝜖 ′ < 𝛼, then 𝑈𝑠 ≜ (1 − 𝜖 )𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼 − 𝜖 ′ ) + 𝜖 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥
                                        ′                              ′
                                                              𝛼        𝑀𝑠                               𝛼
              (b) If 𝜖 ′ ≥ 𝛼 then 𝑈𝑠 ≜ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥
    (2) Lower Bound: assume that 𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 and 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ) > 1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 , then
         (a) If 𝜖 ′ + 𝛼 < 1 then 𝐿𝑠 ≜ (1 + 𝜖 )𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ ) − 𝜖 𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜖 ′ )
                                            ′                              ′
                                                                   𝛼        𝑀𝑠                              𝛼     𝑀𝑠
                                                                       𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 ) − 𝜖 ′𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝜖 ′ )]
              (b) If 𝜖 ′ + 𝛼 ≥ 1 then 𝐿𝑠 ≜ 𝛼1 [−(𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ − 1)𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 + 𝑄ˆ 𝑀𝑠  𝑘 𝑘            𝑀𝑠 𝑘 𝑘
Then 𝑃 (𝐿𝑠 ≤ 𝑄 𝑀
               𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼)) > (1 − 𝛿)(1 − 𝛿
                   𝑘 𝑘                        𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ) and 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 ) > (1 − 𝛿)(1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ).
                                                              𝜋


   Proof. From the law of total probability,
                                       𝜋                             𝜋
                                  𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 ) = 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 |𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )
                                                                                  𝜋
                                                                           + 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 |𝑅𝑘:𝑇 > 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 > 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )
                                                                                  𝜋
                                                                                                                                                 (135)
                                                                           ≥ 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 |𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )
                                                                                  𝜋
                                                                           > 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 |𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 )(1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ).
Similarly,
                                         𝜋
                                    𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀                             𝜋
                                           (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≥ 𝐿𝑠 ) > 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≥ 𝐿𝑠 |𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≥ 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 )(1 − 𝛿𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛 ).                          (136)
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                      50


From Theorem C.1, for all 𝑙 ∈ R
                                                                                    −1
                                                                                  𝑇∑︁
                       |𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) − 𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑙 |𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋)| ≤                   E𝑏𝑘+1:𝑖 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 , 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋] = 𝜖,          (137)
                                                                                  𝑖=𝑘+1

The action-value function is defined as the CVaR of the return. Let 𝑋 and 𝑌 be random variables distributed according
to the original and simplified models 𝑃 and 𝑃𝑠 , respectively. Theorem 5.7 establishes bounds on CVaR𝛼 (𝑋 ) in terms of
CVaR of a sample of 𝑌 , under a known discrepancy between the cumulative distribution functions of 𝑋 and 𝑌 . In our
setting, this distributional discrepancy is bounded by 𝜖, and thus the result applies directly.                                           □

    Theorem C.8. (Bound Guarantees) Let 𝛿 ∈ (0, 0.5), and let 𝑏𝑘 denote the initial belief. Consider samples 𝑅 1, . . . , 𝑅 𝑁𝑏 ∼
𝑃𝑠 (· | 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) generated using the simplified belief-transition model. Define
                                                                        −1
                                                                      𝑇∑︁
                                      𝜖 ≜ 𝜖 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 ) ≜ min(                E𝑠 [Δ𝑠 (𝑏𝑖 , 𝑎𝑖 )|𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝜋], 1),                       (138)
                                                                      𝑖=𝑘
                                                  √︁
                                               𝜂 = ln(1/𝛿)/(2𝑁𝑏 ),                        𝜖 ′ = 𝜖 + 𝜂,                                 (139)
                                    𝑑ˆmax
                                      𝜋
                                          (𝑏𝑘 ) =       max            𝑖
                                                                      𝑅,          𝑑ˆmin
                                                                                    𝜋
                                                                                        (𝑏𝑘 ) =       min            𝑖
                                                                                                                    𝑅.                 (140)
                                                    𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }                               𝑖 ∈ {1,...,𝑁𝑏 }
     (1) Upper Bound:
                                           ′    𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼 − 𝜖 ′ ) + 𝜖 ′ 𝑑ˆ𝜋 (𝑏 )
          (a) If 𝜖 ′ < 𝛼, then 𝑈𝑠 ≜ (1 − 𝜖𝛼 )𝑄ˆ 𝑀𝑠  𝑘 𝑘                𝛼 max 𝑘
          (b) If 𝜖 ′ ≥ 𝛼 then 𝑈𝑠 ≜ 𝑑ˆ𝜋 (𝑏𝑘 )
                                     max
     (2) Lower Bound:
         (a) If 𝜖 ′ + 𝛼 < 1 then 𝐿𝑠 ≜ (1 + 𝜖𝛼 )𝑄ˆ 𝑀
                                                  𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ ) − 𝜖 ′ 𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝜖 ′ )
                                             ′
                                                   𝑠  𝑘 𝑘                𝛼 𝑀𝑠 𝑘 𝑘
         (b) If 𝜖 ′ + 𝛼 ≥ 1 then 𝐿𝑠 ≜ 𝛼1 [−(𝛼 + 𝜖 ′ − 1)𝑑ˆmin
                                                          𝜋 (𝑏 ) + 𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 ) − 𝜖 ′𝑄ˆ 𝜋 (𝑏 , 𝑎 , 𝜖 ′ )]
                                                               𝑘        𝑀𝑠 𝑘 𝑘                 𝑀𝑠 𝑘 𝑘
                                                                                                        
                                           𝑁𝑏                                                       𝑁
Then 𝑃 (𝐿𝑠 ≤ 𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼)) > (1 − 𝛿) 𝑁 +1 − 𝜖 and 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 ) > (1 − 𝛿) 𝑁 𝑏+1 − 𝜖 .
                𝜋                                              𝜋
                                               𝑏                                                                         𝑏


    Proof. We prove the upper bound; the lower bound follows by an analogous argument applied to 𝑑ˆmin
                                                                                                   𝜋 (𝑏 ). By
                                                                                                       𝑘
Theorem 7.2,

                   𝑃𝑠 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑ˆmax                                            𝑃 (𝑅𝑘:𝑇 ≤ 𝑑ˆmax
                                                          𝑁𝑏                                                              𝑁𝑏
                                𝜋
                                    (𝑏𝑘 ) | 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) ≥           ,                          𝜋
                                                                                               (𝑏𝑘 ) | 𝑏𝑘 , 𝜋) ≥                − 𝜖.   (141)
                                                         𝑁𝑏 + 1                                                          𝑁𝑏 + 1
Setting 𝑑 max = 𝑑ˆmax
                  𝜋 (𝑏 ) and 𝛿
                      𝑘
                                        1
                               𝑑 max = 𝑁 +1 + 𝜖 in Theorem 7.3, both of its conditions are satisfied, and we obtain
                                           𝑏
                                                                                                            𝑁       
                                                                                                                                       (142)
                                  𝜋                                                                            𝑏
                             𝑃 (𝑄 𝑀 (𝑏𝑘 , 𝑎𝑘 , 𝛼) ≤ 𝑈𝑠 ) > (1 − 𝛿)(1 − 𝛿𝑑max ) = (1 − 𝛿)                           −𝜖 .
                                                                                                            𝑁𝑏 + 1
An analogous argument with 𝑑 min = 𝑑ˆmin
                                     𝜋 (𝑏 ) and 𝛿
                                         𝑘
                                                           1
                                                  𝑑 min = 𝑁 +1 + 𝜖 yields the lower bound guarantee.                                      □
                                                                              𝑏


D    Environment Configurations
The following subsections describe the three POMDP environments used throughout the experiments, including the
action elimination experiments of Figure 9. Each domain provides an original environment (used for sampling rollouts)
and a simplified surrogate (used for belief updates and CVaR bound computation). The two models differ only in their
observation and reward models, as summarised in Table 1.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                                    51

                            Aspect                 Original                            Simplified
                            Observation noise Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) Isotropic Gaussian
                            Reward noise           Stochastic (Push, Laser Tag)        Deterministic
                  Table 1. Architectural differences between the original and simplified models across all domains.




D.1    Light-Dark
State space: s = (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ R2 (2D continuous position). Action space: Discrete — {up, down, left, right}, mapped to unit
vectors in R2 . Observation space: o ∈ R2 — noisy 2D position.

                                 Parameter                                          Value
                                 Grid size                                           7×7
                                 Start state                                         (1, 1)
                                 Goal state                                  (6, 6); radius 1.5
                                 State transition covariance                       0.06 · 𝐼 2
                                 Obs. noise (far from beacon)       N (0, 0.06 · 𝐼 2 ) / GMM(𝐾=2500)
                                 Obs. noise (near beacon)       N (0, 0.03 · 𝐼 2 ) / GMM(𝐾=2500, scaled)
                                 Beacons                         (1, 1), (1, 6), (6, 1), (6, 6); radius 1.0
                                 Obstacle                             (5, 2); radius 3.0; hit prob 1.0
                                 Goal reward                                          +10
                                 Obstacle penalty                                     −10
                                 Step cost (fuel)                                      −2
                                 Discount factor 𝛾                                    0.95
                                 Planning horizon 𝐻                                 9 steps
                                         Table 2. Configuration for the 2D Light-Dark POMDP.



   Original: Two independent 1D GMMs (one per axis), 𝐾 = 2500 components, approximating the target Normal
distribution. Simplified: Standard Gaussian N (0, 𝜎 2 𝐼 2 ) with the same 𝜎.

D.2    Continuous Push
State space: s = (𝑟 𝑥 , 𝑟 𝑦 , 𝑜 𝑥 , 𝑜 𝑦 , 𝑡𝑥 , 𝑡 𝑦 ) ∈ R6 — robot, object, and target positions. Action space: Discrete — {up, down, left, right},
mapped to unit vectors. Observation space: o ∈ R6 — robot and target positions observed exactly; object position is
noisy: 𝑜ˆ = 𝑜 + 𝜖, 𝜖 ∼ N (0, 𝜎 2 𝐼 2 ).
   Original: One 1D GMM (𝐾 = 7000 components) applied independently to each object-position axis; additionally
adds stochastic reward noise N (0, 25). Simplified: Gaussian noise N (0, 0.01 · 𝐼 2 ) on object position; deterministic
reward.

D.3    Continuous Laser Tag
State space: s = (𝑟 𝑥 , 𝑟 𝑦 , 𝑜 𝑥 , 𝑜 𝑦 , term) ∈ R4 × {0, 1} — robot and opponent positions plus terminal flag. Action space:
Discrete — {up, down, left, right, tag}. Observation space: o ∈ R8 — 8-directional laser range measurements with
additive noise; terminal states return o = −1.
   Original: One 1D GMM with 𝐾 = 290 components (𝜎comp = 0.097), applied independently to all 8 laser measurements;
additionally adds stochastic reward noise N (0, 0.25). Simplified: Gaussian noise N (0, 1.0) per laser measurement;
deterministic reward.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                          52

                              Parameter                                    Value
                              Grid size                                     6×6
                              Initial state                    (0.5, 0.5, 1.0, 0.5, 5.0, 5.0)
                              Robot transition covariance           diag(0.005, 0.005)
                              Observation noise 𝜎                 0.1 (on object position)
                              Push threshold                                 1.0
                              Friction coefficient                           0.3
                              Max push force                                 2.0
                              Robot radius                                   0.3
                              Dangerous area                (5.0, 2.0); radius 1.0; penalty −20
                              Discount factor 𝛾                             0.95
                              Planning horizon 𝐻                           9 steps
                                 Table 3. Configuration for the Continuous Push POMDP.



                      Parameter                                                 Value
                      Arena                                           11 × 7 continuous grid
                      Walls                                           8 axis-aligned wall cells
                      Initial state                                    (2.0, 1.0, 8.0, 5.0, 0)
                      Robot transition covariance                             0.0125 · 𝐼 2
                      Opponent transition covariance                         0.00625 · 𝐼 2
                      Opponent pursuit speed                                      0.6
                      Laser noise 𝜎                                    1.0 (per measurement)
                      Robot / opponent radius                                     0.3
                      Tag radius                                                  0.5
                      Tag reward                                                 +10
                      Failed-tag penalty                                         −10
                      Step cost                                                   −1
                      Dangerous areas                     (5.0, 3.0), (7.0, 1.0); radius 1.0; penalty −300
                      Discount factor 𝛾                                          0.95
                      Planning horizon 𝐻                              8 steps (7 moves + tag)
                                 Table 4. Configuration for the Continuous Laser Tag POMDP.




D.4   Shared Planner Parameters

                                             Parameter                 Value
                                             CVaR level 𝛼                0.1
                                             Belief particles 𝑁𝑝          10
                                             Return samples 𝑁𝑟           600
                                             Δ-estimation states         100
                                             Samples per state (for Δ) 2000
                                             𝑘-NN neighbours              10
                                             Discount factor 𝛾          0.95
                                             Confidence parameter 𝛿     0.05
                                             Random seed                  42
                             Table 5. Planner parameters shared across all three environments.




  These parameters are used in the open-loop bound evaluation experiments (Figures 9, 10, and 11) and in the
closed-loop policy evaluation experiments (Figures 12, 13, and 14).
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                      53


E    Simulations
The planning configurations below correspond to the open-loop experiments in Figures 9, 10, and 11.
    Figure 9 presents the estimated bounds and CVaR values for pairs of action sequences across all three environments,
computed using 600 sampled belief trajectories and a confidence parameter of 𝛿 = 0.05.
    The simplified planner samples 𝑁 Δ = 100 states offline from the square region defined by the corners (0, 0) and (7, 7).
For each sampled state, the distributional discrepancy Δ between the simplified and original observation models is
estimated using 𝑁𝑧 = 2000 samples. CVaR is computed at confidence level 𝛼 = 0.5, and the probabilistic bounds are
constructed with confidence level 𝛿 = 0.05. We set the number of sampled belief trajectories to 𝑁𝑏 = 600.


                                              Parameter                   Value
                                              Number of Episodes            300
                                              Steps per Episode          30 (max)
                                              Planning Depth                 2
                                              Return Samples (𝑁𝑏 )          600
                                              CVaR 𝛼                        0.5
                                              Number of Particles (𝑁𝑝 )     10
                                              Discount Factor (𝛾 )         0.95
                                              GMM Components                290
                           Table 6. Planning configuration for the Continuous Laser Tag experiments.



E.0.1   Continuous Laser Tag – Planning Configuration.


                                              Parameter                    Value
                                              Number of Episodes             300
                                              Steps per Episode           30 (max)
                                              Planning Depth                  2
                                              Return Samples (𝑁𝑏 )           600
                                              CVaR 𝛼                         0.5
                                              Number of Particles (𝑁𝑝 )      10
                                              Discount Factor (𝛾 )          0.95
                                              GMM Components                7000
                                Table 7. Planning configuration for the Light-Dark experiments.



E.0.2   Light-Dark – Planning Configuration.

E.0.3 Continuous Push – Planning Configuration. The planning parameters used for Continuous Push experiments are
summarized in Table 8; see Figure 9c for representative agent trajectories.

F    BetaZero Policy Configuration (Light-Dark)
The closed-loop policy evaluation uses BetaZero Moss et al. 2024a, an AlphaZero-style algorithm for POMDPs. A neural
network maps a belief summary vector 𝜙 (𝑏) to a scalar value estimate 𝑉 (𝑏) and a policy prior 𝜋 (𝑎 | 𝑏), which guide
MCTS over particle beliefs.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                               54

                                            Parameter                   Value
                                            Number of Episodes            300
                                            Steps per Episode          30 (max)
                                            Planning Depth                 2
                                            Return Samples (𝑁𝑏 )          600
                                            CVaR 𝛼                        0.5
                                            Number of Particles (𝑁𝑝 )     10
                                            Discount Factor (𝛾 )         0.95
                                            GMM Components               7000
                           Table 8. Planning configuration for the Continuous Push experiments.



F.1   Belief Representation
Particles are summarised into a fixed-size feature vector using the mean-and-standard-deviation representation:

                                             𝜙 (𝑏) = 𝜇¯𝑥 , 𝜇¯𝑦 , 𝜎¯𝑥 , 𝜎¯𝑦 ∈ R4,                                (143)
                                                                         


where 𝜇¯ and 𝜎¯ are the weighted mean and standard deviation of the particle set.

                                        Parameter                        Value
                                        State dimension                    2
                                        Belief feature dimension 4 (= 2× state dim)
                                        Particles per belief 𝑁𝑝           500
                           Table 9. Belief representation parameters for BetaZero on Light-Dark.



  Input normalisation is applied using online statistics collected during training:

                                               Feature        Mean Std
                                               𝜇¯𝑥              3.56      1.91
                                               𝜇¯𝑦              4.12      1.91
                                               𝜎¯𝑥             0.302 0.407
                                               𝜎¯ 𝑦            0.303 0.408
                                               Value output −24.34 36.64
                             Table 10. Input normalisation statistics for the BetaZero network.




F.2   Network Architecture
Two-headed MLP with a shared trunk and separate value and policy heads:

                                        Layer                        Size
                                        Input                         4
                                        Hidden 1                     128
                                        Hidden 2                     128
                                        Value head output         1 (scalar)
                                        Policy head output 4 (one logit per action)
                                         Table 11. BetaZero network architecture.
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                                   55


F.3   MCTS Parameters

                                    Parameter                             Value
                                    Search depth                            10
                                    Simulations per step (training)        100
                                    Simulations per step (inference)       1000
                                    Exploration constant 𝑐            219.13 (tuned)
                                    Temperature 𝜏                     0.319 (tuned)
                                    Value weight 𝑧𝑞                         1.0
                                    Visit count weight 𝑧𝑛                   1.0
                                    DPW action widening 𝑘𝑎 , 𝛼𝑎          1.0, 0.5
                                    DPW observation widening 𝑘𝑜 , 𝛼𝑜     1.0, 0.5
                                    Discount factor 𝛾                      0.95
                                 Table 12. MCTS parameters for BetaZero on Light-Dark.




F.4   Training Loop

                                        Parameter                      Value
                                        Outer iterations                 50
                                        Episodes per iteration           50
                                        Total training episodes         2500
                                        Episode length                20 steps
                                        Data collection         Full MCTS rollouts
                                        Replay buffer               5 iterations
                                       Table 13. BetaZero training loop parameters.



  At each episode, a fresh initial belief is sampled: mean ∼ U ([−1, 8] 2 ), std ∼ U (0.01, 2.0), then 𝑁𝑝 = 500 particles
are drawn from N (mean, std2 𝐼 ). This diversity prevents the training distribution from collapsing to a uniform loop.

F.5   Optimizer and Loss

                            Parameter                                     Value
                            Optimizer                                     Adam
                            Learning rate                                  10−4
                            Batch size                                     1024
                            Training epochs per iteration                   50
                            Weight decay                                   10−5
                            Loss                           Cross-entropy (policy) + MSE (value)
                             Table 14. Optimizer and loss configuration for BetaZero training.




F.6   Hyperparameter Search
The exploration constant 𝑐 and temperature 𝜏 were selected via Optuna (TPE sampler, 20 trials) with 𝑛 sim = 100 during
search:
Pariente & Indelman                                                                                           56

                              Hyperparameter                 Search range         Best value
                              𝑐 (exploration constant) [1.0, 10 × Δ𝑟 ] ≈ [1, 220]    219.13
                              𝜏 (temperature)                  [0.05, 0.5]            0.319
                              𝑧𝑞 , 𝑧 𝑛                            fixed              1.0, 1.0
                            Table 15. Hyperparameter search results for BetaZero on Light-Dark.




    Search used a MedianPruner (3 startup trials, 5 warmup steps) and a TPE sampler with seed 42. The objective
minimised the final policy loss (cross-entropy vs. MCTS visit counts); the baseline uniform policy corresponds to
ln 4 ≈ 1.386. The best trial was retrained at 𝑛 sim = 1000 for the final model used in all experiments.

G    Hardware Specifications
All simulations were conducted on a machine equipped with an 11th Gen Intel® CoreTM i9-11900K CPU running at
3.50 GHz and 64 GB of RAM.
