                                         When OpenClaw Meets Hospital: Toward an Agentic

                                         Operating System for Dynamic Clinical Workflows
                                         Wenxian Yang1 , Hanzheng Qiu2 , Bangqun Zhang3 , Chengquan Li4 , Zhiyong Huang5 ,
                                         Xiaobin Feng6,* , Rongshan Yu4,* , and Jiahong Dong7,*

                                         1 Independent Researcher

                                         2 National Institute for Data Science in Health and Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China




arXiv:2603.11721v2 [cs.AI] 21 Mar 2026
                                         3 Yue’erwan Internet Hospital Co., Ltd.

                                         4 School of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

                                         5 National University of Singapore, Singapore

                                         6 Yttrium-90 Precision Interventional Radiotherapy Center of Liver Cancer, Beijing Tsinghua Changgung Hospital,


                                         School of Clinical Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
                                         7 Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Centre, Beijing Tsinghua Changgung Hospital, School of Clinical Medicine, Tsinghua


                                         University, Beijing, China
                                         * e-mail: fengxiaobin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, rsyu@xmu.edu.cn, dongjiahong@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn




                                         ABSTRACT




                                                                                                 1
Large language model (LLM) agents extend generative models with reasoning, tool use, and persistent memory, thereby

enabling the automation of complex tasks. In healthcare, such systems could support documentation, care coordination,

and clinical decision making. Their reliable deployment in hospitals, however, remains constrained by safety risks, limited

transparency, and inadequate mechanisms for handling longitudinal clinical context. Here we propose an architecture that

adapts LLM agents to hospital environments. The design comprises four components: a restricted execution environment

inspired by multi-user operating systems, a document-centric interaction model linking patient and clinician agents, a page-

indexed memory architecture for longitudinal context management, and a curated library of composable medical skills.

Implemented on top of OpenClaw, an open-source agent orchestration framework, this design provides the basis for an Agentic

Operating System for Hospitals: a computing layer for coordinating clinical workflows while preserving safety, transparency,

and auditability. To evaluate the memory component, we introduce manifest-guided retrieval for hierarchical navigation of

longitudinal patient records. In a benchmark derived from the MIMIC-IV dataset (v2.2) comprising 100 de-identified patient

records and 300 clinical queries stratified across three difficulty tiers (100 per tier), manifest-guided retrieval matched a

metadata-filtered RAG baseline on overall recall (0.877 versus 0.876) while achieving 2.2× higher precision (0.779 versus

0.352) and retrieving fewer documents; on tier-3 longitudinal queries, manifest recall was 21% higher (0.846 versus 0.701),

confirming that LLM-guided hierarchical navigation is most valuable when queries span multiple care episodes. These results

outline a practical path toward hospital-scale agentic infrastructure.




1 Introduction

Recent work has extended large language models (LLMs) into autonomous agents capable of interacting with external software

environments. Agent architectures combine reasoning, planning, tool use, and memory to execute workflows that extend

beyond text generation alone1 . These capabilities have stimulated growing interest in healthcare, where coordination across

heterogeneous data sources, clinical documents, and care processes is central to everyday practice.

   Several recent studies suggest that LLM-based agents could assist with diagnostic support, clinical documentation, and

patient communication2 . Translating such systems into operational hospital settings, however, exposes persistent structural

limitations. Existing agentic frameworks generally assume open computing environments and broad operating-system permis-

sions, including unrestricted file-system access, external network calls, and arbitrary code execution. These assumptions are

fundamentally misaligned with healthcare privacy regulation and audit requirements. At the same time, dominant memory

approaches based on flat vector retrieval fragment patient histories into isolated embeddings, discarding the longitudinal

structure on which clinical reasoning depends and weakening recall across extended care episodes.

   Hospital environments impose additional constraints. Care is delivered through structured workflows involving multiple

participants, including physicians, nurses, and patients. Information exchange occurs primarily through structured artifacts

such as clinical notes, laboratory reports, and treatment plans rather than through continuous dialogue. Most current agent

architectures, by contrast, assume a single conversational interface rather than a collaborative document-centered environment.



                                                                                                                          2/25
A further limitation arises from the design of existing hospital information systems. Electronic health records, clinical

decision support tools, and care-coordination platforms typically encode care as fixed, pre-programmed workflows designed for

anticipated pathways. These systems perform well for common, well-defined protocols but are poorly suited to the long tail of

clinical variability, because patient presentations and disease trajectories rarely conform to predefined routines. Physicians

confronting unusual comorbidity profiles, or patients seeking guidance that spans multiple episodes of care, are therefore often

left beyond the reach of installed workflows.

   Taken together, these observations suggest that adapting agents for healthcare is not primarily a problem of model capability,

but of infrastructure design. We argue that agents should operate within a controlled computing layer purpose-built to satisfy

the safety, memory, and coordination requirements of clinical environments. We therefore introduce the concept of an Agentic

Operating System for Hospitals, a computing layer designed to support safe agent deployment in clinical settings. We describe

four core components addressing execution control, longitudinal memory organization, document-mediated coordination, and

composable clinical skills.


2 Related Work

2.1 LLM agent architectures

Recent research has explored LLM agents as modular systems integrating reasoning, tool use, and memory. Architectures

such as ReAct3 , Reflexion4 , and generative agents5 demonstrate how language models can coordinate multi-step interactions

with external environments. These frameworks typically grant agents broad access to system resources, including file systems,

external APIs, and arbitrary code execution environments. While such permissiveness is acceptable in sandboxed research

settings, it introduces unacceptable risks in operational environments where safety and auditability are mandatory requirements.

The challenge, therefore, is not solely one of capability but of containment: how to embed agentic reasoning within a controlled

execution boundary without sacrificing functional utility. Existing agent frameworks provide no principled solution to this

problem, motivating the need for an infrastructure layer analogous to an operating system. One concrete example is OpenClaw,

an open-source agent orchestration framework designed for complex, multi-step tasks6 . Unlike tools-and-skills integration that

many agent frameworks already support, OpenClaw’s distinguishing contributions lie in its persistent memory architecture

and its heartbeat mechanism: a scheduled task system that enables agents to autonomously initiate actions at defined intervals

without requiring an explicit user trigger. Together, these two mechanisms allow agents to maintain coherent long-term context

across sessions and to proactively monitor or act upon evolving conditions—capabilities that are essential for any system

expected to operate continuously in a dynamic environment. However, OpenClaw’s design targets a permissive, consumer-

facing context and therefore lacks the execution isolation, audit trail mechanisms, and clinically structured longitudinal memory

required for hospital deployment.




                                                                                                                            3/25
2.2 Retrieval-augmented generation in clinical contexts

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems have been proposed to address the limitations of static model knowledge by

integrating external document repositories7 . By retrieving relevant passages at inference time, RAG enables models to reason

over knowledge that would otherwise fall outside their training distribution. However, conventional RAG pipelines rely on

flat vector similarity retrieval over fragmented text chunks, producing ranked lists of decontextualized passages that may span

unrelated encounters, time points, or clinical episodes. A query about a patient’s medication history may surface a dosage

note from three years prior alongside a recent adverse-event report, with no structural signal to distinguish their temporal or

causal relationship. A patient record is not a collection of independent sentences; it is an ordered sequence of temporally

linked documents—admission notes, progress notes, laboratory reports, imaging findings, and discharge summaries—whose

meaning depends on sequential context. Chunking such records into isolated embeddings sacrifices precisely the contextual

dependencies that clinical reasoning requires.

   Several approaches have attempted to address structural limitations in RAG. MemGPT8 introduces a hierarchical memory

model inspired by OS virtual memory paging, moving context between fast in-context storage and slower external storage;

however, its paging policy is designed for conversational continuity rather than document-structured clinical knowledge.

GraphRAG9 constructs a knowledge graph over a corpus and retrieves via community summaries, improving multi-hop

reasoning but requiring expensive offline graph construction that does not accommodate the continuous document mutations

characteristic of live patient records. RAPTOR10 builds a recursive tree of abstractive summaries for hierarchical retrieval, but

operates over static corpora and provides no mechanism for incremental index maintenance on document updates. HippoRAG11

models retrieval as associative memory over a knowledge graph, improving cross-document reasoning, but likewise assumes a

static document collection. By contrast, we propose a page-indexed memory architecture that abandons vector similarity entirely.

Rather than encoding documents as embeddings, it exposes the document hierarchy to the agent through human-readable

manifest files and relies on the agent’s own language-reasoning capability to navigate progressively toward relevant content.

This design eliminates embedding computation overhead, requires no offline index construction, and naturally handles live

document mutations without any reindexing step.


2.3 Clinical workflow integration and deployment challenges

Within healthcare, substantial work has examined the requirements for integrating AI systems into clinical environments12–14 .

These studies consistently show that successful deployment depends on alignment with existing institutional structures—

documentation practices, professional role boundaries, and regulatory governance—rather than with the open, permissive

computing assumptions that underlie general-purpose agent frameworks. A distinctive feature of hospital environments is their

inherently multi-participant structure: physicians, nurses, and patients each occupy defined roles and exchange information

primarily through structured documents rather than continuous dialogue. This stands in sharp contrast to general-purpose

agent architectures, which assume a single conversational interface between one user and one model instance. Clinical settings

therefore demand a multi-agent architecture in which separate agents serve distinct participant roles and coordinate indirectly


                                                                                                                            4/25
through shared document artifacts. Regulatory requirements in healthcare further demand that system behaviour be explainable

and auditable, placing additional constraints on memory design, skill execution, and inter-agent communication.

   A deeper and more persistent limitation, however, concerns the design philosophy of hospital information systems as a

class. The full ecosystem of clinical software—including hospital information systems (HIS), electronic health records (EHR),

clinical decision support systems (CDSS), triage platforms, pharmacy and drug management systems, and care coordination

tools—is built on a common principle: each system implements a fixed, pre-programmed set of functions, and any clinical task

not explicitly anticipated at design time falls outside the system’s scope. This design philosophy produces systems that are

reliable and auditable within their predefined boundaries but structurally incapable of responding to ad-hoc clinical needs15, 16 .

Because no two patients present identically and no disease trajectory follows a scripted sequence, the diversity of real-world

clinical requests systematically exceeds what any fixed function library can represent. A physician managing a patient with an

unusual comorbidity combination, a triage nurse assessing a presentation that spans multiple protocol categories, or a patient

seeking guidance that crosses the boundary between drug management and chronic disease monitoring will find that no installed

system can serve the request in its entirety. This gap is not incidental but structural: fixed-function systems cannot reason about

novel situations, only match incoming requests against predefined rules17 . The introduction of agentic AI—systems that can

compose ad-hoc task sequences from a library of fine-grained capabilities and build longitudinal context through long-term

memory—offers a qualitatively different approach to this problem, one that can address the long tail of clinical need rather than

serving only its modal case.


2.4 Research gaps

Taken together, the literature reveals four unresolved gaps. First, current agent frameworks lack a principled mechanism for

restricting execution to well-defined, auditable actions. Second, existing memory systems based on flat vector retrieval are

poorly suited to the hierarchical, longitudinal structure of clinical records. Third, no existing architecture explicitly models the

multi-participant, document-mediated nature of hospital workflows. Fourth, existing hospital IT systems implement care as

static, pre-programmed workflows that cannot adapt to the inherent long-tail variability of clinical practice; physicians and

patients regularly encounter situations that fall outside installed protocols, with no mechanism for ad-hoc task execution. Our

work addresses each of these gaps directly: a restricted execution environment inspired by Linux multi-user systems targets the

first; a page-indexed memory architecture addresses the second; a document-centric multi-agent design addresses the third; and

the agentic task-composition model—through which the agent reasons over a library of medical skills and composes them

dynamically to address novel clinical requests—targets the fourth. Together these components constitute the proposed Agentic

Operating System for Hospitals.




                                                                                                                               5/25
3 System Architecture

3.1 Restricted execution and skills coordination

The proposed architecture treats the hospital environment as a first-class design constraint and structures agent deployment

accordingly. It builds upon the skill-based decomposition principle of OpenClaw while replacing its permissive runtime with

Linux-based execution isolation and adding the longitudinal memory mechanisms that clinical deployment requires. The

central design principle is least-privilege execution: rather than granting agents ambient access to system resources, each agent

instance operates within an isolated runtime whose permission boundary is statically defined at deployment time, analogous to

a restricted user account in a Unix multi-user system.

   Each participant role—patient, physician, or clinical staff—is mapped to a dedicated agent process executing within its

own isolated namespace. The namespace exposes a fixed interface consisting exclusively of sanctioned tool invocations; direct

file-system access, outbound network connections, and dynamic code loading are prohibited at the runtime level rather than

enforced through model-level instruction. This design shifts trust enforcement from the model’s instruction-following behaviour

to the execution environment itself, providing stronger and more auditable safety guarantees.

   Agent capabilities are realized through a curated library of medical skills: statically defined, pre-audited workflow modules

that encapsulate clinical operations such as vital-sign aggregation, medication adherence tracking, and structured report

generation. Each skill presents a typed interface to the agent and is permitted to access only internal, institutionally managed

resources—such as a hospital’s laboratory information system, pharmacy database, or wearable sensor gateway—through

predefined, narrowly scoped connectors; no skill may invoke arbitrary external network calls, escalate its own privileges, or

execute arbitrary system calls. This design preserves the network-isolation property of the agent runtime while still enabling

skills to interact with real clinical data sources through auditable, pre-approved integration points. This skill-level decomposition

enables formal pre-deployment review and fine-grained runtime monitoring of all agent-initiated actions.

   A defining capability that distinguishes this architecture from conventional hospital IT systems is its support for ad-hoc task

composition. Existing hospital information systems encode care as static, pre-programmed workflows: each system function is

defined at deployment time, and requests that fall outside those definitions are unserviceable. The agentic model inverts this

constraint. Because the agent can reason over the available skill library and dynamically compose sequences of skill invocations

in response to a stated clinical goal, it can address novel situations that no pre-existing workflow covers. A physician who needs

to correlate a rare drug interaction with multi-year laboratory trends, or a patient who wants to understand how a new diagnosis

relates to their existing comorbidity history, poses a request that no fixed workflow can serve; the agent constructs a task plan

on demand, navigates the manifest hierarchy to retrieve the relevant longitudinal context, and invokes the appropriate sequence

of skills to produce a coherent clinical response. The long-term memory architecture reinforces this capability: because the

agent accumulates context across care episodes through the document hierarchy rather than resetting between interactions,

it can identify patient-specific patterns and address personalized clinical needs that emerge only over extended longitudinal

observation—the class of need that is precisely most underserved by pre-programmed hospital systems.


                                                                                                                                6/25
   Inter-agent coordination follows a document-mutation model rather than a shared-memory or direct-message model. All

information exchange is realized as structured writes to shared clinical documents; no agent communicates with another through

a direct channel. Patient agents hold write access to patient-owned documents such as symptom logs, vital-sign records, and

self-reported health journals, while clinician agents hold write access to physician-authored documents such as assessment

notes, medication orders, and follow-up plans. Cross-role interactions are mediated exclusively by these documents: a patient

agent that detects an out-of-range vital-sign appends a structured alert entry to the patient record, which the clinician agent then

reads; a clinician agent that revises a follow-up schedule writes the updated plan as a new document version, which the patient

agent subsequently ingests to adjust its monitoring behaviour.

   To support reactive coordination, each agent subscribes to a change-notification stream associated with the documents

within its access scope. Internally, every document write is recorded as an append-only mutation event containing a document

identifier, the modified page reference, the writing agent’s role, and a monotonically increasing version counter. A lightweight

event broker dispatches these mutation events to all subscribed agents; upon receipt, an agent evaluates whether the change

warrants immediate action—such as escalating an abnormal finding to a clinician—or deferred processing during the next

scheduled reasoning cycle. This subscription mechanism decouples agents temporally while preserving causal ordering:

because every event references a version counter, agents can reconstruct the exact sequence of document changes and detect

concurrent modifications without polling. To prevent logically inconsistent concurrent updates, write-capable reasoning cycles

are serialized at the patient scope through a short-lived filesystem lease. Before an agent begins a read–reason–write operation

over a patient’s document subtree, it must first acquire that patient’s lock directory using an atomic filesystem primitive such

as mkdir or open(O_CREAT|O_EXCL). The lease record stores the agent identity, acquisition time, and last-heartbeat

timestamp; the agent renews the lease while running and releases it immediately after the final page append completes. If the

agent crashes, stalls, or exceeds a bounded execution window, the lease expires automatically and can be safely reclaimed after

a timeout. This policy intentionally chooses coarse-grained locking: all writes affecting a single patient are serialized for a

short interval, while unrelated patients remain fully parallelizable across the system. Because the mechanism is implemented

directly through standard Linux filesystem semantics, it requires no distributed lock service and remains fully auditable through

the same OS-native monitoring stack as ordinary document writes. All mutation events are persisted alongside the document

itself, yielding a complete, tamper-evident audit trail of every inter-agent information exchange across the system; Figure 1

summarises the overall architecture. Among the four components described above, the page-indexed memory architecture

requires the most detailed treatment and is elaborated in the following subsection.


3.2 Page-indexed memory architecture

The page-indexed memory architecture organizes agent memory as a three-stage lifecycle: capture, store, and recall (Figure 2).

In the capture stage, observations produced during agent interactions—sensor readings, dialogue turns, skill outputs—are

written as structured entries into the document collection via the mutation mechanism described above. In the store stage, the

system consolidates captured entries into a document hierarchy and maintains a manifest at each hierarchical level to summarize


                                                                                                                               7/25
Figure 1. Architecture of the Agentic Operating System for Hospitals. The system comprises three layers. (Agent Layer) Each
participant role—patient, clinician, triage, specialist—maps to a dedicated agent process executing within an OS-enforced
isolated namespace; agents interact with the environment solely through two operations: invoking pre-audited medical skills
and reading or writing shared clinical documents. (Interface Layer) The Medical Skills Library exposes a curated set of
statically typed workflow modules; the Document Store maintains per-role document collections linked by an append-only
mutation event stream dispatched by the Event Broker. (OS Enforcement Layer) Linux user isolation, file permission bits,
seccomp filters, AppArmor policies, and the auditd/inotify subsystem collectively enforce all access boundaries at the
kernel level, independent of model behaviour. Critically, no agent communicates with another through a direct channel; all
inter-agent coordination is realised exclusively through document writes and event notifications.




                                                                                                                      8/25
its contents. In the recall stage, the agent navigates this hierarchy through successive manifest reads, progressively narrowing

its focus until it reaches the pages most relevant to its current reasoning task. Critically, this architecture requires no vector

embeddings: navigation is driven entirely by the agent’s own language-reasoning capability applied to manifest text.

Document hierarchy and manifest files.                 The document collection is organized as a rooted tree H . Internal nodes of H

represent document groups (e.g., all records for a given patient, or all encounters within a care episode), and leaf nodes are

individual content pages p containing clinical content such as encounter notes, laboratory results, or medication orders. Each

internal node u stores a manifest.md file listing its immediate children with a brief, human-readable description of each

child’s scope and contents. Formally, the manifest at node u is a structured document:

                                                        
      Mu = (c1 , δ1 ), (c2 , δ2 ), . . . , (c|u| , δ|u| )


where ci is the identifier (path) of the i-th child and δi is a concise natural-language description of that child’s clinical scope,

time range, and document type. Leaf pages carry no manifest; they contain only primary content.

    Manifests are generated and maintained by the system automatically: when a new page is appended to a document group

following a mutation event, the system issues an LLM call to produce or update δi for the affected child entry. Because each

manifest update is local to a single node, maintenance cost is O(d) per mutation event, where d is the depth of the modified

node in H , and does not require batch reprocessing of sibling nodes.

Progressive disclosure retrieval.           Rather than computing similarity scores, the agent retrieves relevant content by iteratively

reading manifests and selecting which subtrees to descend into, guided by its reasoning about the query. This progressive

disclosure strategy mirrors how a clinician navigates a paper chart: first scanning a summary index, then opening only the

sections likely to contain the answer.

    Algorithm 1 formalizes this process. The agent begins at the root manifest Mroot and at each level presents the manifest

entries to the LLM together with the current query; the LLM selects a subset of children to expand. Branches not selected are

pruned without being read, avoiding unnecessary context consumption. Traversal continues until either leaf pages are reached

or the agent determines it has collected sufficient context.

    The LLM-S ELECT call at line 8 is the sole decision-making step: the agent reads the manifest entries as natural language

and outputs the subset of child identifiers relevant to the query. This replaces the similarity function of embedding-based

approaches with the agent’s full language-understanding capability, allowing it to reason about clinical scope, temporal

relevance, and document type simultaneously rather than reducing all three dimensions to a scalar distance.

    The depth bound L limits the maximum number of manifest reads per query and controls the breadth-depth trade-off:

shallow L retrieves broader context from higher-level summaries, while deeper traversal reaches more specific page content. In

practice, L is set per query type: a broad clinical summary query terminates at depth 1 or 2, while a targeted medication lookup

descends to leaf pages.


                                                                                                                                   9/25
Algorithm 1 Progressive Disclosure Retrieval via Manifest Navigation
 1: Input: query q, root manifest Mroot , max depth L
 2: Output: retrieved pages P∗
 3: P∗ ← /0
 4: frontier ← {(Mroot , depth = 0)}
 5: while frontier ̸= /0 do
 6:    (Mu , ℓ) ← dequeue(frontier)
 7:    entries ← parse(Mu ) {list of (ci , δi ) pairs}
 8:   S ← LLM-Select(q, entries) {agent selects relevant children}
 9:   for each (ci , δi ) ∈ S do
10:      if ci is a leaf page then
11:         P∗ ← P∗ ∪ {load(ci )}
12:      else if ℓ < L then
13:         enqueue (load manifest of ci , ℓ + 1) into frontier
14:      else
15:         P∗ ← P∗ ∪ {load(ci )} {depth limit reached; load node content as partial context}
16:      end if
17:   end for
18: end while
19: return P∗



Manifest maintenance on document mutation.                  Each document mutation event (described above) may invalidate the

manifest of the parent node. Upon receiving a mutation event for page p under node u, the system issues an incremental LLM

call that rewrites only the affected child entry δi in Mu , leaving all other entries unchanged. If a page is inserted or deleted, the

corresponding entry is added or removed from Mu and the description regenerated for adjacent entries if their scope changes.

Manifests at ancestor nodes are updated only when the scope description of the modified subtree changes materially (e.g., a new

clinical episode begins), determined by a brief LLM comparison of the old and new δi . This localized update policy ensures

that manifest files remain accurate reflections of live document state at the cost of at most O(L) incremental LLM calls per

mutation event, with no embedding recomputation at any level.


3.3 Clinical workflow integration

Hospitals involve numerous structured processes that require coordinated action across time, participants, and information

sources. The proposed architecture supports these processes by composing three mechanisms introduced above: medical

skills as the unit of executable action, document mutation as the communication channel between agents, and manifest-guided

memory navigation as the means of retrieving relevant clinical context. The following scenarios illustrate how representative

hospital workflows are realized within this framework (Figure 3).

Continuous monitoring and routine follow-up.             A patient agent assigned to a post-discharge patient executes a M ONITORV I -

TALS skill on a scheduled interval, aggregating wearable sensor readings and patient-reported symptoms into a structured daily

summary page appended to the patient’s health record. When the clinician agent’s next scheduled reasoning cycle fires, it

invokes manifest-guided retrieval to collect recent summary pages, synthesizes a progress assessment, and appends a follow-up

note to the physician document. If the assessment identifies a deteriorating trend—such as progressively elevated blood pressure



                                                                                                                               10/25
Figure 2. Page-indexed memory architecture and progressive disclosure retrieval. (Left) The memory lifecycle consists of
three stages: Capture (observations are written as structured pages), Store (pages are consolidated into a rooted document
hierarchy with a manifest file at each internal node), and Recall (the agent navigates the hierarchy through successive manifest
reads). (Right) The document tree is organised by patient, care episode, and document group; each internal node carries a
manifest (badge M) listing its children with natural-language scope descriptions, while leaf nodes contain primary clinical
content. Given a query, the agent issues an LLM-Select call at each level to identify relevant subtrees (highlighted in green) and
prune irrelevant branches without reading them (shown in grey, labelled “pruned”). This design requires no vector embeddings;
retrieval accuracy depends solely on the agent’s language-reasoning capability applied to manifest text, and the sequence of
manifests consulted constitutes an inherently interpretable access trace.




                                                                                                                           11/25
over five consecutive days—the clinician agent appends a structured F OLLOW U P R EQUEST entry to the shared care plan

document, triggering a mutation event that notifies a scheduling agent—a dedicated agent process responsible for managing

appointment queues and booking workflows—to book an in-person review. Throughout this workflow no agent communicates

directly with another; all coordination is mediated through document writes observed via the event subscription model.

Triage and initial assessment.       When a patient registers at the emergency department, a triage agent executes a C OL -

LECT P RESENTING S YMPTOMS skill to populate the initial encounter page of the patient record. The agent then performs

manifest-guided traversal of prior records—navigating episode-level manifests to retrieve relevant chronic conditions, current

medications, and recent laboratory results—and appends a structured triage assessment page consolidating the presenting

complaint, relevant history, and a preliminary acuity score. This assessment page is written to a shared triage queue document

accessible to all on-duty clinician agents. A clinician agent subscribed to that queue receives the mutation event, reads the

triage page, and either accepts the case or re-routes it to a specialist agent by writing a referral entry to the queue document,

updating the patient’s acuity manifest entry accordingly.

Emergency escalation.      When a patient agent detects a critical physiological event—such as a heart-rate reading exceeding a

predefined threshold or an oxygen-saturation drop below a safe boundary—it immediately invokes the E SCALATE E MERGENCY

skill rather than deferring to the next scheduled reasoning cycle. This skill atomically appends a high-priority alert page to

the patient record and writes a structured escalation entry to a dedicated emergency coordination document monitored by all

on-duty clinician agents. Because escalation entries carry a priority flag in the mutation event payload, the event broker delivers

them ahead of standard notifications, allowing clinician agents to interrupt their current reasoning cycle and respond within a

bounded latency. The responding clinician agent reads the patient record via manifest navigation—directly targeting the most

recent vital-sign pages—documents an initial response plan, and invokes a N OTIFY C ODE skill that triggers the appropriate

hospital alert protocol. Every step in this chain—sensor event, escalation write, clinician response, and protocol invocation—is

persisted as a timestamped mutation event, producing a complete and auditable timeline of the emergency response.

Medication management and adherence tracking.               A patient agent executes a C HECK M EDICATIONA DHERENCE skill

daily, comparing scheduled medication events in the care plan against patient-confirmed administration entries. If a missed

dose is detected, the agent appends an adherence flag to the medication log page; if the pattern persists beyond a configurable

threshold, it writes a non-adherence alert to the shared care coordination document. The clinician agent, upon receiving the

mutation notification, retrieves the medication history pages via manifest navigation and determines whether to adjust the

dosing schedule, initiate a patient-education interaction, or escalate to a pharmacist agent. Any modification to the care plan is

written as a new versioned page, and the patient agent ingests the change at its next cycle to update its monitoring parameters

accordingly. This closed-loop design ensures that medication management remains consistent across agent boundaries without

requiring any direct inter-agent message passing.




                                                                                                                             12/25
Proactive risk identification and preventive intervention.         Beyond reacting to acute threshold breaches, the architecture

naturally supports proactive longitudinal reasoning by exploiting the full temporal depth of the document hierarchy. On

a weekly or monthly schedule, a clinician agent executes an A NALYZE L ONGITUDINALT REND skill that issues a broad

manifest-guided retrieval query spanning multiple care episodes—navigating from the patient’s root manifest across years

of encounter summaries, laboratory trend pages, and vital-sign history. The agent reasons over this longitudinal context to

compute a structured risk assessment page, recording indicators such as a gradual decline in renal function across twelve

months of laboratory results or a pattern of increasing emergency visits preceding each winter. This risk assessment page

is appended to the patient record and, if the computed risk score exceeds a configurable threshold, additionally written as a

preventive alert to a population-health coordination document monitored by a care management agent. The care management

agent, upon receiving the mutation event, reviews the alert, cross-references institutional preventive care guidelines via its

own manifest-guided retrieval, and writes a recommended intervention plan—such as a nephrology referral or a structured

self-management programme—to the patient’s care plan document. The patient agent ingests the updated care plan and adjusts

its monitoring focus accordingly, increasing the frequency of relevant skill executions. This workflow requires no architectural

extension; it is realized entirely through scheduled skill invocations, manifest-guided retrieval across deep document history,

and the existing document-mutation coordination model.

Cross-specialty coordination for multimorbid patients.           Patients managed concurrently by multiple specialists present

a coordination challenge that the document-mutation model addresses directly through shared document access and event

subscription. Each specialist discipline is represented by a dedicated clinician agent—for example, a cardiology agent, a

nephrology agent, or an oncology agent—each holding write access to its own specialty-note documents and read access to

a shared multidisciplinary care plan document. When the cardiology agent updates the antihypertensive regimen, it writes a

new medication order page and appends a summary entry to the shared care plan; the resulting mutation events are delivered

to all subscribed specialist agents. Each specialist agent that receives the notification performs a manifest-guided retrieval

of its own relevant history—the nephrology agent navigates to recent renal function pages, the oncology agent to current

chemotherapy protocol pages—and evaluates the change against its own treatment context. If a conflict is identified, such as a

newly prescribed ACE inhibitor contraindicated by the patient’s current chemotherapy agent, the detecting agent appends a

structured conflict alert page to the shared care plan document, triggering a further mutation event visible to all specialist agents

and the coordinating clinician. The coordinating clinician agent aggregates these conflict entries, retrieves the full relevant

context across all specialty manifests, and produces a reconciled care plan page that supersedes the conflicting orders. Because

every write in this workflow is a versioned document mutation, the full sequence of specialist updates, conflict detections, and

plan reconciliations is preserved in the audit trail with causal ordering intact, providing a transparent record equivalent to a

documented multidisciplinary team meeting.




                                                                                                                               13/25
Figure 3. Clinical application scenarios enabled by the Agentic Operating System for Hospitals. The nine-panel grid
illustrates representative use cases realised by the proposed architecture. The central panel summarises the four core
mechanisms shared across all scenarios: least-privilege execution, document-mutation coordination, manifest-guided memory
retrieval, and ad-hoc skill composition. The surrounding eight panels cover scheduled care (Continuous Monitoring,
Medication Management), reactive workflows (Triage, Emergency Escalation), longitudinal analysis (Proactive Risk
Identification, Population Health), multi-agent coordination (Cross-Specialty Coordination), and infrastructure (Safety, Audit &
Governance). Each scenario is realised entirely through the composition of medical skills, document writes, event
subscriptions, and manifest navigation—without any bespoke architectural extension. The diversity of use cases demonstrates
that a single unified infrastructure layer is sufficient to address both routine and exceptional clinical needs across the full
spectrum of hospital workflows.




                                                                                                                          14/25
3.4 Safety and governance

A key insight of the proposed architecture is that reducing the agent’s effective interface to two primitive operations—file

read and file write—allows most of the safety and governance problem to be delegated to the security machinery of the host

operating system rather than implemented as bespoke application logic.

Minimal trusted computing base.         Unlike general-purpose agent frameworks that require network access, dynamic code

execution, database connections, and external API calls—each of which introduces an independent attack surface—agents in

the proposed system interact with the environment solely by reading documents and appending pages. This minimal interface

dramatically shrinks the trusted computing base: the system has no network stack to secure, no interpreter sandbox to maintain,

and no API credential lifecycle to manage. The security problem reduces to controlling which agent processes may read or

write which files, a problem that mature operating systems have solved for decades.

OS-native enforcement.      On Linux, the proposed permission model maps directly onto standard OS security primitives

without any additional infrastructure. Each agent process runs under a dedicated OS user account; file ownership and permission

bits enforce the read/write access boundaries defined by the architecture—patient agents own patient-record files, clinician

agents own physician-document files, and no agent can access files outside its assigned subtree. Mandatory access control

frameworks such as SELinux or AppArmor can further constrain each agent process to its declared file paths at the kernel

level, preventing privilege escalation even if the model’s instruction-following is compromised. Linux namespaces provide

filesystem-level isolation between agent processes at no additional development cost, and seccomp filters can restrict the

system-call surface of each process to the minimal set required for file I/O. Because these mechanisms are enforced by the

kernel rather than by application code, they are independent of model behaviour and cannot be circumvented by a misbehaving

or adversarially prompted agent.

Audit trail as a filesystem property.    The append-only mutation log that underlies inter-agent coordination (Section 3) is,

at the storage layer, an ordinary append-only file. Filesystem-level auditing tools such as Linux inotify and auditd can

therefore monitor every document write in real time without any instrumentation of agent code. This means that a complete

audit trail of all agent actions—required by healthcare regulations such as HIPAA—is obtained as a byproduct of the OS’s

native file-audit infrastructure rather than as a separately engineered component; tamper-evidence can be further strengthened

by routing the append-only log through a hash-chaining mechanism at the storage layer.

Comparison with complex agent architectures.         The safety simplification achieved here contrasts sharply with approaches

that grant agents broad system access and then attempt to impose safety constraints on top. Securing an agent that can invoke

arbitrary APIs, execute shell commands, and load external libraries requires custom sandboxing, runtime policy enforcement,

and continuous monitoring of a large and evolving attack surface. By contrast, securing an agent whose only interface is file

I/O requires configuring OS users, file permissions, and an access-control policy—tasks that system administrators perform

routinely and for which well-understood tooling already exists. This alignment with existing OS security infrastructure not only


                                                                                                                          15/25
reduces implementation complexity but also facilitates independent security audits, as reviewers can verify the permission

model using standard OS introspection tools rather than inspecting novel application-layer enforcement code18 .


4 Evaluation

We conducted a targeted empirical evaluation of the page-indexed memory component. The goal was to test whether manifest-

guided progressive disclosure recovers relevant evidence more reliably than flat vector retrieval on structured longitudinal

clinical records.


4.1 Experimental setup

Data source and patient selection.       We evaluated on MIMIC-IV v2.219 , a de-identified electronic health record dataset

from Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, supplemented with clinical notes from MIMIC-IV-Note20 (available through

PhysioNet21 ). Candidate patients were required to have at least three hospital admissions and to pass a quality floor: discharge-

note coverage ≥50% of admissions, diagnosis diversity ≥5 unique ICD codes, at least one radiology report, and de-identification

density ≤15 tokens per 1 000 characters. From eligible candidates we drew a stratified random sample of 100 patients across

gender, age bracket (<50, 50–70, >70), and admission-count bracket (3–5, 6–9, ≥10).

Corpus construction.      MIMIC-IV stores clinical data as relational tables in compressed CSV files. A deterministic pipeline

reorganized these flat tables into a three-level directory hierarchy—patient (S{id}) / admission (hadm_{id}) / document—

mirroring the structure required by the manifest architecture. Six document types were extracted per admission where available:

discharge summaries, radiology reports, ICD-coded diagnoses, emergency-department triage assessments, prescriptions, and

laboratory results. Free-text notes (discharge summaries and radiology reports) were preserved verbatim, retaining only the

highest-sequence revision for discharge notes. Radiology reports were sorted by chart time and numbered sequentially within

each admission. Structured data were rendered into human-readable Markdown: diagnoses were joined with ICD long titles,

prescriptions were sorted chronologically, laboratory results were grouped by test category (e.g. Chemistry, Hematology) using

the d_labitems dictionary, and triage records were formatted as vital-sign summaries. All documents received YAML

provenance headers recording source table, identifiers, and metadata. No clinical content was added or paraphrased; the pipeline

only restructured, formatted, and annotated original records. The resulting corpus contains 6 991 leaf documents across 814

admissions.

   To enable hierarchical navigation, manifests were generated bottom-up by the LLM as Markdown tables with four columns

(Child, Type, Date, Scope). Admission-level manifests were produced from the admission’s metadata and the first 1 500

characters of each leaf document, with the Scope column summarizing each document’s clinical content in one sentence.

Patient-level manifests were then produced from each patient’s demographics and a structured summary per admission (dates,

document count, top three ICD diagnoses), with Scope summarizing the admission’s key events. The 914 manifests serve as the

navigational index for the retrieval system.



                                                                                                                           16/25
Queries and gold labels.      Queries were generated from the selected cohort using an LLM-guided pipeline over the manifest

hierarchy. For each patient, feasible tiers were inferred from corpus structure: Tier 1 required at least one leaf document, Tier 2

required at least one admission with two or more distinct document-type categories, and Tier 3 required at least two admissions

containing documents. Each patient was then assigned one feasible tier by greedy deficit balancing. The LLM received the

patient-level manifest, all admission-level manifests, and snippets from up to five leaf documents per admission (the first 3 000

characters of each, prioritized by document type and explicitly including laboratory results when available), and produced one

candidate query together with provisional gold-document paths. The prompt enforced tier-specific constraints: Tier 1 queries

had to be answerable from exactly one leaf document, Tier 2 queries from two to three documents within a single admission,

and Tier 3 queries from documents spanning at least two admissions. Proposed paths were normalized against the on-disk

corpus and discarded if unresolvable; when a tier remained below quota, additional queries were generated from patients

feasible for that tier until 100 queries per tier were reached. This process yielded 300 evaluation queries in total, balanced

evenly across the three difficulty tiers.

    Gold-standard evidence sets and reference answers were constructed through a three-stage LLM-assisted pipeline. First, a

sufficiency check determined whether the provisional gold documents were enough to answer the query. If not, an expansion

step used the target patient’s admission-level manifests to identify additional documents from their scope descriptions, after

which the expanded set was re-verified. Queries whose evidence sets remained insufficient were manually reviewed against the

source corpus and corrected before benchmarking. Finally, a concise reference answer was generated using only the verified

gold documents.

Models and parameters.         All LLM calls—manifest navigation, answer generation, gold-label production, and judging—

used Kimi K2.5 through an OpenAI-compatible API from Alibaba Cloud. Manifest navigation and the LLM judge used

max_tokens = 768; answer generation for all three systems used max_tokens = 2048.

Systems compared.        All three systems operated in a patient-scoped setting: patient identity was resolved deterministically

from the query text or the structured target_patient field, without an LLM call. Manifest-guided retrieval then navigated

two levels of the hierarchy via LLM calls—first selecting admissions from the patient-level manifest (level 1, hereafter L1), then

selecting documents from each admission-level manifest (level 2, L2)—to assemble a targeted set of leaf documents. Flat-RAG

retrieval applied section-aware chunking (splitting on Markdown headings, falling back to paragraph boundaries, with a

512-token sliding window and 64-token overlap for oversized sections), embedded each chunk using text-embedding-v4

(1 536 dimensions, Alibaba Cloud), and performed document-level aggregation: 3k candidate chunks were grouped by source

document, ranked by a composite key (best chunk distance, supporting chunk count, mean top-3 distance), and the top-k

documents were selected. Metadata-filtered RAG (RAG-AF) applied the same embedding and aggregation pipeline but

pre-filtered chunks by admission identifiers extracted from the query text before dense retrieval, falling back to patient-level

filtering when no admission identifiers were found. This variant tests whether explicit structural metadata narrows the gap with

manifest-guided retrieval. We report k=10 as the primary baseline; k=5 and k=15 appear in Table 3.


                                                                                                                             17/25
Metrics.   Retrieval precision = |R ∩ G |/|R| and recall = |R ∩ G |/|G |, where R is the set of retrieved documents and G

the verified gold evidence set. We also report perfect recall (fraction of queries recovering all gold documents) and the mean

number of retrieved documents. Answer quality was assessed by an LLM judge on a 1–5 rubric evaluating factual accuracy

and completeness relative to the gold answer (2 100 total judgments: 300 queries × 7 system configurations—manifest, three

flat-RAG k values, and three metadata-filtered-RAG k values).


4.2 Retrieval performance

Table 1 summarizes the main comparison across three systems. Manifest-guided retrieval achieved the highest precision (0.779,

2.2× over RAG-AF and 3.4× over flat RAG) and the highest answer-quality score (4.45). On recall, manifest and RAG-AF

were effectively tied overall (0.877 versus 0.876), but this aggregate masks a critical Tier-3 divergence analyzed below. Notably,

RAG-AF achieved more perfect-recall queries than manifest (224/300 versus 214/300), reflecting its higher recall on Tier-1 and

Tier-2; however, this came at substantially lower precision (0.352 versus 0.779) and higher document load (7.8 versus 5.8).

Part of the precision gap is structural: both RAG variants always retrieve a fixed number of documents regardless of query

complexity, whereas the manifest system adapts its retrieval set (1 document for Tier-1, ∼3.5 for Tier-2, ∼13 for Tier-3).

Table 1. Overall comparison between manifest-guided retrieval, metadata-filtered RAG (RAG-AF), and flat RAG at k=10.
Higher is better for score, precision, recall, and perfect recall; lower is better for retrieved documents.

                         System              Score   Precision   Recall    Perfect Recall   Docs Retrieved
                         Manifest            4.45      0.779      0.877      214/300             5.8
                         RAG-AF (k=10)       4.32      0.352      0.876      224/300             7.8
                         RAG (k=10)          3.85      0.231      0.647      124/300             9.7


    Table 2 breaks down performance by query tier, revealing three key patterns.

    First, on Tier-1 and Tier-2 queries, metadata filtering closes the recall gap. RAG-AF reaches 0.960 and 0.967 recall on Tier-1

and Tier-2 respectively, exceeding manifest (0.870 and 0.913). This confirms that simple admission-level pre-filtering largely

resolves the disambiguation problem for queries that explicitly reference an admission. However, manifest precision remains

5× higher on Tier-1 (0.860 versus 0.167) and 1.9× on Tier-2 (0.840 versus 0.441) because it retrieves only the documents

needed.

    Second, the clearest manifest advantage appears on Tier-3 longitudinal queries. When queries span multiple admissions

without naming them, admission filtering barely helps (RAG 0.676 → RAG-AF 0.701). Manifest recall (0.846) is 21% higher

than RAG-AF, confirming that LLM-guided episode selection is essential for longitudinal queries.

    Third, 13 of the 100 Tier-1 queries asked for the chief complaint (gold: discharge_summary.md); the navigator

selected triage.md instead—a plausible but incorrect choice since both documents contain chief-complaint information.

This is a navigator precision limitation rather than a structural failure and is discussed further in Section 5.




                                                                                                                           18/25
Table 2. Per-tier comparison across manifest-guided retrieval, metadata-filtered RAG (RAG-AF), and flat RAG at k=10.
Manifest advantages are most pronounced on Tier-3 longitudinal queries.

                          Tier    System            Score     Precision     Recall   Perfect Recall   Docs
                                  Manifest             4.76       0.860     0.870       87/100        1.0
                              1   RAG-AF (k=10)        4.72       0.167     0.960       96/100        6.6
                                  RAG (k=10)           3.88       0.069     0.640       64/100        9.7
                                  Manifest             4.47       0.840     0.913       74/100        3.5
                              2   RAG-AF (k=10)        4.28       0.441     0.967       91/100        7.0
                                  RAG (k=10)           3.88       0.193     0.626       30/100        9.7
                                  Manifest             4.11       0.638     0.846       53/100        13.0
                              3   RAG-AF (k=10)        3.95       0.449     0.701       37/100        9.6
                                  RAG (k=10)           3.80       0.431     0.676       30/100        9.7



4.3 Sensitivity and ablation

Table 3 shows k-sensitivity for both RAG variants. Even at k=15, RAG-AF surpasses manifest recall (0.912 versus 0.877)—but

at the cost of nearly double the documents (9.8 versus 5.8) and less than half the precision (0.305 versus 0.779). Manifest

matches RAG-AF at k=10 on recall (0.877 versus 0.876) with 2.2× higher precision and fewer documents. Increasing k further

yields diminishing returns for RAG-AF while degrading precision.

Table 3. RAG sensitivity to k for both flat and metadata-filtered (RAG-AF) variants. Manifest results (from Table 1) are shown
for reference. Score denotes a supporting LLM-judge answer-quality rating (1–5 scale).

                        System             Precision     Recall     Perfect Recall   Docs Retrieved   Score
                        RAG (k=5)           0.291         0.439        59/300             5.0          3.28
                        RAG (k=10)          0.231         0.647       124/300             9.7          3.85
                        RAG (k=15)          0.186         0.738       165/300             14.3         3.95
                        RAG-AF (k=5)        0.466         0.768       179/300             4.6          4.11
                        RAG-AF (k=10)       0.352         0.876       224/300             7.8          4.32
                        RAG-AF (k=15)       0.305         0.912       244/300             9.8          4.33
                        Manifest            0.779         0.877       214/300             5.8          4.45


   To characterize the contribution of each structural layer, we constructed a four-level ablation spectrum (Table 4) ranging

from pure dense retrieval to full manifest-guided navigation.

   Table 4 reveals the contribution of each structural layer. Adding explicit admission metadata (RAG → RAG-AF) is the

single largest recall improvement (+0.229), but it only works when the query text contains admission identifiers (all 100

Tier-1, all 100 Tier-2, but only 21 of 100 Tier-3 queries). LLM-based episode selection (RAG-AF → Manifest L1) pushes

recall to 0.977 by handling Tier-3 queries that lack explicit metadata, but precision collapses to 0.238 because all documents

within selected admissions are loaded. Document-level filtering (Manifest L1 → L1+L2) recovers precision to 0.779—a 3.3×

improvement—with a modest recall trade-off (−0.100). This confirms that the document-level manifest is the primary source

of the precision advantage.




                                                                                                                        19/25
 Table 4. Structural awareness ablation. Each row uses progressively richer structural information from the clinical record.

                    System               Structural awareness          Precision   Recall    Perfect Recall   Docs
                    RAG (k=10)           Dense retrieval only            0.231      0.647       124/300       9.7
                    RAG-AF (k=10)        + admission metadata            0.352      0.876       224/300       7.8
                    Manifest L1 only     + LLM episode selection         0.238      0.977       276/300       22.2
                    Manifest L1+L2       + LLM document selection        0.779      0.877       214/300        5.8



4.4 Qualitative example

The manifest-based approach also produced directly interpretable retrieval traces. For query Q289, a Tier-3 longitudinal query

asking how a patient’s lactate levels changed from an initial craniotomy admission to a later readmission for surgical site

infection, the system resolved the patient from the query text, selected the two relevant admissions, and retrieved exactly two

documents: lab_blood_gas.md from each admission. This trace achieved both precision and recall of 1.0. The resulting

answer cited specific lactate values (2.2–3.0 mmol/L during the craniotomy admission versus 0.9 mmol/L at readmission),

demonstrating that the manifest hierarchy enables clinically precise longitudinal reasoning with minimal document retrieval.

Table 5. Example manifest trace for Q289. The trace shows the selected patient, admission nodes, and leaf documents used to
answer a longitudinal lactate-monitoring query on real MIMIC-IV data.

    Field                              Value
    Query                              How did S19768128’s lactate levels change from the initial craniotomy admission to the later
                                       readmission for surgical site infection?
    Selected patient                   S19768128 (resolved from query text)
    Selected admissions                hadm_20298053, hadm_20946200
    Selected documents                 lab_blood_gas (from both admissions)
    Retrieved files                    S19768128/hadm_20298053/lab_blood_gas.md
                                       S19768128/hadm_20946200/lab_blood_gas.md
    Trace quality                      Precision = 1.0; Recall = 1.0




5 Discussion

This work makes four conceptual contributions to the design of AI systems for healthcare. We complement these architectural

claims with an empirical validation of the page-indexed memory component on de-identified clinical records from MIMIC-IV.

Because the benchmark evaluates document retrieval on a single institution’s records using a single LLM family, it should be

interpreted as targeted evidence for the retrieval architecture rather than as end-to-end validation of a full hospital operating

system. Accordingly, the evaluation supports stronger claims about retrieval quality, longitudinal evidence recovery, and trace

interpretability than about OS-level safety enforcement or real-world clinical deployment.

   First, we reframe the problem of deploying LLM agents in hospitals as an infrastructure design problem rather than a

model-capability problem. The central argument—that failures of safety, memory, and coordination arise from architectural

mismatch rather than insufficient model intelligence—motivates a different design strategy: constrain the environment rather

than rely on the model alone. This perspective aligns agent deployment with established principles from operating-systems

research, particularly least-privilege execution and isolation as primary safety mechanisms.


                                                                                                                                  20/25
   Second, we introduce a document-mutation coordination model in which all inter-agent communication is mediated through

structured file writes, without direct messaging. This design reduces the inter-agent interface to two filesystem primitives,

making the coordination protocol verifiable, auditable, and enforceable through OS-native mechanisms. The event-subscription

layer built on top of this model supports reactive coordination, including priority-flagged emergency escalation, without

requiring agents to maintain persistent communication channels.

   Third, we propose progressive disclosure via manifest-guided navigation as an alternative to embedding-based memory

retrieval. By representing the document hierarchy through human-readable manifest files and delegating navigation decisions to

the agent’s language-reasoning capability, the architecture eliminates embedding infrastructure while preserving the hierarchical

and longitudinal structure of clinical records. Manifest-guided retrieval also yields inherently interpretable access traces: the

sequence of manifests read and the children selected at each level constitutes a human-readable record of the information

considered before reasoning. In our MIMIC-IV evaluation, manifest-guided retrieval achieved a 2.2× precision advantage

over the strongest baseline (metadata-filtered RAG) while matching its overall recall (0.877 versus 0.876) and retrieving 26%

fewer documents (5.8 versus 7.8), providing concrete evidence that this navigation strategy scales to real clinical records with

hundreds of documents per patient.

   Fourth, we identify ad hoc task composition as a clinically essential capability that is absent from existing hospital IT

systems and show that the proposed architecture can provide it without bespoke engineering for each use case. Because

fixed, pre-programmed workflows cannot accommodate the long-tail variability of clinical practice, patients and physicians

routinely encounter needs that installed systems cannot address. The agentic model responds by allowing the agent to reason

over the medical skill library and compose novel task sequences on demand, augmented by long-term memory that draws on

context accumulated across care episodes. This combination of dynamic skill composition and longitudinal memory makes the

proposed system qualitatively more adaptive than static workflow-based platforms.

   Several limitations of the current paper warrant acknowledgment. First, manifest descriptions are themselves LLM-generated

and are therefore susceptible to inaccuracy, omission, or temporal drift if the manifest update mechanism fails to fire on a

mutation event. Although the maintenance policy is designed to be incremental, a high-frequency update environment—such as

an intensive care unit generating continuous sensor data—may produce a volume of mutation events that stresses the O(L)

LLM-call-per-update budget. Batching strategies and manifest staleness tolerances require further investigation.

   Second, the concurrency-control policy is deliberately conservative. The current design serializes write-producing reasoning

cycles at the patient level through short-lived filesystem leases, which is straightforward to implement and audit on Linux

but may reduce throughput when many agents contend for the same high-acuity patient record. In practice, this trade-off is

acceptable for the clinical setting we target because the critical safety requirement is to preserve a coherent patient state during

each agent’s read–reason–write interval, and the duration of that interval is expected to be short relative to the surrounding

care workflow. Nevertheless, future work should evaluate whether finer-grained locking, non-blocking append queues, or

transaction-style batching can preserve the same safety guarantees while improving throughput in unusually high-frequency



                                                                                                                              21/25
update environments such as intensive care monitoring.

   Third, the architecture assumes that patient data originates within the document collection managed by the proposed system.

In practice, hospitals operate established electronic health record (EHR) systems such as Epic or Cerner, and clinical data exists

in HL7 FHIR-compliant formats that would need to be translated into the document hierarchy. The design of bidirectional

synchronization between the proposed document store and existing EHR infrastructure is beyond the scope of this paper.

   Fourth, the evaluation uses a single LLM (Kimi K2.5) for all roles—navigation, answer generation, gold-label production,

and judging—which may introduce systematic bias. The LLM judge scores reflect quality assessment by the same model family

that generated the answers. Cross-model evaluation and human clinical expert review remain necessary for robust validation.

   Fifth, the manifest system’s admission-level navigation granularity introduces a structural precision–recall trade-off: when

a broad query activates an entire admission, sibling documents not needed for the specific query are loaded alongside relevant

ones. This over-retrieval was most pronounced on tier-3 longitudinal queries (precision 0.638 versus tier-1 precision 0.860).

Finer-grained navigation, such as document-type filtering within admissions, could mitigate this effect.

   We tested this directly by adding admission-level metadata filtering to the RAG baseline (RAG-AF). On tier-1 and tier-2

queries where admission identifiers appear in the query text, metadata-filtered RAG closed the recall gap entirely (0.960 and

0.967 versus manifest 0.870 and 0.913) while narrowing the precision gap. However, on tier-3 longitudinal queries—where

admission identifiers are typically absent—metadata filtering provided minimal improvement (0.701 versus flat RAG 0.676),

and manifest recall (0.846) remained substantially higher. This confirms that the value of hierarchical navigation increases with

query complexity: simple metadata filtering largely closes the gap on single-admission lookups, but cross-admission reasoning

requires the kind of LLM-guided episode selection that the manifest hierarchy provides.

   Our error analysis revealed two systematic patterns that illuminate the strengths and limitations of each approach. First,

embedding-based retrieval systematically failed to disambiguate documents sharing vocabulary but differing by temporal or

structural context. Of the 46 queries where flat RAG at k=10 achieved zero recall, 36 were tier-1 queries—typically targeting

a specific document from one admission when the patient had many structurally similar documents across admissions. This

pattern is consistent with our metadata-filtering experiment: RAG-AF, which pre-filters by admission identifier, reduced tier-1

zero-recall failures from 36 to 4, confirming that the disambiguation failure is fundamentally a metadata problem, not an

embedding quality problem. Manifest-guided retrieval largely avoids this failure mode because it resolves the admission before

selecting documents within it, though 13 tier-1 queries still failed due to document-type ambiguity within the correct admission.

   Second, the manifest system’s over-retrieval on tier-3 queries followed a predictable pattern. Across 100 tier-3 queries, the

system retrieved 708 non-gold documents (mean 7.08 per query), with three extreme outliers exceeding 60 extra documents

each for patients with many admissions. Despite this over-retrieval, manifest tier-3 precision (0.638) still exceeded RAG-AF at

k=10 (0.449).

   Third, the 13 tier-1 manifest failures noted above reveal a limitation of LLM-based navigation: when two document types

cover similar content, the navigator may select the wrong one. All 13 involved chief-complaint queries where the gold document



                                                                                                                            22/25
was discharge_summary.md but the navigator chose triage.md—both of which contain chief-complaint information.

Possible mitigation includes query-aware document ranking within the selected admission.


6 Conclusion

We argue that deploying LLM agents in hospitals is primarily an infrastructure problem rather than a model-capability problem,

and we propose the Agentic Operating System for Hospitals as a concrete response. By reducing each agent’s interface to file

read and file write, the architecture delegates safety enforcement to the host operating system, replaces vector retrieval with

manifest-guided document navigation, and enables ad hoc task composition across a curated medical skill library. Together,

these design choices address structural limitations shared by both general-purpose agent frameworks and fixed-function hospital

IT systems. In an evaluation on 100 MIMIC-IV patient records with 300 stratified clinical queries (100 per tier), manifest-guided

retrieval achieved 2.2× higher precision than a metadata-filtered RAG baseline (0.779 versus 0.352) while matching its overall

recall, and 3.4× higher precision than flat RAG (0.779 versus 0.231). Even against the metadata-filtered baseline, manifest

retrieval achieved 21% higher recall on longitudinal queries (0.846 versus 0.701), with its clearest advantages observed on

multi-admission queries where simple metadata filtering is insufficient. We offer this design as a foundation for clinical AI

infrastructure that earns trust not by assuming safe model behavior, but by making unsafe behavior structurally difficult.


Author Contributions

W.Y. conceived the study, developed the architecture, and wrote the manuscript. H.Q. conducted the experiments and

implemented the evaluation pipeline. B.Z. and C.L. contributed clinical expertise and reviewed the clinical workflow and safety

considerations. Z.H. assisted with literature review and manuscript revision. X.F., R.Y., and J.D. supervised the project and

revised the manuscript. All authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript.


Competing Interests

The authors declare no competing interests.


Data Availability

The evaluation was conducted on the MIMIC-IV dataset, version 2.219 , with clinical notes from MIMIC-IV-Note20 , available

through PhysioNet21 (https://physionet.org/content/mimiciv/2.2/) under a credentialed data use agreement.

The evaluation pipeline code is available at https://github.com/[repository-placeholder].


References

 1. Mohammadi, M., Li, Y., Lo, J. & Yip, W. Evaluation and benchmarking of LLM agents: A survey. In KDD’25, Proceedings

    of the 31th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 6129–6139 (2025).


                                                                                                                           23/25
 2. Wang, W. et al. A survey of LLM-based agents in medicine: How far are we from baymax? In Findings of the Association

    for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025, 10345–10359 (Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025).

 3. Yao, S. et al. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on

    Learning Representations (ICLR) (2022).

 4. Shinn, N., Cassano, F., Gopinath, A., Narasimhan, K. & Yao, S. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement

    learning. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36 (NeurIPS) (2023).

 5. Park, J. S. et al. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In The 36th Annual ACM Symposium on

    User Interface Software and Technology (UIST), 1–22 (2023).

 6. Steinberger, P. OpenClaw. https://github.com/openclaw/openclaw (2025).

 7. Lewis, P. et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Information

    Processing Systems 33 (NeurIPS), 9459–9474 (2020).

 8. Packer, C. et al. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560 (2023).

 9. Edge, D. et al. From local to global: A graph RAG approach to query-focused summarization. arXiv preprint

    arXiv:2404.16130 (2024).

10. Sarthi, P. et al. Raptor: Recursive abstractive processing for tree-organized retrieval. In The Twelfth International

    Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2024).

11. Gutiérrez, B. J., Shu, Y., Gu, Y., Yasunaga, M. & Su, Y. HippoRAG: Neurobiologically inspired long-term memory for

    large language models. Adv. neural information processing systems (NeurIPS) (2024).

12. Sendak, M. P. et al. Presenting machine learning model information to clinical end users with model facts labels. npj Digit.

    Medicine 3, 41, DOI: 10.1038/s41746-020-0253-3 (2020).

13. Nagendran, M. et al. Artificial intelligence versus clinicians: systematic review of design, reporting standards, and claims

    of deep learning studies. BMJ 368, m689, DOI: 10.1136/bmj.m689 (2020).

14. Rajpurkar, P., Chen, E., Banerjee, O. & Topol, E. J. Ai in health and medicine. Nat. Medicine 28, 31–38, DOI:

    10.1038/s41591-021-01614-0 (2022).

15. Ash, J. S., Berg, M. & Coiera, E. Some unintended consequences of information technology in health care: the nature of

    patient care information system-related errors. J. Am. Med. Informatics Assoc. 11, 104–112, DOI: 10.1197/jamia.M1471

    (2004).

16. Sutton, R. T. et al. An overview of clinical decision support systems: benefits, risks, and strategies for success. npj Digit.

    Medicine 3, 17, DOI: 10.1038/s41746-020-0221-y (2020).

17. Panch, T., Mattie, H. & Celi, L. A. The “inconvenient truth” about AI in healthcare. npj Digit. Medicine 2, 77, DOI:

    10.1038/s41746-019-0155-4 (2019).


                                                                                                                           24/25
18. Holzinger, A. et al. Information fusion as an integrative cross-cutting enabler to achieve robust, explainable, and trustworthy

    medical artificial intelligence. Inf. Fusion 79, 263–278, DOI: 10.1016/j.inffus.2021.10.007 (2022).

19. Johnson, A. E. W. et al. Mimic-iv, a freely accessible electronic health record dataset. Sci. Data 10, 1, DOI: 10.1038/

    s41597-022-01899-x (2023).

20. Johnson, A. E. W., Pollard, T. J. et al. Mimic-iv-note: Deidentified free-text clinical notes. https://physionet.org/content/

    mimic-iv-note/ (2023). PhysioNet.

21. Goldberger, A. L. et al. Physiobank, physiotoolkit, and physionet: Components of a new research resource for complex

    physiologic signals. Circulation 101, e215–e220, DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.101.23.e215 (2000).




                                                                                                                             25/25
