                                         Problem Reductions at Scale: Agentic Integration of
                                                 Computationally Hard Problems


                                                                      Xi-Wei Pan* 1 Shi-Wen An* 2, 3 Jin-Guo Liu1, †
                                                                1
                                                                    HKUST (GZ) 2 Institute of Science Tokyo 3 RIKEN AIP




arXiv:2604.11535v2 [cs.AI] 7 May 2026
                                                                                             Abstract
                                                    Solving an NP-hard optimization problem often requires reformulating it for a spe-
                                                    cific solver—quantum hardware, a commercial optimizer, or a domain heuristic. A
                                                    tool for polynomial-time reductions between hard problems would let practitioners
                                                    route any supported problem to any supported solver through a single interface.
                                                    Building such a library at scale, however, has remained out of reach. We show that
                                                    harness engineering, the practice of designing constraints, verification systems,
                                                    and feedback loops that channel AI coding agents, can overcome this barrier. Our
                                                    harness combines a no-code contribution route for domain experts, a multilayer veri-
                                                    fication stack ranging from type-level checks to agentic feature tests (AI agents role-
                                                    playing as end users), and a fully automated implementation-review-integration
                                                    pipeline. In about three months, we built a command-line tool backed by a library of
                                                    100+ problem types and 200+ reduction rules in over 170k lines of Rust. The result
                                                    suggests that a well-engineered harness lets agents build well-tested software at a
                                                    scale and pace beyond prior reduction-library efforts. Because the reduction graph
                                                    composes transitively, a new solver registered for any single problem type instantly
                                                    becomes available to every problem connected by a reduction path. The source code
                                                    is available at https://github.com/CodingThrust/problem-reductions.


                                        1      Introduction
                                        1.1     Many Hard Problems, Few Solvers

                                        Combinatorial optimization problems arise throughout science and engineering [34, 48]. An airline
                                        needs to assign crews to flights [25]. A chip designer needs to allocate registers, commonly modeled
                                        as graph coloring in compilers [7]. A logistics company needs to route delivery trucks [52]. Each
                                        of these is an instance of an NP-hard problem [33, 20], a class of problems for which no efficient
                                        general-purpose algorithm is known, but which can be solved in practice for moderate sizes by
                                        specialized solvers.
                                        The difficulty is that each solver speaks its own narrow language. SAT solvers [16, 4] accept Boolean
                                        satisfiability instances. Integer linear programming (ILP) engines like CPLEX [30], Gurobi [26], and
                                        HiGHS [29] require problems expressed as linear constraints over integer variables. Semidefinite pro-
                                        gramming (SDP) relaxations tackle Max-Cut and graph bisection [23] but need a matrix formulation.
                                        Beyond classical solvers, specialized hardware introduces additional formulations: D-Wave quantum
                                        annealers [22] solve Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO), and Rydberg atom
                                        arrays [36, 47, 15] natively solve Maximum Independent Set on geometric graphs. Physics-inspired
                                        methods scale further: graph neural networks solve QUBO at million-variable scale [48], and hybrid
                                        quantum-GNN methods tackle the Traveling Salesman Problem [27]. These approaches still require
                                        a QUBO or Ising formulation as input. A practitioner with a crew-scheduling problem cannot reach
                                        most of these solvers without first translating the problem into a form the solver understands.
                                              * Equal contribution.   † Corresponding author: jinguoliu@hkust-gz.edu.cn.



                                        Preprint.
This translation is called a reduction: an efficient algorithm that converts an instance of one problem
into an instance of another and maps the target’s solution back to the source. In other words, a
reduction gives a uniform rule for solving any source instance via the corresponding target instance.
Each verified reduction is a bridge connecting a new problem to an existing solver.

1.2   Bridging Problems to Solvers

A single reduction between two problems is a primitive
reduction rule. Primitive rules collectively form a directed            3-SAT
reduction graph (Figure 1): each node is a problem type,
each directed edge is a primitive rule. Every edge carries                                         NP-hard
a reduction overhead: a multivariate polynomial mapping                         𝐴              𝐻   certified
                                                                      𝑟𝐵←𝐴
the source’s size measures to the target’s; we write rB←A
for the overhead of the rule A → B.                                    𝐵
                                                                                    compose




Reductions compose along directed paths. Chaining A →                  𝑟𝐶←𝐵
                                                                             𝐶
B and B → C along the central chain in Figure 1 yields a                              𝑡𝐼 Integer linear
                                                                 𝑆 𝑡𝑆                    programming
composite rule A → C with overhead rC←A = rC←B ◦
rB←A . Two kinds of paths play a special role, marked by
the highlighted nodes in the figure. 3-SAT serves as the Figure 1: The reduction graph. Two an-
source of NP-hardness proofs: any path from 3-SAT to a chor problems are highlighted: 3-SAT at
problem H provides an NP-hardness argument for H. We the top and Integer linear programming
say H is NP-hard certified by the reduction graph. Integer (ILP) at the bottom right. Edge labels are
linear programming (ILP) is backed by mature solvers: reduction overheads r·←· ; node labels
any path from a problem to ILP routes it to one of them, like tS , tI denote the time complexity of
which is crucial for testing the correctness of reductions. the node’s best known solver.
The target solver’s time complexity, tI for ILP, thereby
upper-bounds the end-to-end solving cost of any problem routed to it, up to reduction overhead.

1.3   The Challenge

Scaling an executable reduction graph is an engineering                                        ?
problem. The literature is far ahead of any implementation:
Garey and Johnson [20] catalogue over 300 NP-hard prob-
lems with reduction sketches, yet the largest executable re-
duction graph (Appendix A) covers fewer than 20 problem
types. Implementation and maintenance are the bottleneck,
                                                                      (a) Manual integration
and two barriers in particular emerge.
Convention drift. Every reduction rule must conform
to the same interface, the same file layout, and the same         Issue
test pattern. Maintaining this uniformity across many
contributions is precisely what human teams cannot do
at scale: as contributors accumulate their own patterns,                                   Code
the codebase fractures. A mathematician who understands
a new reduction has no way to contribute it without first
                                                                    (b) Agentic integration
learning the implementation language and the project’s
conventions (Figure 2).                                    Figure 2: The integration problem. (a) A
Effort exhaustion. Every new entry demands the same new reduction does not fit the library’s
lengthy checklist. Adding a problem type requires resolv- conventions and cannot be integrated
ing whether the problem is genuinely new or a known without learning the codebase. (b) The
problem under a different name, writing a formal defi- contributor files a structured issue; an
nition, and identifying the best known algorithm and its agent handles implementation, review,
complexity. Adding a reduction rule requires confirming and documentation.
that both endpoint problems exist, verifying the rule is
novel and actually improves on existing routes, analyzing the reduction overhead, providing a cor-
rectness argument, implementing the forward and inverse maps, designing correctness tests, and
documenting the reduction with a worked example. Repeating this cycle for every entry exhausts
even dedicated maintainers.


                                                   2
              Many hard problems,                             Harness-engineered
      (a)                                              (b)                                                        (c) A reduction graph built at scale
              few solvers                                     agentic workflow
               NP-hard problem types                                                                                                                                   190
                                                                           problem-reductions               ···                                                        problem types

                                                                       Open   [Rule] K-Coloring → ILP
                                                                                                                                     3SAT
                                                                                                                                                                       220
                                                                       Algorithm    𝑥𝑣,𝑐 ∈ {0, 1}; one-hot per                                                         concrete type
                                                                                    𝑣; 𝑥𝑢,𝑐 + 𝑥𝑣,𝑐 ≤ 1 on                                                              of problems
        3-SAT            Max-Cut       Set Cover                                    edges                                                                              (variants)
                                                                       Overhead     variables |𝑉 | ⋅ 𝑘,
                                                        no-code                     constraints |𝐸| ⋅ 𝑘 + |𝑉 |
                                                      contribution     Reference    Mehrotra & Trick, 1996
                                                                                                                                                                       265
                                                                       Example      …                                                                                  reduction rules


                                                                                                                                                                       129
      3-Coloring             TSP           MIS
                                                                                                                                                                       reducible to
                                                             Agents under harness (skill-based)                                        ILP                             ILP


                                           …                     Implementation Agent                                                                                  78
                                                                 Picks an issue, implements, submits a PR                                                              reachable from
      Bin Packing        Partition                                                                                                                                     3-SAT
                                                                 Review Agent
                                                                 Reviews PR via parallel sub-agents                                                                    ~170k
            A problem can reach many solvers;                                                                                                                          lines of Rust
                  which path is fastest?                                                                                                                               code


             Solver formats / backends                                                                                      Growth over time
                                                        compile-     automated round-trip             agentic
                                                          time        unit tests verifications        feature                # problem types
                                                                                                                  200        # reduction rules
              SAT                    ILP                checks                                         tests
              CNF formula            𝐴𝑥 ≤ 𝑏, 𝑥 ∈ ℤ𝑛
                                                                                                                  100

              Annealer
              QUBO / Ising            …                       Validated Reduction Code                                  0                    4             8               12     week
                                                              Human reviewed finally, merged into the                                manual      → basic skills → full pipeline
                                                              codebase




Figure 3: Overview. (a) Many solvers exist, and a problem can usually reach several of them through
different reductions, but this knowledge is scattered across the literature without a unified executable
framework. (b) A harness-engineered agentic workflow turns a structured GitHub issue into validated
code through implementation and review agents under a layered verification stack (the four main
layers shown; Section 3.4 lists all six). (c) Three months of this pipeline produced a reduction graph
with 190 problem types and 265 rules; the inset shows growth over time.


AI coding agents offer a way forward, but only when paired with a harness: the engineered constraints,
feedback loops, and automatic checks that channel agents toward reliable output [44]. The engineer’s
job is no longer to write the code, but to design the harness that makes the agent’s code trustworthy. We
build a domain-specific harness that addresses both convention drift and effort exhaustion; Section 3
details its components.

1.4         Contributions

We make three contributions, each addressing one actor in the workflow.
For end users. The first comprehensive and executable library of computationally hard problem
reductions: 265 reductions among 190 problem types and 170k lines of Rust code, an inventory that
would have taken years by hand but landed in three months with a small team and AI agents.
For maintainers. Our harness uses skills to guide agents through the full pipeline, from coding to
the final review, under a layered correctness gate. Maintainers are freed from routine work to focus
on the intellectual work.
For domain experts. A no-code contribution route that turns a structured GitHub issue into validated
implementation, with no familiarity with the implementation language needed.

2       System Architecture
We implement the reduction graph as a Rust crate, organized in three layers (Figure 4).

2.1         Interface Layer

The library exposes two interfaces, both designed for humans and AI agents: the pred command-line
interface (CLI) and a PDF manual.


                                                                                         3
          1. Interface Layer                 >   pred CLI                              PDF Manual
          Entry points for human users and       • create a problem instance           • problem definitions
          AI agents.                             • reduce to another problem           • reduction proofs
                                                 • solve and evaluate                  • worked examples



          2. Library Layer                                                  Example Database
          Registered problem types and
          the reductions between them.
                                                    Problem Types                         Reduction Rules



          3. Infrastructure Layer
                                                 Solvers                           𝑓(𝑥) Symbolic Engine
          Backends that serve each               • for round-trip testing              • reduction overheads
          problem and rule.                      • ILP or brute-force                  • algorithm complexities


Figure 4: System architecture. Three layers separate concerns: the interface layer (top) is what users
and agents touch, the library layer (middle) holds the reduction graph itself, and the infrastructure
layer (bottom) provides the computational backends: solvers for instances and a symbolic engine for
overhead and complexity.


Through the CLI, create emits a problem instance as JSON, reduce transforms it along any
reduction path, and the resulting JSON pipes into external solvers or downstream tools. solve closes
the loop for quick checks. See Appendix B for a worked session.
Compiled from Typst, the manual collects the library’s formal mathematics: each problem and
reduction has a definition, a worked example, a diagram, and a proof sketch. Domain experts review
it for correctness, and agents register a new entry whenever they add a model or rule, keeping code
and mathematics in lockstep.

2.2   Library Layer

The library layer is a collection of problem types and the reduction rules between them.
Problem types. Every problem type implements a uniform interface for problems, such as input
domain, solution type and size measures. Each type defines its own size measures and best-known
algorithm complexity, for example, Maximum Independent Set (MIS) is parameterized by |V | and
|E|, with a known O(1.1996|V | ) algorithm [58]. A problem type may have variants: restricting
the input domain to a narrower class preserves the combinatorial objective but can change the
complexity. Each variant occupies a distinct node in the reduction graph. For
                                                                          √ instance, general MIS
                  |V |                                                  O( |V |)
requires O(1.1996 ) time, whereas MIS on unit disk graphs admits a 2             algorithm, which is
subexponential, unlike the general case [12].
Reduction rules. Each rule requires two mappings, a forward map and an inverse map. The forward
map converts a source problem instance to a target problem instance. After solving the target problem,
the inverse map extracts source solutions from target solutions. Each rule also carries a reduction
overhead: a set of multivariate polynomials mapping the source’s size measures to the target’s.
For example, the 3-SAT → MIS reduction creates one vertex per literal occurrence in the formula,
yielding O(L) vertices and O(L2 ) edges where L is the total number of literal occurrences.
Example database. Each problem type defines a canonical instance, such as the Petersen graph for
Maximum Independent Set. The same instance drives the test suite and serves as the worked example
in the PDF manual.

2.3   Infrastructure Layer

The infrastructure layer provides the computational backends that the library layer builds on: back-
end solvers for exact verification, and a symbolic engine for analyzing computational complexity.
Appendix C presents the engineering details of the Rust crate.


                                                               4
Solvers. Every problem type needs a minimal but reasonably efficient solver, because testing requires
solving each problem exactly. Most types (e.g., Maximum Independent Set, Traveling Salesman,
flow-shop scheduling) have a reduction path to ILP. The default validation strategy reduces the
problem to ILP and solves it with HiGHS [29], an open-source solver. For problems without an
ILP path, the library provides customized exact solvers that exploit problem structure. For example,
functional-dependency closure for Minimum Cardinality Key [37], and cycle enumeration with
branch-and-bound for Partial Feedback Edge Set [2]. The remaining problems fall back to brute-force
enumeration on small instances.
Symbolic engine. Both reduction overheads and algorithm complexities are represented as symbolic
expressions. The symbolic engine supports three operations: composition substitutes one edge’s
output polynomial into the next edge’s input, often used to determine the composite overhead
of a multi-step reduction path; comparison determines whether a symbolic expression has lower
asymptotic growth than another, used for finding the cheapest reduction path; and evaluation evaluates
a symbolic expression.

2.4   Why Rust?

None of the maintainers had written Rust before this project. The language was chosen in large part
for properties that benefit agents.
Strict compiler, actionable errors. Rust rejects many invalid programs before execution, and reports
precise type, ownership, and lifetime errors. These diagnostics give agents a concrete repair target.
Fast feedback. Cargo provides a standard loop for building, testing, and formatting. Incremental
compilation and unit tests make that loop fast enough for agent iteration.


3     Harness Design

3.1   Anatomy of the Harness

Definition 1 (Harness System). A harness system constrains agent behavior through five components:
a project specification auto-loaded into every agent session, a set of tools the agent may invoke, a
progressively-disclosed knowledge base, a set of automation skills (executable checklists that compose
the previous three into multi-step pipelines), and a set of advisor skills for human contributors
onboarding.

The five components address successive needs in an agent session: what conventions to follow, what
actions to take, what domain knowledge to consult, and how to orchestrate these into workflows.
Project specification files at the repository root (CLAUDE.md, AGENTS.md) encode how to find the
remaining four components and what conventions to follow. Every agent session loads these files
automatically on startup, ensuring that a new agent inherits the same conventions as every prior
session, without human briefing.
Tools include command-line interfaces (CLI), model context providers (MCP), and external search
services. The CLI and the language’s built-in test harness are the agent’s hands. In this project, the
pred CLI lets agents create problem instances, run reductions, invoke solvers, and inspect topological
connectivity in the reduction graph. ArXiv MCP and web search retrieve references, and Typst
compiles the PDF manual and its documentation artifacts.
Knowledge base. Domain knowledge includes Garey and Johnson’s catalogue [20], reference
papers converted to Markdown for agent consumption, and reference implementations already in the
codebase. This body of material is too large to fit in a single agent context window. The harness
organizes this knowledge for progressive disclosure [42]: agents discover relevant files through search
and read full content (formal definitions, proof sketches, worked examples) only when a specific task
demands it.
Skills are plain-Markdown documents that orchestrate specification, tools, and knowledge into multi-
step, repeatable workflows. We divide skills into two kinds (Figure 5): automation skills that agents
execute end-to-end, and advisor skills that bring humans into the loop at decision points.


                                                  5
 (a)                            human
                                          domain expert,   (b)
                                          user, reviewer                         CLAUDE.md / AGENTS.md

                     stays in loop

 advisor skill   SKILL.md        agent             tools
                                                                 user         contributor    maintainer         agent
                                                               find-solver       propose      fix-issue       check-issue
                                          human or other    find-problem                     final-review    run-pipeline
                                invoker
                                          agents
                                                                                              dev-setup     review-pipeline
                     only triggers
  automation                                                                                   release
                 SKILL.md        agent             tools
     skill
                                                                             advisor skill       automation skill


Figure 5: Skills architecture. (a) The two skill kinds: advisor skills keep humans in the loop with the
agent throughout, while automation skills run end-to-end once invoked. Other interactions with agents
are omitted for clarity. (b) The skill catalogue, grouped by invoker (user, contributor, maintainer, or
agent). Blue boxes are advisor skills; white boxes are automation skills.



Automation skills can include abstract steps that traditional automation (Makefiles, shell scripts) can-
not express: like “implement the reduction algorithm”(run-pipeline skill in Figure 5(b)), “review
the pull request for correctness”(review-pipeline skill) and “make a new release”(release skill).
These steps require judgment and are interpreted by the agent using its own capabilities. Unlike bare
prompts, skills break a complex task into concrete, ordered steps small enough for an agent to execute
faithfully, preventing the drift and omissions that occur when agents plan from scratch.
Advisor skills involve humans for two purposes: training humans to use the library or contribute
to it, and utilizing humans for tasks agents cannot reliably perform, such as critical decisions, hard
mathematical reasoning, and creative work like designing canonical examples. Training skills flatten
the learning curve: end users invoke find-solver skill (Figure 5(b)) to go from a real-world problem
to a concrete solving strategy by exploring the reduction graph, or find-problem to discover what
problems a given solver covers; contributors invoke propose skill to brainstorm a new problem
or reduction in mathematical language and file a well-formed GitHub issue, with no programming
required. Utilizing skills retain humans for critical correctness work: maintainers invoke fix-issue
to identify and address quality defects such as unsound proofs or low-quality examples interactively,
and final-review to catch dangerous commits or correctness gaps before merge. These skills lower
the usage barrier from “knows the library” to “knows the problem,” and the contribution barrier from
“knows the programming language” to “knows the mathematics.”
Appendix E excerpts one skill of each kind: propose (advisor) and add-rule (automation).


3.2    What Cannot Be Delegated

Four responsibilities must remain with humans: se- Human
lecting which reduction to pursue, verifying the al-                        Harness engineering
gorithm’s correctness, constructing canonical ex-
                                                                            Strategic planning
amples, and authorizing merges. Selecting which
rules to pursue requires understanding the needs                            Merge authorization
of the community; the human is the information                              Canonical examples
source. Verifying the algorithm’s correctness re-                           Mathematical verification
quires deep reasoning. Reasoning ability of large                           Code review
language models degrades sharply with problem com-
                                                                            Implementation
plexity [39, 49, 14]. Research-level mathematics re-
mains largely unsolved [21, 6, 38]. Constructing                            Convention enforcement
                                                       Agent
canonical examples requires creative work; the hu-                 Human   Agent
man is the end user and the best judge. Authorizing
merges is security critical; a human with long-term Figure 6: Delegation spectrum. Tasks sorted
memory must be responsible.                          from fully human (top) to fully automated
Figure 6 summarizes the division of labor, sorted by (bottom); bars show the human–agent split.
how replaceable each task is by agents.


                                                           6
3.3     Automation Pipeline

   Domain Expert
    (propose)
                                  picks issue           creates PR                                  posts verdict
      Backlog             Ready            In Progress              Review Pool        Under Review           Final Review           Done
            Maintainer triages                                                                                         Maintainer merges
                                       Impl. Agent (run-pipeline)                 Review Agent (review-pipeline)
         (fix-issue)                                                                                                (final-review)


Figure 7: Contribution pipeline as a state machine on the GitHub project board. Each box is a board
column (state); arrows show the single allowed transition direction. Four roles drive the flow: a
domain expert files issues (brown), a maintainer triages and merges (orange), an implementation
agent picks issues and creates PRs (blue), and a review agent runs parallel reviews and posts verdicts
(teal). If any stage fails, the item moves to On Hold (not shown) for human triage.

Adding a reduction to the graph involves six stages; the first five are mirrored as columns on a GitHub
project board (Figure 7), while Stage 6 runs as a post-merge community call. Each column is a state;
progress flows left to right. If any stage fails, the item moves to OnHold for human triage. Four roles
drive the flow: a domain expert files issues, a maintainer triages and merges, and two agents (one for
implementation, one for review) handle the routine work in between.
Stage 1: Propose ( → Backlog ). A domain expert clones the repository and invokes the propose
skill (Appendix E) in Claude Code or a similar agentic coding tool. The skill conducts a structured
brainstorming session (one question at a time) to elicit the core content of the contribution: which
problem or reduction rule to add, its formal definition, etc. The expert answers in mathematical
language; no programming is required. The agent runs a topology analysis to avoid duplicates and to
identify high-value gaps in the reduction graph, then pre-validates the draft against Stage 2’s quality
checks. The output is a structured GitHub issue filed into Backlog .
Stage 2: Validate ( Backlog → Ready ). A maintainer invokes the fix-issue skill to triage each issue
in Backlog . The agent first evaluates the proposal along four dimensions: usefulness (does a cheaper
path already exist?), effort (what is the effort to implement this rule?), correctness (do cited references
support the claims?), and writing quality (are all symbols defined, all examples fully worked?). It then
auto-corrects mechanical failures (undefined symbols, missing metrics) and brainstorms substantive
fixes with the maintainer interactively. Only issues passing all four checks move to Ready .
Stage 3: Implement ( Ready → Review Pool ). An implementation agent reads the run-pipeline
skill, picks an issue automatically from Ready column, implements it1 , submits a pull request (PR)
and moves the issue to Review Pool . All of this happens in headless mode, with no human in the loop.
Stage 4: Review ( Review Pool → Final Review ). Similarly, a review agent reads the review-pipeline
skill, claims an issue from Review Pool , moves it to Under Review , dispatches three read-only sub-agents:
structural completeness, code quality, and agentic feature testing (AI agents role-playing as end users;
Section 3.4), and posts a review report on the PR and moves the issue to Final Review . All in headless
mode.
Stage 5: Merge ( Final Review → Done ). A maintainer invokes the final-review skill to review
the PR. Agent claims a PR from Final Review , checks the review report, performs mechanical fixes,
walks the maintainer through the agentic verdict, and lets the maintainer make the final decision. The
maintainer either merges the PR to main branch (issue moved to Done ) or holds the PR with a reason
(issue moved to OnHold ).
Stage 6: Verify. The maintainer invites the domain expert who filed the original issue to a community
call, and walks through the PDF manual and CLI. This closing-the-loop step catches errors invisible
to automated tests: subtle misinterpretations of the problem statement or proof arguments.
Stages 3–4 (implement and review) run in headless mode via OpenAI Codex [43] (gpt-5.4, xhigh
reasoning effort). The remaining stages use Claude Code [1] (opus-4.6) for interactive sessions
with the maintainer and domain expert. Anecdotally, we found gpt-5.4 more reliable for code
implementation and opus-4.6 stronger in interactive dialogue, though we did not evaluate this
systematically.
  1 The engineering workflow builds on Superpowers [53]




                                                                        7
3.4   Correctness Assurance

Correctness is enforced by six layers: issue review (Stage 2), compile-time type checks, unit tests,
round-trip tests, agentic feature tests (Stage 4) and manual verification (Stage 5 and 6).
Unit tests and round-trip tests. Unit tests cover individual problems, solvers, and helper functions.
Round-trip tests cover each reduction rule end-to-end: from a small canonical source instance, reduce,
solve the target, lift the solution back, and compare against a direct solve of the source (an oracle the
rule never invokes).
Agentic feature tests. Libraries normally stabilize through community use, but a niche library cannot
wait for that community to form. Agentic feature tests approximate user feedback by simulating
realistic use scenarios before real users arrive. The mechanism has three phases. First, the main agent
launches a sub-agent in a fresh context window (one that has never seen the implementation) and
injects a user profile: a structured persona with domain expertise and a concrete use case (Appendix F).
The fresh context is essential; an agent that has just written the code cannot objectively test it. Second,
the sub-agent role-plays the persona end-to-end: it reads only the project’s documentation, picks a
problem it recognizes from its domain, builds an instance with realistic data, discovers a reduction
path through the CLI, solves, and verifies the result against its own expectation. Third, the sub-agent
steps out of character. The main agent interviews it about what worked, what was confusing, and
where the output diverged from expectation, then writes a structured report. This report surfaces
usability gaps, documentation omissions, and semantic errors that unit tests cannot reach.
Agentic feature tests on the pred CLI surfaced ∼50 defects in command behavior, help text, and end-
to-end pipelines (Appendix G). Unit and round-trip tests encode the developer’s expectations and miss
them; agentic feature tests probe the CLI from a fresh user’s perspective, exposing documentation
drift and overlooked edge cases.

4     Evidence
The pipeline produced a substantive reduction library and an agent-callable interface.

4.1   Library Status

Figure 3(c) summarizes the library at v0.5.0: 190 problem types (220 variants), 265 reduction rules,
129 types (68%) with a reduction path to ILP, and 78 reachable from 3-SAT. Each ILP path grants
standard solver access via the pred CLI; each 3-SAT path provides a tested NP-hardness argument
backed by executable code rather than pen-and-paper proofs. In 12 weeks of development, most of
the library was built after week 8.5, once the full skill-based pipeline was in place (Appendix H).

4.2   Case Study on End-User Utility

The simplest use of pred starts from a high-performance solver and asks what problems it can serve.
For an Ising machine that takes QUBO input, pred can list all 138 library problems that reach QUBO
within three hops (Appendix D).
The harder direction starts from a problem stated in everyday language and asks an AI agent to use
pred to deliver a fast and good solver end-to-end. To check whether pred helps in this direction,
we set up a case study where the agent receives a problem in everyday language. In our instance, a
manager wants to split a 150-person organization into two product teams to maximize the sum of
pair-wise cross-team scores. Mathematically, this is NP-hard Maximum Cut (full setup in Appendix I).
To answer, the agent has to recognize the underlying mathematical model, pick a reduction path to a
solver-friendly endpoint, choose a solver for that endpoint, and write the code that ties them together.
Each of these steps depends on prior knowledge that may be wrong, partial, or out of date; pred
replaces the reduction-path step with a walk over a verified graph.
Beyond pred, the other obvious way for an agent to reach external information is to search the web.
To tell apart pred’s contribution from generic web access, we compare four configurations that toggle
the two independently (the four rows of Table 1). Each configuration is run on ten random instances,
with one-shot solver wall-time capped at 90 s. For each run we record three quantities: tokens spent
overall, solver wall-time, and the objective value obtained by the solver.


                                                    8
Table 1 summarizes the outcomes. With pred, the agent picks the right reduction every time. Every
pred-enabled run lands on the same path (spin-glass / QUBO) and the same solver (simulated
annealing on the Ising form), matches the best-of-four objective on every instance, and cuts solver
wall-time by a factor of 3–6, at the cost of roughly 2× more AI tokens (details in Appendix Table 5).
Without pred , solver choice is unreliable. The bare configurations scatter over mixed-integer linear
programming (MILP), constraint-programming SAT (CP-SAT), simulated annealing, tabu search,
and ad-hoc heuristics; the misses always fall on solvers that do not perform well at the 90 s budget.
Bare AI misses the best-of-four on 3/10 instances (worst 19.1% below); bare + web misses on 2/10,
but its two missed runs fail catastrophically in one-shot execution.
Web access alone does not close the gap. It exposes the agent to more candidate solvers but gives
no structural guarantee that any of them will work in the budget; on this case study, that broader
exposure is net harmful. Appendix I has more details.

Table 1: Outcomes on the team-split instance class (10 instances per configuration; 90 s solver-wall
cap). Agent: Claude Opus 4.7 with extra-high reasoning effort. Higher objective is better; Best-match
reports how many of the ten instances each configuration achieves the best-of-four objective.
      Configuration   Mean obj. ↑   Min obj. ↑   Best-match   Mean AI tokens    Mean solver time (s)
      Bare AI           12,306        9,966         7/10          37,379                37.1
      Bare AI + web     10,014          0           8/10          41,504                26.1
      + pred            12,603       12,187        10/10          70,523                12.9
      + pred + web      12,603       12,187        10/10          80,592                 6.5



5     Conclusion and Discussion
5.1    Conclusion

In about three months, a small team and AI agents built a verified reduction graph of 190 problem
types and 265 reduction rules. The resulting library gives those problems verified paths to standard
solver targets and executable hardness witnesses. Building a reduction library at this scale was
previously out of reach. What made it tractable is AI coding agents working under the harness we
design. The harness loads a project specification into every agent session so contributions compose
rather than collide, drives work through role-typed skills, and enforces a layered correctness gate
from compile-time checks through unit tests, round-trip tests, agentic feature tests, and final human
verification. Speed and rigor reinforce each other in this design: the same harness that accelerates
contribution also enforces the checks that prevent drift.

5.2    Discussion

The evolving role of humans. Harness engineering shifts where human effort is spent, from writing
code to designing constraints. The carefully designed harness enforces uniform conventions and qual-
ity control across contributors. The most unsettling fact is that none of us is genuinely irreplaceable.
We are all replaceable “plugins” for responsibilities, creativity, and deep reasoning. Even if a key
maintainer stops maintaining the project, a new domain expert can get onboarded quickly with the
help of the advisor skills.
Automation and advisor skills. Skills can delegate routine work to AI agents. We find them most
useful when they guide human contributors. Advisor skills keep humans more actively involved.
They support onboarding by lowering the barrier to learning the project’s conventions and draw on
human expertise for critical decisions. We found this distinction useful when designing the harness.
We expect it to become standard vocabulary in harness design.
Further Directions. The reduction graph at scale opens several research directions: one is under-
standing how computationally hard problems are clustered in problem space; another is identifying
high-value missing reduction rule to guide automated reduction-rule discovery. This reduction graph
can be improved in several directions: one is to refine fine-grained cost prediction for a given instance
rather than rely on asymptotic complexity; another is to extend beyond NP to other complexity classes
(#P, PSPACE, etc.).


                                                   9
References
 [1] Anthropic. Claude Code, 2025. URL https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code.
     Accessed: 2026-04-13.
 [2] Ali Baharev, Hermann Schichl, Arnold Neumaier, and Tobias Achterberg. An exact method
     for the minimum feedback arc set problem. ACM J. Exp. Algorithmics, 26, April 2021. ISSN
     1084-6654. doi: 10.1145/3446429. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3446429.
 [3] Joel Becker, Nate Rush, Elizabeth Barnes, and David Rein. Measuring the impact of early-2025
     ai on experienced open-source developer productivity, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2507.09089.
 [4] Armin Biere, Tobias Faller, Katalin Fazekas, Mathias Fleury, Nils Froleyks, and Florian Pollitt.
     CaDiCaL, Gimsatul, IsaSAT and Kissat entering the SAT Competition 2024. In Marijn Heule,
     Markus Iser, Matti Järvisalo, and Martin Suda, editors, Proc. of SAT Competition 2024 – Solver,
     Benchmark and Proof Checker Descriptions, volume B-2024-1 of Department of Computer
     Science Report Series B, pages 8–10. University of Helsinki, 2024.
 [5] Birgitta Böckeler. Harness engineering for coding agent users, 2026. URL https://
     martinfowler.com/articles/exploring-gen-ai/harness-engineering.html. Ac-
     cessed: 2026-04-13.
 [6] Center for AI Safety, Scale AI & HLE Contributors Consortium. A benchmark of expert-level
     academic questions to assess AI capabilities. Nature, 649(8099):1139–1146, 2026.
 [7] Gregory J Chaitin, Marc A Auslander, Ashok K Chandra, John Cocke, Martin E Hopkins, and
     Peter W Markstein. Register allocation via coloring. Computer languages, 6(1):47–57, 1981.
 [8] Claude. Agent skills in the sdk, 2026. URL https://code.claude.com/docs/en/
     agent-sdk/skills. Accessed: 2026-04-13.
 [9] CodeRabbit. State of AI vs. human code generation report, 2025. URL https://www.
     coderabbit.ai/whitepapers/state-of-AI-vs-human-code-generation-report.
     Accessed: 2026-04-13.
[10] Carles Creus, Pau Fernández, and Guillem Godoy. Automatic evaluation of reductions between
     NP-complete problems. In Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing – SAT 2014, pages
     415–421, Cham, 2014. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-09284-3.
[11] D-Wave Systems. D-Wave documentation, 2026. URL https://docs.ocean.dwavesys.
     com. Accessed: 2026-04-13.
[12] Mark de Berg, Hans L. Bodlaender, Sándor Kisfaludi-Bak, Dániel Marx, and Tom C. van der
     Zanden. A framework for exponential-time-hypothesis–tight algorithms and lower bounds in
     geometric intersection graphs. SIAM Journal on Computing, 49(6):1291–1331, 2020.
[13] Xiang Deng, Jeff Da, Edwin Pan, Yannis Yiming He, Charles Ide, Kanak Garg, Niklas Lauffer,
     Andrew Park, Nitin Pasari, Chetan Rane, Karmini Sampath, Maya Krishnan, Srivatsa Kundurthy,
     Sean Hendryx, Zifan Wang, Vijay Bharadwaj, Jeff Holm, Raja Aluri, Chen Bo Calvin Zhang,
     Noah Jacobson, Bing Liu, and Brad Kenstler. SWE-Bench Pro: Can AI agents solve long-
     horizon software engineering tasks?, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.16941.
[14] Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lorraine Li, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin,
     Sean Welleck, Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, et al. Faith and fate: Limits
     of transformers on compositionality. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:
     70293–70332, 2023.
[15] Sepehr Ebadi, Alexander Keesling, Madelyn Cain, Tout T Wang, Harry Levine, Dolev Bluvstein,
     Giulia Semeghini, Ahmed Omran, J-G Liu, Rhine Samajdar, et al. Quantum optimization of
     maximum independent set using Rydberg atom arrays. Science, 376(6598):1209–1215, 2022.
[16] Niklas Eén and Niklas Sörensson. An extensible SAT-solver. In International conference on
     theory and applications of satisfiability testing, pages 502–518. Springer, 2003.


                                                10
[17] Yukang Feng, Jianwen Sun, Zelai Yang, Jiaxin Ai, Chuanhao Li, Zizhen Li, Fanrui Zhang,
     Kang He, Rui Ma, Jifan Lin, Jie Sun, Yang Xiao, Sizhuo Zhou, Wenxiao Wu, Yiming Liu,
     Pengfei Liu, Yu Qiao, Shenglin Zhang, and Kaipeng Zhang. LongCLI-Bench: A preliminary
     benchmark and study for long-horizon agentic programming in command-line interfaces, 2026.
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.14337.
[18] Yannick Forster, Dominique Larchey-Wendling, Andrej Dudenhefner, Edith Heiter, Dominik
     Kirst, Fabian Kunze, Gert Smolka, Simon Spies, Dominik Wehr, and Maximilian Wuttke. A
     Coq library of undecidable problems. In CoqPL 2020 The Sixth International Workshop on Coq
     for Programming Languages, 2020.
[19] Xuanzhao Gao, Xiaofeng Li, and Jinguo Liu. Programming guide for solving constraint
     satisfaction problems with tensor networks. Chinese Physics B, 34(5):050201, 2025.
[20] Michael R. Garey and David S. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory
     of NP-Completeness. W. H. Freeman & Co., 1990. ISBN 978-0-7167-1045-5.
[21] Elliot Glazer, Ege Erdil, Tamay Besiroglu, Diego Chicharro, Evan Chen, Alex Gunning,
     Caroline Falkman Olsson, Jean-Stanislas Denain, Anson Ho, Emily de Oliveira Santos, Olli
     Järviniemi, Matthew Barnett, Robert Sandler, Matej Vrzala, Jaime Sevilla, Qiuyu Ren, Elizabeth
     Pratt, Lionel Levine, Grant Barkley, Natalie Stewart, Bogdan Grechuk, Tetiana Grechuk,
     Shreepranav Varma Enugandla, and Mark Wildon. FrontierMath: A benchmark for evaluating
     advanced mathematical reasoning in AI, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.04872.
[22] Fred Glover, Gary Kochenberger, and Yu Du. Quantum bridge analytics I: a tutorial on
     formulating and using QUBO models. 4or, 17(4):335–371, 2019.
[23] Michel X Goemans and David P Williamson. Improved approximation algorithms for maximum
     cut and satisfiability problems using semidefinite programming. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
     42(6):1115–1145, 1995.
[24] Sharon Goldman.      Cursor used a swarm of AI agents powered by OpenAI to
     build and run a web browser for a week—with no human help. here’s why de-
     velopers are buzzing, January 2026.    URL https://fortune.com/2026/01/23/
     cursor-built-web-browser-with-swarm-ai-agents-powered-openai/. Accessed:
     2026-04-13.
[25] Balaji Gopalakrishnan and Ellis L Johnson. Airline crew scheduling: State-of-the-art. Annals
     of Operations Research, 140(1):305–337, 2005.
[26] Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi, 2026. URL https://www.gurobi.com. Accessed:
     2026-04-13.
[27] Haoqi He. Quantum annealing and GNN for solving TSP with QUBO. In Algorithmic Aspects
     in Information and Management (AAIM), pages 134–145. Springer, 2024. doi: 10.1007/
     978-981-97-7801-0_12.
[28] Werner Heijstek.   We analyzed the code of Cursor’s ai-built browser FastRen-
     der, January 2026.   URL https://www.softwareimprovementgroup.com/blog/
     quality-of-fastrender/. Accessed: 2026-04-13.
[29] QHJAJ Huangfu and JA Julian Hall. Parallelizing the dual revised simplex method. Mathemati-
     cal Programming Computation, 10(1):119–142, 2018.
[30] IBM. IBM ILOG CPLEX optimization studio, 2026. URL https://www.ibm.com/
     products/ilog-cplex-optimization-studio. Accessed: 2026-04-13.
[31] Joseph T. Iosue. qubovert: a Python package for formulating, simulating, and solving problems
     in boolean and spin form, 2022. URL https://github.com/jtiosue/qubovert. Accessed:
     2026-04-13.
[32] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and
     Karthik R Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?
     In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
     //openreview.net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.


                                                11
[33] Richard M. Karp. Reducibility among Combinatorial Problems, pages 85–103. Springer US,
     Boston, MA, 1972. ISBN 978-1-4684-2001-2. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4684-2001-2_9. URL
     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4684-2001-2_9.
[34] Bernhard Korte and Jens Vygen. Combinatorial optimization: theory and algorithms. Springer,
     2008.
[35] Jin-Guo Liu, Xun Gao, Madelyn Cain, Mikhail D. Lukin, and Sheng-Tao Wang. Computing
     solution space properties of combinatorial optimization problems via generic tensor networks.
     SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 45(3):A1239–A1270, 2023. doi: 10.1137/22M1501787.
[36] Andrew Lucas. Ising formulations of many NP problems. Frontiers in physics, 2:74887, 2014.
[37] Cláudio L. Lucchesi and Sylvia L. Osborn. Candidate keys for relations. Journal of
     Computer and System Sciences, 17(2):270–279, 1978. ISSN 0022-0000. doi: https://doi.
     org/10.1016/0022-0000(78)90009-0. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
     article/pii/0022000078900090.
[38] William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The expressive power of transformers with chain of
     thought, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07923.
[39] Iman Mirzadeh, Keivan Alizadeh, Hooman Shahrokhi, Oncel Tuzel, Samy Bengio, and Mehrdad
     Farajtabar. GSM-Symbolic: Understanding the limitations of mathematical reasoning in large
     language models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.05229.
[40] Nicholas Nethercote, Peter J. Stuckey, Ralph Becket, Sebastian Brand, Gregory J. Duck, and
     Guido Tack. MiniZinc: Towards a standard CP modelling language. In Christian Bessière,
     editor, Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming – CP 2007, pages 529–543, Berlin,
     Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-74970-7.
[41] Minh-Thi Nguyen, Jin-Guo Liu, Jonathan Wurtz, Mikhail D. Lukin, Sheng-Tao Wang, and
     Hannes Pichler. Quantum optimization with arbitrary connectivity using Rydberg atom arrays.
     PRX Quantum, 4:010316, Feb 2023. doi: 10.1103/PRXQuantum.4.010316. URL https:
     //link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PRXQuantum.4.010316.
[42] Jakob Nielsen. Progressive disclosure. Nielsen Norman Group, 2006. URL https://www.
     nngroup.com/articles/progressive-disclosure/.
[43] OpenAI. Codex, 2026. URL https://openai.com/codex/. Accessed: 2026-04-13.
[44] OpenAI. Harness engineering: Leveraging Codex in an agent-first world, 2026. URL https:
     //openai.com/index/harness-engineering/. Accessed: 2026-04-13.
[45] Xi-Wei Pan, Huan-Hai Zhou, Yi-Ming Lu, and Jin-Guo Liu. Encoding computationally hard
     problems in triangular Rydberg atom arrays, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.
     25249.
[46] Laurent Perron and Vincent Furnon. OR-Tools. URL https://developers.google.com/
     optimization/.
[47] Hannes Pichler, Sheng-Tao Wang, Leo Zhou, Soonwon Choi, and Mikhail D. Lukin. Quantum
     optimization for maximum independent set using Rydberg atom arrays, 2018. URL https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/1808.10816.
[48] Martin JA Schuetz, J Kyle Brubaker, and Helmut G Katzgraber. Combinatorial optimization
     with physics-inspired graph neural networks. Nature Machine Intelligence, 4(4):367–377, 2022.
[49] Parshin Shojaee, Iman Mirzadeh, Keivan Alizadeh, Maxwell Horton, Samy Bengio, and
     Mehrdad Farajtabar. The illusion of thinking: Understanding the strengths and limitations of
     reasoning models via the lens of problem complexity, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2506.06941.
[50] Yohei Tamura and Masahiro Sakai. qubogen: QUBO matrix generator for major combinato-
     rial optimization problems written in Python, 2020. URL https://github.com/tamuhey/
     qubogen. Accessed: 2026-04-13.


                                               12
[51] Minh V. T. Thai, Tue Le, Dung Nguyen Manh, Huy Phan Nhat, and Nghi D. Q. Bui. SWE-
     EVO: Benchmarking coding agents in long-horizon software evolution scenarios, 2026. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.18470.
[52] Paolo Toth and Daniele Vigo. Vehicle routing: problems, methods, and applications. SIAM,
     2014.
[53] Jesse Vincent et al. Superpowers: A plugin for building better AI coding agents, 2025. URL
     https://github.com/obra/superpowers. Accessed: 2026-04-13.
[54] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi
     Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang
     Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin,
     Robert Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. OpenHands: An open platform for AI
     software developers as generalist agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16741.
[55] Scott Wu. Introducing Devin, the first AI software engineer. Cognition Blog, March 2024. URL
     https://cognition.ai/blog/introducing-devin.
[56] Pedro Maciel Xavier, Pedro Ripper, Tiago Andrade, Joaquim Dias Garcia, Nelson Maculan,
     and David E. Bernal Neira. QUBO.jl: A Julia ecosystem for quadratic unconstrained binary
     optimization, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.02577.
[57] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Zhe Wang, Yan Yang, Yuxiang Wei, and Lingming Zhang. Live-SWE-
     agent: Can software engineering agents self-evolve on the fly?, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
     org/abs/2511.13646.
[58] Mingyu Xiao and Hiroshi Nagamochi. Exact algorithms for maximum independent set. Infor-
     mation and Computation, 255:126–146, 2017.
[59] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik
     Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software
     engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:50528–50652, 2024.
[60] Mashiyat Zaman, Kotaro Tanahashi, and Shu Tanaka. PyQUBO: Python library for mapping
     combinatorial optimization problems to QUBO form. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 71(4):
     838–850, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TC.2021.3063618.
[61] Chenhao Zhang, Jason D. Hartline, and Christos Dimoulas. Karp: a language for NP reductions.
     In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language
     Design and Implementation, PLDI 2022, page 762–776, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association
     for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450392655. doi: 10.1145/3519939.3523732. URL
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3519939.3523732.


A    Related Work
Reduction libraries and tools. Prior work falls along a ladder of executability and scope (Table 2):
paper catalogues and formulation surveys, executable per-rule tools, single-endpoint modeling
libraries, and an earlier inter-type prototype. The present library extends this line by connecting
many source types to many targets with composable overhead and inverse maps, under AI-assisted
maintenance.
Two adjacent traditions warrant mention. Optimization modeling languages such as MiniZinc [40] let
a user write a high-level constraint or optimization model once and dispatch it to many solver back-
ends via a shared intermediate representation; the mechanism is modeling-to-solver via flattening
rather than problem-to-problem reduction between NP-hard types. Formal verification frameworks,
notably the Coq Library of Undecidable Problems [18], formalize reduction chains whose correctness
is machine-checked by proof rather than tested on canonical examples; they target undecidable
problems and incur substantially higher development cost than the present library.
AI coding agents: capabilities and limitations. SWE-agent [59], Devin [55], OpenHands [54],
and Claude Code [1] resolve isolated issues with increasing reliability [57], but longer-horizon


                                                13
             Table 2: Reduction libraries and tools, ordered by executability and scope.

 Work                               Form                  Scope
 Karp [33]; Garey and Johnson [20]; Paper catalogue       Reduction sketches and Ising formulas; not exe-
 Lucas [36]                                               cutable
 Karp DSL [61]                      Executable per-rule   25 reductions from a textbook; isolated rules, no
                                                          reusable graph
 REDNP [10]                         Executable per-rule   DSL for student exercises; new problems boot-
                                                          strap via reduction to SAT
 PyQUBO [60]; qubovert [31]; Executable library           Many problems to single endpoint (QUBO/Is-
 QUBO.jl [56]; D-Wave Ocean [11]                          ing)
 ProblemReductions.jl [19, 35]   Executable graph         18 types; inter-type reduction graph; manually
                                                          maintained
 This work                          Executable graph      190 types, 265 rules; composable inverse maps;
                                                          AI-assisted maintenance


benchmarks reveal a capability cliff: frontier agents resolve up to ∼70% of single-file issues on
SWE-bench Verified [32], yet SWE-bench Pro [13] reports only ∼23% on multi-file tasks and
SWE-EVO [51] ∼21%; LongCLI-Bench [17] finds pass rates below 20% on long-horizon CLI
tasks. Quality concerns are equally sharp: AI co-authored code carries 1.7× more major defects [9];
the METR randomized trial found experienced developers 19% slower with AI tools on their own
repositories [3]; Cursor’s FastRender (3M+ lines generated by parallel agents) scored 1.3/5 for
maintainability [24, 28].
Harness engineering. To tame this variance, harness engineering [44, 5] shifts the engineer’s
role from code authorship to environment design. Persistent project instructions and composable
skills [8, 53] keep agents aligned with repository conventions across sessions; verification pipelines
reject incorrect output before it enters the codebase. Our approach instantiates this pattern for
a mathematical domain, exploiting the project’s uniform, verifiable structure so that each agent
invocation is short, self-contained, and human-reviewable.

B    CLI Usage
We introduce the pred CLI through one example. The instance is weighted MaxCut on a 4-cycle
(0-1, 1-2, 2-3, 3-0) with unit weights. Build the instance:
         pred create MaxCut --graph 0-1,1-2,2-3,3-0 -o instance.json

Enumerate downstream models.
         pred from MaxCut/SimpleGraph/i32 --hops 2

prints the reachable downstream cone (two branches, each three hops from QUBO/f64):
         MaxCut/SimpleGraph/i32
           |– MinimumCutIntoBoundedSets/SimpleGraph/i32 -> ILP/bool
           |– SpinGlass/SimpleGraph/i32 -> SpinGlass/SimpleGraph/f64

Compare reduction paths.
         pred path MaxCut/SimpleGraph/i32 QUBO/f64 --all

enumerates both paths and reports their per-step overhead. The endpoints differ by orders of
magnitude:
        • Path 1 (via SpinGlass): num_vars = O(|V |) at the QUBO endpoint.
        • Path 2 (via MinimumCutIntoBoundedSets and ILP/bool): num_vars = O(|V |4 ).
Path 2 inflates because the intermediate ILP encoding adds a constraint per cut edge before being
quadratised into QUBO; Path 1 keeps the variable count linear. To save Path 1 so that downstream
reductions consume the same choice deterministically:


                                                  14
                                                       Problem trait
                                       NAME · Value: Aggregate · dims() · evaluate()



                                  Max<W>                   Min<W>                    Or
                               NP optimization          NP optimization           NP decision

                                    And                   Sum<W>                Extremum<V>
                                co-NP decision           #P counting            LP optimization



                                                                 ReduceTo<T>


                                                   ReductionResult<T>
                                            target_problem() · extract_solution()


                                                                 #[reduction(overhead = {...})]


                           Compile-time validation
                           • Variable names → getter methods
                           • Expr AST: symbolic overhead expressions
                           • declare_variants! → compile-time registry



Figure 8: Trait hierarchy and compile-time validation. The Problem trait defines a universal
evaluation interface; ReduceTo<T> requires both forward and inverse maps; procedural macros
validate overhead expressions and variant registrations at compile time.


         pred path --cost minimize:num_vars -o path.json

Reduce, solve, lift.
         pred reduce instance.json --via path.json -o bundle.json

forward-reduces the instance along the saved path; the bundle carries the original instance under
source, the reduction trace under path, and the resulting 4-variable QUBO under target. After an
external solver returns a target-space configuration (on this instance, alternating colours [1,0,1,0]
achieve the QUBO minimum −8), the call
         pred extract bundle.json --config 1,0,1,0

inverse-maps the QUBO solution back through every reduction step and reports the source-space
evaluation Max(4) (Appendix C): every edge of the 4-cycle is cut. extract composes the inverse of
every reduction in the path.

Other subcommands.

       • pred show <variant>: prints a problem’s definition, schema, complexity, and neighbour-
         ing reductions.
       • pred list: enumerates all registered problem types with their complexities.
       • pred evaluate <instance>.json --config <csv>: scores a candidate configuration
         against the instance directly, useful for verifying solutions independently of the solver.
       • pred solve <instance>.json: runs an end-to-end solve via the cheapest reduction path
         with a built-in default solver.

C    Implementation Details
The library’s type system reduces the space of possible agent errors by making incorrect code fail
to compile. This appendix describes the key design decisions: the aggregation-based problem
representation, the solver priority system, and the variant registry (Figure 8).

Problems and variants. Every problem type implements Problem, which requires: a con-
stant name, an associated Value type, a method returning the configuration space dimensions,
an evaluate() method that maps any configuration to a value, and variant metadata. The
Value type is an aggregation wrapper that determines how individual evaluations combine across


                                                             15
the configuration space. Six wrappers cover the standard problem classes (Table 3). Each
wrapper implements an Aggregate trait with identity(), combine(), and optional witness-
tracking methods, so a brute-force solver reduces to a single fold over the configuration space:
configs.map(evaluate).fold(identity, combine). Wrappers that support witness recovery
can track which configuration achieved the optimal value; those that cannot (counting and co-NP)
only produce aggregate values. This distinction propagates to the reduction traits.


                    Table 3: Aggregation wrappers and their complexity classes.
                  Wrapper             Class                  Witness     Example
                  Max<W>              NP optimization        Yes         Max. Indep. Set
                  Min<W>              NP optimization        Yes         Min. Vertex Cover
                  Or                  NP decision            Yes         k-Satisfiability
                  Sum<W>              #P counting            No          k-th Largest m-Tuple
                  And                 co-NP decision         No          (reserved)
                  Extremum<V>         NP optimization†       Yes         Integer Lin. Prog.
              † Extremum differs from Max/Min only in that the optimization sense is chosen at runtime.



A single problem type admits multiple variants: parameterizations by graph type (SimpleGraph,
PlanarGraph, BipartiteGraph, KingsSubgraph, UnitDiskGraph, etc.) and weight type (unit,
i32,√f64). Each variant may have a better complexity bound: MIS on king’s subgraphs runs in
2O( |V |) [12] versus O(1.1996|V | ) on general graphs [58]. The declare_variants! macro regis-
ters each concrete instantiation with its best-known complexity, a factory for JSON deserialization,
and a solve function. All variable names in complexity expressions are validated at compile time
against the problem’s getter methods. This registry produces the registered variants from 100+ base
problem types.

Decision problems. A generic Decision<P> wrapper converts any optimization problem P (whose
value type is Max<W> or Min<W>) into a decision problem with value type Or: given a bound k, it
asks whether a configuration meeting or exceeding k exists. The wrapper implements Problem
automatically via the DecisionProblemMeta trait, which supplies the decision variant’s name. The
reduction from the decision wrapper to its inner optimization type is derived generically, so adding
a decision variant requires only a one-line macro invocation (register_decision_variant!).
Three problem types currently have decision variants: Maximum Independent Set, Minimum Vertex
Cover, and Minimum Dominating Set.

Reduction rules. The type system enforces a split based on witness capability. ReduceTo<T>
requires a ReductionResult that bundles target_problem() and extract_solution(), a
map from a target configuration back to a source configuration. An agent cannot compile a
forward reduction without providing the inverse map; incomplete reductions are compile errors.
ReduceToAggregate<T> requires an AggregateReductionResult with extract_value() in-
stead, a map from a target value back to a source value, with no witness recovered. Each reduction
also carries a compile-time-validated overhead: the #[reduction(overhead = {...})] procedu-
ral macro attaches symbolic size expressions, and variable names are checked against getter methods
on the source type, so a typo causes a compile error, not a silent bug.

Solvers. When the user invokes pred solve, the system selects a solver in priority order. First, if
the problem has a dedicated solver that exploits its structure (currently six problem types), the system
uses it. Second, if a witness-capable reduction path to Integer Linear Programming (ILP) exists, the
system reduces along the cheapest path (by Dijkstra) and solves with HiGHS. Third, the brute-force
enumerator is always available: it folds over all configurations using the aggregation interface. Brute
force remains essential for testing, where correctness matters more than speed.

Reduction graph construction. Problem variants and reduction rules compose into the directed
graph described in Section 2.2. For subtype edges (e.g., MIS on a king’s subgraph to MIS on a general
graph), a generic ReductionAutoCast implements both reduction traits with an identity solution
map. At runtime, type-erased blanket implementations (DynReductionResult) let the reduction-


                                                        16
graph engine chain reductions along Dijkstra-discovered paths without knowing the concrete types at
compile time.

D    QUBO Coverage
Specialized hardware for combinatorial optimization is one of the fastest-growing frontiers of AI
infrastructure. Ising machines, quantum annealers [22], and physics-inspired neural solvers [48] all
promise substantial speedups over conventional CPU solvers, and the field has converged on a single
input format: QUBO. The catch is that the speedup is only available after the user has hand-translated
their problem into QUBO, a step that has historically required a domain expert per problem and a
fresh paper per reduction. This is exactly where the reduction graph pays off.
Treating QUBO as one registered solver target, pred to QUBO --hops 3 reports 138 problem
variants that route to it with witness recovery in the current library. Table 4 samples ten and lists the
composed overhead rQUBO←A , the polynomial mapping source size to QUBO variable count. All
ten share one invocation, pred reduce - --to QUBO, and only the input changes. By contrast,
solver-specific compilers such as PyQUBO [60] and qubovert [31] accept QUBO input but provide
no inter-problem reductions, leaving the translation step to the user.

Table 4: Ten problems reaching QUBO within three hops, sampled from 138 reachable variants. A
QUBO-capable solver inherits all of them via one command.
             Problem                           Hops      rQUBO←A                 Application
             GraphPartitioning                 1         O(V )                   VLSI partitioning
             3-Satisfiability                  1         O(C + V )               Verification, planning
             Knapsack                          1         O(n + b)                Resource allocation
             TravelingSalesman                 1         O(V 2 )                 Logistics, PCB drilling
             KColoring                         1         O(V 2 )                 Register allocation
             Partition                         2         O(n + b)                Load balancing
             MaximumClique                     2         O(V 3 )                 Bioinformatics
             BinPacking                        2         O(n3 )                  VM/container packing
             MultiprocessorScheduling          2         O(P T 2 + P 2 T )       Cloud scheduling
             MaximumIndependentSet             3         O(V 3 )                 Wireless scheduling
                  V : vertices; C: clauses; n: items; b: encoding/slack bits; P, T : processors, tasks.



E    Skill Excerpts
Figure 9 reproduces the two skills referenced in Section 3.3: propose (advisor skill that gates issue
creation by domain experts) and add-rule (automation skill that drives implementation from a
validated issue).

F    Agent Profile Example
Figure 10 shows a representative agent profile used by the agentic feature tests described in Section 3.4.
The persona’s domain knowledge lets the sub-agent judge whether reduction outputs are plausible
without access to ground-truth labels.

G    Agentic Feature Test Findings
The ∼ 50 pred defects of Section 3.4 fall into two categories. Every defect is faithfully recorded
in the project’s development history (GitHub issues and pull requests), which will be made public
alongside the paper.

Help text drifts from actual behaviour. A user only knows what the program tells them, so any
disagreement between the documentation and the running code propagates into every later decision
the user makes. As one example, in pred v0.3.0 typing pred with no subcommand printed the


                                                          17
   propose — advisor skill (excerpts)                             add-rule — automation skill (excerpts)
    ---                                                            ---
    name : propose                                                 name : add - rule
    description :                                                  description : Adding a new reduction
      Guides domain experts through brainstorm -                     rule to the codebase , either from
      ing and files a GitHub issue                                   an issue or interactively
    ---                                                            ---

   No programming knowledge required. This skill works            Required Information Checklist
   entirely in mathematical / domain language.                    1. Reduction algorithm — how to transform
  <HARD-GATE>                                                        source instance to target, with BibTeX refer-
  Do NOT write any code, create any files, or invoke                 ence.
  implementation skills. The ONLY output of this skill is         2. Size overhead — how target size relates to
  GitHub issues filed via gh issue create.                           source size, used for estimating the overhead
  </HARD-GATE>                                                       of the reduction.
                                                                  3. Concrete example — a small worked-out in-
   Run topology analysis first to identify the most impactful        stance, used for testing and documentation.
   missing reductions [. . . ]                                    4. . . .
    cargo run -- example \                                        Do NOT proceed until the checklist is complete.
        detect_isolated_problems
    cargo run -- example \
        detect_unreachable_from_3sat                              Reference Implementations — Read these first:
                                                                  src/rules/mvc_mis.rs [. . . ]
   Pre-validation — Run check-issue on draft before filing:
   1. Usefulness — does a cheaper reduction path already exist?   Document in paper. Write a reduction-rule
   2. Effort — effort to implement?                               entry in the Typst paper with theorem body, proof
   3. Correctness — do cited references support the claims?       (construction, correctness, solution extraction), and
   4. Writing quality — all symbols defined, examples worked?     a worked example with concrete numbers. Run
   Only issues passing all four checks are filed.                 make paper — must compile without errors.


Figure 9: Two skills that bookend the contribution pipeline. propose (left) gates issue creation by
domain experts: the hard gate enforces no-code contribution, topology analysis guides experts toward
strategic reduction-graph gaps, and pre-validation checks four quality dimensions before the issue
enters the pipeline. add-rule (right) drives implementation from a validated issue: the checklist
encodes the mathematical knowledge every reduction requires, reference implementations prevent
convention drift, and the paper entry ensures visual verifiability by human reviewers.


top-level menu and then appended roughly seventy lines of unrelated pred solve help, which may
lead the user to believe a solve invocation is required by default. A simulated first-time user found
this on the very first command and reported the confusion. An AI agent writing unit tests thinks about
the code it has just built, not about how a user would first meet the tool.

Counterexamples and edge cases the test author missed. Verifying every reduction rule without
formal proof or automated theorem proving has no clean solution. The project mitigates this in two
layers. The first layer frontloads correctness: domain experts file high-quality issues drawn from their
experience and from canonical references (like Garey and Johnson [20]), and each problem type ships
with a non-trivial canonical example chosen to trigger the structural features the reductions must
respect. Current AI cannot reliably construct such examples (Section 3.2); it defaults to toy cases that
satisfy the type contract but miss the structure that makes the reduction non-trivial. That structure is
difficult to articulate in language, and AI can be nudged toward less trivial cases only through explicit
proxies such as variable count or edge density. The second layer is agentic feature tests, which run the
real CLI pipeline on those canonical examples from the outside and catch contract violations that the
existing tests miss. As one example, an instance of an NP-hard problem typically has many distinct
valid solutions, and a reduction’s inverse map must lift any of them back to a valid source solution;
unit tests check this property using only the one solution a brute-force solver happens to return, and
an agentic-test sweep caught four reductions whose inverse maps worked there but silently produced
invalid source configurations when the CLI’s default ILP solver returned a different valid solution. As
another, the --cost-bound flag of pred create ProductionPlanning was declared as a signed
integer but cast to an unsigned integer without a non-negativity check, so a simulated user typing
a negative bound silently received a problem with an effectively unbounded cost, which the solver


                                                          18
    Agent Profile: Dr. Sarah Chen — CLI Tool (pred)
    Use case. An algorithm engineer reads the project documentation to learn what problems and reductions
    exist, then uses the pred CLI to model and solve their own optimization problems. Each session: pick a
    problem from the paper, create an instance with real-world-style data, find a reduction path to a solver, solve
    it, and verify the result.
    Persona. Senior algorithm engineer at a logistics company with ten years of experience in vehicle routing,
    scheduling, and layout optimization. Knows these problems map to graph coloring, independent set, set
    cover, and similar NP-hard formulations because she has hand-coded reductions before. Found this project’s
    paper and wants to try the CLI instead of writing reductions herself. Has never used pred before.
    Behavior. Reads the paper and docs first, then picks a problem she recognizes. Figures out the CLI by
    reading its help output. After each step, compares the output against her expectation. If something does not
    match, investigates before moving on.


Figure 10: A representative agent profile used in agentic feature testing. The persona’s domain
knowledge (logistics optimization) lets the agent judge whether reduction results are plausible
without access to ground-truth labels.


declared trivially feasible. Agentic feature tests do not remove this intrinsic difficulty, but by probing
for counterexamples from a user’s perspective they progressively harden the library against the inputs
that real use produces.
Both categories share an origin: agentic feature tests evaluate the program from the outside, using
only the documentation and realistic data, and find what an unguarded user would find.

H       Development Phases
In Phase 1 (weeks 0–7), the team and AI agents ported reduction rules from existing packages
(ProblemReductions.jl [19], UnitDiskMapping.jl [41, 45], and qubogen [50]) and from Garey and
Johnson’s catalogue [20]. Growth was steady but slow: roughly 20 problem types and 55 rules by
week 7. Through this process, the skill-based automation pipeline was established and iteratively
refined. In Phase 2 (weeks 7–8.5), basic skills were introduced, but the pipeline was not yet end-to-end
automated. In Phase 3 (weeks 8.5–13), the full pipeline became operational. Both curves accelerate
sharply: problem types grew from 23 to 187, and reduction rules from 52 to 239, in under five weeks.
External domain experts began contributing through the propose skill, filed structured issues in
mathematical language while agents handled implementation.

I     End-User Utility Experiment Details
This appendix expands on the controlled experiment summarised in Section 4.2.

Instance generator. Each of the ten seeds (the primes 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41)
deterministically produces one team-split scenario: 150 engineers with a dense signed-weight survey
over the 150-choose-2 pair graph. Each pair is independently sampled with probability 0.5 and, if
sampled, receives an integer weight drawn uniformly from [−5, 12] (zeros skipped). Positive weights
mean the pair benefits from being on different teams; negative weights mean they belong on the
same team. The resulting graph has roughly 5,300 edges (density ≈ 0.48) with mixed signs. The
corresponding mathematical model is signed-weight Maximum Cut on a 150-vertex dense graph.

Four configurations. The agent runs in one of four configurations differing on two binary axes
(2×2 factorial over web search and pred access):

         • Bare AI (A): no pred, no web. The agent works from training-time priors only.
         • Bare AI + web (B): no pred, but WebSearch/WebFetch allowed.
         • + pred (C): pred CLI available, no web.
         • + pred + web (D): both pred and web available.


                                                          19
Each cell runs ten seeds under the same environment settings (Solver environment below); A
and B receive only the user-facing prompt, while C and D additionally receive a Markdown skill
(solve-instance-offline for C, solve-instance for D).

Scope of pred’s contribution (C and D). In C and D the only thing we add on top of A and B is
a Markdown skill explaining how to use the pred CLI to walk the reduction graph; the skill says
nothing about which solver to run. It guides the agent through two steps. The first is reduction-path
selection: match the user’s problem description to a known model, query pred for downstream
endpoints ranked by overhead and worst-case complexity, save a chosen path, forward-reduce along
it, and inverse-map the solver’s answer back to the original variables (Appendix B shows an example).
The second is solver selection: given the endpoint pred returned, pick an off-the-shelf solver that
handles instances of that size and structure within the time budget. The skill lists no candidate solvers
and expresses no preference; C relies on the agent’s training-time knowledge for this step, and D
additionally uses WebSearch/WebFetch. This split keeps the comparison fair: pred only helps with
picking the reduction endpoint, and the choice of solver on top of that endpoint is left entirely to the
agent.

Solver environment. Each run uses a fresh working directory and a fresh Python virtual-
environment created via uv; the agent installs whatever solver package it picks. All four configurations
follow the same single-pass protocol: the agent commits to one algorithm and one hyperparame-
ter configuration, invokes the solver exactly once as timeout 90 python solve.py, and reports
whatever target-space configuration the call returns (no retries, no method chaining, no polish stage).
Each run is handled by Claude Opus 4.7 at extra-high reasoning effort (claude-opus-4-7-xhigh)
in its own workdir.

User-facing prompt. All four configurations receive the same engineer-voice prompt rendered
from a shared template (Figure 11). The template carries no model or solver hint. The placeholders
{NUM_PEOPLE}, {LAST_ID}, and {NUM_PAIRS} are interpolated per seed.

  User-facing prompt template (rendered identically for all four configurations)
   Hi - I run people - ops for a { NUM_PEOPLE } - person engineering org and we ’ re
   about to do our annual team re - org . The CTO wants to split the whole org
   into exactly two product teams ( call them Team A and Team B ) , and she
   wants the split chosen to maximize total cross - team collaboration value .

   Here ’ s the model :
   We have { NUM_PEOPLE } engineers ( id 0..{ LAST_ID }) . HR has run a yearly
   survey asking everyone about who they ’ ve worked with productively , who
   they ’ ve clashed with , and so on . From that I built a per - pair score :

     - score > 0 means putting these two on DIFFERENT teams is GOOD .
     - score < 0 means they ’ re better off on the SAME team .
     - pairs not in the CSV have score = 0.

   The objective we ’ re maximizing is :

        sum over all listed pairs of   score_pair ,
        ONLY IF the two people end up on different teams .

   There is no team - size constraint - Team A can be any size from 0 to

   { NUM_PEOPLE } , and Team B gets the rest . We just want the split that
   maximizes the cross - team value sum .

   I ’ ve attached the per - pair scores as ‘ pairs . csv ‘ in your workdir
   ({ NUM_PAIRS } rows total - the survey is dense ) . Each row is
   ‘a ,b , score ‘ (3 columns , no header ) , with engineer ids in 0..{ LAST_ID }.

   Please write a script that picks the split and prints the resulting total
   cross - team value . Save the answer as ‘ answer . json ‘ with structure :

        { " team_a ": [3 , 7 , 19 , 42 , ...] }

   I ’ d like the algorithm to be both fast and good . Thanks !


               Figure 11: Shared user-facing prompt rendered to all four configurations.


                                                         20
Per-instance solver picks. Table 5 lists the solver each agent selected on every instance. With-
out pred, the bare baselines drift across MILP (HiGHS, PuLP+CBC), OR-Tools CP-SAT [46],
simulated annealing (dwave-neal / dwave-samplers [11]), dwave-tabu [11], and Goemans–
Williamson [23] (PICOS+CVXOPT). The two failure modes show why pred is non-trivial. A’s
misses are MILP and CP-SAT runs whose LP relaxation is too loose for branch-and-bound to close in
90 s. B’s misses are sharper: prompted by web search, the agent picks fancier methods (tabu on seed
13, SDP on seed 29) and trips on integration details that documentation snippets do not surface. The
tabu run misreads a solver-parameter convention and ends up asking for a compute budget orders of
magnitude beyond the 90 s wall, so the call is killed before any answer is returned. The SDP run pairs
Goemans–Williamson with a free open-source backend (CVXOPT) that cannot finish on a problem
of this size in 90 s, where a commercial backend (MOSEK, SDPA) would have converged. In both
cases the chosen method is sound on this problem; what fails is matching it to a working API call
and a backend that scales. pred addresses precisely this gap. The fundamental difference is in the
search space the agent navigates: without pred, the agent picks from any solver web search surfaces,
including fancier methods whose APIs and backends are easy to misuse; with pred, the reduction
graph routes the problem to a target form (here, the Ising / QUBO family) whose standard solvers are
mature and well-integrated. The agent still picks its own solver on top of that endpoint, but the choice
is now made in a region where the integration is well-trodden by construction. A natural extension is
to annotate each endpoint in the reduction graph with richer solver-level information (recommended
packages, working API patterns, known backend choices for given problem sizes), narrowing the
agent’s remaining choice further still.
With pred (C and D), every run reduces the problem to QUBO via the SpinGlass route and solves
it with simulated annealing on the Ising form, matching the best-of-four on all ten instances. pred
makes this route the default rather than one option among many. Its overhead-aware ranking (O(|V |)
for SpinGlass vs. O(|V |4 ) for the ILP route) surfaces the SpinGlass endpoint, where signed-weight
MaxCut maps directly to an Ising Hamiltonian (each edge weight becomes a coupling) without
auxiliary variables. On that form simulated annealing’s local spin flips converge to low-energy
configurations well inside the 90 s budget for a 150-variable problem.


Table 5: Solver picked on each instance by each configuration. SA = simulated annealing on
the Ising / QUBO reduction (dwave-neal or dwave-samplers); MILP = mixed-integer linear
program (HiGHS or PuLP+CBC); CP-SAT = OR-tools constraint programming; Tabu = D-Wave
TabuSampler; SDP = Goemans–Williamson semidefinite relaxation (PICOS+CVXOPT). Bold cells
are the largest gaps to the best-of-four.
                       Seed      Bare AI    Bare AI + web    + pred    + pred + web
                         7       SA         SA               SA        SA
                        11       SA         SA               SA        SA
                        13       CP-SAT     Tabu             SA        SA
                        17       MILP       SA               SA        SA
                        19       SA         SA               SA        SA
                        23       SA         SA               SA        SA
                        29       SA         SDP              SA        SA
                        31       SA         SA               SA        SA
                        37       MILP       SA               SA        SA
                        41       SA         SA               SA        SA
                  solver families 3         3                1         1



Raw per-run data. Table 6 lists the objective and corresponding solver wall-time for each (config-
uration, instance) pair. Bold objectives mark misses below the best-of-four.

Role of web access. Comparing A and B isolates the effect of web access on the bare configurations.
Web has real but two-sided effects: it can steer the agent away from exact methods like MILP that do
not scale to this problem size (B’s match rate rises to 8/10 from A’s 7/10), but the broader candidate
pool also exposes the agent to fancier methods whose integrations are subtle, and two of B’s runs
return 0 (dragging its mean to 10,014, below A’s 12,306). Web changes which solver the agent picks
but provides no structural guarantee about budget feasibility; the net effect on this case study is


                                                   21
Table 6: Raw per-instance objective and solver wall-time for each configuration. Bold objectives fall
below the best-of-four (right column). The 90 s OS-enforced kill cutoff bounds wall-times; entries
near 80–90 s indicate the solver was running until killed.

                      Bare AI          Bare AI + web           + pred           + pred + web
           Seed    Obj.    Time (s)    Obj.    Time (s)    Obj.     Time (s)    Obj.     Time (s)   Best of 4
            7     12,962    13.0      12,962     25.3     12,962      1.3      12,962     1.2        12,962
            11    12,641     6.5      12,641      6.4     12,641      15.3     12,641     11.9       12,641
            13    12,552    75.0         0       90.0     12,944       6.1     12,944     11.7       12,944
            17     9,966    83.0      12,326      3.2     12,326      2.9      12,326     1.2        12,326
            19    12,915    12.5      12,915      3.0     12,915      14.7     12,915      5.9       12,915
            23    12,240    12.1      12,240      6.3     12,240      59.7     12,240      1.2       12,240
            29    12,944    25.0         0       90.0     12,944      12.6     12,944      5.8       12,944
            31    12,401    32.8      12,401      1.3     12,401      3.0      12,401     11.6       12,401
            37    12,250    85.1      12,471     32.5     12,471      12.5     12,471     14.4       12,471
            41    12,187    26.2      12,187      3.4     12,187      1.2      12,187     0.6        12,187
          mean    12,306    37.1      10,014     26.1     12,603      12.9     12,603      6.5       12,603



unreliable. The agent still needs domain-specific tools and skills (here pred) to reliably pick an
effective solver.
On C and D every run lands on simulated annealing (SA), so the only remaining decision is the
SA budget. Table 7 shows that the two configurations pick similar budgets on most seeds, but D’s
largest budgets stay well below C’s. The reason shows up in D’s logs: D queries WebSearch for
typical dwave-neal budgets and anchors its choices near the documented values, while C, lacking
that reference, occasionally inflates the budget as a safety margin.

Table 7: Simulated-annealing budget chosen by each pred-enabled run and the resulting solver
wall-time. Each cell shows num_reads × num_sweeps.
                                         + pred                         + pred + web
                     Seed       reads × sweeps      time (s)       reads × sweeps       time (s)
                      7           200 × 2,000            1.3        200 × 2,000           1.2
                      11         1,000 × 5,000          15.3       400 × 10,000          11.9
                      13         200 × 10,000            6.1       400 × 10,000          11.7
                      17         1,000 × 1,000           2.9        200 × 2,000           1.2
                      19         1,000 × 5,000          14.7       200 × 10,000           5.9
                      23        2,000 × 10,000          59.7        200 × 2,000           1.2
                      29         200 × 20,000           12.6       200 × 10,000           5.8
                      31          200 × 5,000            3.0       200 × 20,000          11.6
                      37         200 × 20,000           12.5       500 × 10,000          14.4
                      41          200 × 2,000            1.2        200 × 1,000           0.6

Taken together, A vs B and C vs D give a consistent picture of what web access does and does not
do in one-shot solving. Web has real effects in both directions. Without pred’s structural guardrail,
those effects are unreliable: web changes which solver the agent picks, sometimes for the better and
sometimes catastrophically for the worse. With pred fixing the solver class, web takes on a narrower
role: it can serve as a documentation lookup that anchors parameter choices to known-good ranges.
This split reflects a more general fact: there are few universal priors for solver parameters; choices
are usually case-by-case, and even experienced practitioners reach good settings through grid search
over plausible values rather than a single recipe. pred contributes on the solver-selection axis, where
structure provides a reliable criterion; tuning a chosen solver’s parameters is naturally layered on top
as an iterative grid-search refinement.




                                                          22
