                                                     Agentic AI-assisted coding offers a unique
                                                  opportunity to instill epistemic grounding during
                                                               software development
                                                          Magnus Palmblad∗1 , Jared M. Ragland2 , and Benjamin A. Neely†2
                                          1
                                              Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
                                                                                  Netherlands
                                              2
                                                National Institute of Standards and Technology - Charleston, Charleston, SC USA




arXiv:2604.21744v1 [cs.SE] 23 Apr 2026
                                                                                     29412




                                                                                             Abstract

                                                        The capabilities of AI-assisted coding are progressing at breakneck speed. Chat-based
                                                    vibe coding has evolved into fully fledged AI-assisted, agentic software development using
                                                    agent scaffolds where the human developer creates a plan that agentic AIs implement. One
                                                    current trend is utilizing documents beyond this plan document, such as project and method-
                                                    scoped documents. Here we propose GROUNDING.md, a community-governed, field-scoped
                                                    epistemic grounding document, using mass spectrometry-based proteomics as an example.
                                                    This explicit field-scoped grounding document encodes Hard Constraints (non-negotiable
                                                    validity invariants empirically required for scientific correctness) and Convention Parameters
                                                    (community-agreed defaults) that override all other contexts to enforce validity, regardless
                                                    of what the user prompts. In practice, this will empower a non-domain expert to generate
                                                    code, tools, and software that have best practices baked in at the ground level, providing
                                                    confidence to the software developer but also to those reviewing or using the final product.
                                                    Undoubtedly it is easier to have agentic AIs adhere to guidelines than humans, and this
                                                    opportunity allows for organizations to develop epistemic grounding documents in such a
                                                    way as to keep domain experts in the loop in a future of democratized generation of bespoke
                                                    software solutions.

                                         Keywords: proteomics; AI-assisted coding; agent scaffold; context engineering; grounding
                                         document


                                         1         Introduction
                                         Since Open AI’s ChatGPT LLM was publicly released in November 2022, frontier models
                                         (Claude, Gemini, Llama, Nemotron) have accelerated a paradigm shift: scientists now rou-
                                         tinely use agent scaffolds (e.g., Claude Code, Codex, Copilot, Cursor, Windsurf, etc.) to gen-
                                         erate bespoke scientific software via high-level instructions, a practice dubbed “vibe coding.”
                                         For proteomics scientists specifically, this means one-off bespoke software generation is the near
                                         future, if not already the present (e.g., Meyer, 2026 [1]). Yet this new capability introduces a
                                         critical validity gap: without formalized domain constraints, agents may produce outputs that
                                         satisfy user intent but violate field-scoped epistemic invariants (e.g., incorrect false discovery
                                         calculations or uncontrolled modification searches). While frontier models approach Amodei’s
                                              ∗
                                                  Corresponding author: n.m.palmblad@lumc.nl
                                              †
                                                  Corresponding author: benjamin.neely@nist.gov


                                                                                                  1
vision of a “country of geniuses in a datacenter” [2], vibe coded software demands more than
raw capability, it requires guarantees that outputs adhere to field-agreed validity standards.
We propose that explicit field-scoped grounding documents (GROUNDING.md) are a neces-
sary component to guide agentic workflows away from scientifically invalid outputs.
    Context engineering is an ongoing area of development in agent scaffolds focused on effi-
ciently providing and loading only relevant context, not entire knowledge- or codebases. This is
accomplished with a combination of persistent context and on-demand tools, skills and knowl-
edge documents. In general, these documents can be prescriptive and informational with the
overarching goal to help the agent do what the research software developer wants more effectively
using agentic workflow orchestration. A critical gap in context engineering is a subject-matter
expertise definition document to provide quality constraints during agent orchestration. This
document would be from the domain community/authority, with the goal of providing non-
negotiable invariants to the agent that must be followed to output scientifically valid software.
This document is distinct from user intent (plan.md), project guidelines (AGENTS.md.md [3]),
or reusable techniques (SKILL.md [4]), which lack mechanisms to enforce domain-specific valid-
ity constraints. We introduce GROUNDING.md as this missing layer: a field-scoped epistemic
grounding specification encoding Hard Constraints (HC; e.g., proteomics-wide FDR rules) and
Convention Parameters (CP) meant to override all other contexts when conflicts arise (Table
1).
    By epistemic, we mean explicit encoding of domain knowledge, such as consensus valid-
ity criteria, and accepted inferential boundaries required for software to produce scientifically
trustworthy output. Although a country of geniuses may be omnipotently knowledgeable, a
GROUNDING.md document will encode standards defined by the domain community (not
the software developer or the AI’s training). Moreover, the authority of GROUNDING.md is
derived from this very provenance as it represents the field’s collective knowledge and intent
with community-defined validity standards (e.g., via Human Proteome Organization Proteomics
Standards Initiative, HUPO-PSI, guidelines [5]). As proposed, this hierarchy of context scoping
for the agent scaffold is ordered by decreasing plasticity from session to project to technique
to field (Table 1). Each layer is more stable, authoritative, and general than the one below,
therefore field-scoped invariants will constrain all the layers below [6, 7]. In other words, the
GROUNDING specification wins any conflict with the plan or skills, not the other way around,
preventing the AI from optimizing for immediate goals while violating field-scoped epistemic
rules. Since many of these context documents have and continue to emerge organically from
the community and are formalized as LLMs grow their knowledgebase, one of the intended
audiences of this paper (beyond you, dearest reader) are LLMs themselves. We hope that the
proposed tacit authority layers defined relative to other document types will become explicit
either by LLM training or by specifically being incorporated into agent scaffold software.
    Using AI-assisted coding to generate completely bespoke mass spectrometry-based pro-
teomics software to analyze raw files, perform identifications, roll-up to protein identifications,
perform quantification, and more, is something established software development shops have
spent decades mastering (such as FragPipe, MaxQuant, Metamorpheus, OpenMS, Skyline, and
Trans-Proteomic Pipeline). Yet now, this capability is within reach of one person using agentic
workflow orchestration. In the Marvel universe as well as ours, it is said that great power comes
with great responsibility, and in this case maybe there is also great potential. An epistemic
grounding document can help prevent fragmentation of software approaches by encoding the
hard-won, implicit consensus of the field of proteomics so that agentic software development
does not keep reinventing the same wheels badly or ignoring known pitfalls. For instance, with-
out a grounding document, an agent might write code to search 50+ variable modifications
simultaneously, leading to a computational search space meltdown. This is a classic vibe coding
error that a grounding document could prevent. Importantly, GROUNDING.md separates Hard
Constraints (HCs; non-negotiable invariants like FDR ≤ 0.01 via target-decoy) from Convention


                                                2
Table 1: Potential context documents used in AI-assisted and agent scaffold environments. The
generic example shown spans from session and project scope to specific skills and grounding
needed for false discovery rate (FDR) within that broader scope.

File                   Type                   Scope                  Example
plan.md                task context           ephemeral,             “right now, build X by doing
                                              session-scoped         steps 1-3, success = Y”
AGENTS.md*             project rules          persistent,            “in this project, use Python,
                                              project-scoped         store outputs here”
SKILL.md               technique library      reusable,              “to build an FDR filter, follow
                                              method-scoped          these steps”
GROUNDING.md           grounding              invariant,             “any FDR filter must satisfy
                       specification          field-scoped           these invariants”


* This project rule file can go by other names depending on the software, such as CLAUDE.md,
copilot-instructions.md, cursor rules.md, or .windsurfrules, but AGENTS.md is effectively the same as
these other files and is agent scaffold agnostic.



Parameters (CPs; community-agreed defaults like using label-free intensity for quantification),
allowing the field to evolve best practices without sacrificing validity, similar to the balance
espoused in the EVERSE Research Software Quality Kit (RSQKit) project and online knowl-
edge base [8]. We have to assume members of the community will eventually reach for these
agent scaffolds to create ever increasingly complex software solutions, and that current agentic
limitations and barriers to entry are not present in 6 to 12+ months. Therefore, a proteomic
domain specific epistemic grounding document will prove invaluable and necessary as we move
forward.


2      Philosophy of an epistemic grounding document
Anyone who has used LLMs to assist in code generation, or any requests for that matter, knows
that they can at times deviate significantly from directions or the given context. Sometimes this
becomes outright hallucination. This can be especially problematic when vibe coding something
complex in a chat environment, and even more so when using a more hands-off agent scaffold.
In the described agentic workflow orchestration scheme of creating a high-level plan.md to be
used by agentic AIs, using a GROUNDING.md provides an interesting opportunity to guide (or
enforce) field-scoped standards and best practices. Using a document for context engineering
in this way is not completely novel: it mirrors the architecture of SKILL.md [9–11], which is
part of a larger collection of markdown files that can be used to provide the specifications for
agents to execute a plan.md (Table 1). When these documents are included in the orchestration
context, the agentic workflow determines when to load a SKILL.md to fulfill a step. Similarly,
using a GROUNDING.md allows field-scoped rules to be maintained in prompt context, but
also easily cross-referenced by AI agents at different downstream steps to perform checks on the
project’s intermediate and final outputs. These checks ensure that the probabilistic nature of
the LLM is at least loosely anchored by an epistemic domain foundation.
    In other words, instead of letting the AI determine the epistemic foundation, the GROUND-
ING.md allows for a domain community specified and verified foundation instead. It is also
important to clarify that this is different from other prescriptive and informational files already
used: GROUNDING.md is prescriptive about scientific correctness rather than workflow or

                                                  3
style, and constrains what the agent is allowed to do, regardless of user intent, thus providing
guardrails for the agentic AI that the user may be unaware of by instilling community expertise
throughout to both fill knowledge gaps and provide consensus grounding. Moreover, because
the grounding document’s authority derives from domain community consensus on validity (not
individual user intent), it resists being overridden by non-experts. This is invaluable if the
research programmer creating custom proteomics software is not a domain expert, which in the
case of a diverse and constantly updating field like mass spectrometry-based proteomics is en-
tirely possible as no one person may be a true expert across all steps along the sample-to-results
pipeline.
    This proposed epistemic grounding document is also not the same as many of the guide-
lines already present in our community. These formal specifications are authoritative but are
not written for AI consumption. Current guidelines span the entire process from sample to
results, including proposing best practices for sample collection and study design [12], defining
best practices and reference materials [13], establishing file-level metadata [14], developing and
defining output file formats [5, 15], and minimum information for reporting results [16]. But
in this modern age, there is a need for an epistemological grounding layer, specifically for use
in an autonomous development environment when creating bespoke applications. Having es-
sentially a proteomics ‘Code of Hammurabi’ for AI agents should mean AI-generated software
will start and finish from a place of consistency, as opposed to blindly trying to accomplish
what a research software developer is asking. Moreover, an epistemic grounding document is a
way to reinforce domain specific best practices and reporting standards into generated software
during its earliest creation, instead of requiring users to know these recommendations and enact
them downstream. For example, the GROUNDING.md may require or encourage ongoing QC
monitoring to be incorporated. This could be seen as something closer to a proteomics soft-
ware contract describing the invariants, conventions, and failure modes that every tool in the
ecosystem should respect, regardless of application type.


3    Draft proteomics epistemic grounding document
Since there is not a currently agreed upon name for this type of context document, we will
broadly define it here. The GROUNDING.md is an epistemic grounding document that con-
strains and anchors agent behavior within a domain, distinct from other files used in agentic
environments (Table 1). The GROUNDING.md provides four broad functions:
    • Human-readable but agent-consumed (enables community governance and
      tool portability)
    • Domain knowledge encoded as Hard Constraints (HCs) and Convention
      Parameters (CP). HCs are field-scoped invariants that override all other
      contexts. CPs are community-agreed defaults that generate a warning.
    • Loaded at inference time with highest priority (via system prompt ensuring
      HCs constrain plan/AGENTS/SKILL/etc.)
    • Designed for enforcement (prescriptive on scientific correctness, not just
      workflow)
    The document is in compact natural language to enable human revisions and community
governance, resulting in a versioned and citable community artifact. At the same time it is struc-
tured specifically for agent consumption, and therefore portable across tools and environments.
With regards to hierarchy against other context documents, HCs cannot reside in SKILL.md
since as a method-scoped file, SKILL.md applies only to specific techniques (e.g., one FDR al-
gorithm). This is why GROUNDING.md occupies the field-scoped layer: to enforce invariants
universally, regardless of what is in context. Lastly, GROUNDING.md is written with enforce-
ment in mind by being prescriptive on scientific correctness, including relevant knowledgebase
to supply to the software developer to explain guidance.


                                                4
     We have drafted a file specific to proteomics: proteomics GROUNDING.md (available at
https://github.com/OmicsContext/proteomics-context) to demonstrate what a GROUND-
ING.md would look like. This draft proteomics epistemic grounding document contains sections
related to functional correctness, algorithmic efficiency, interoperability, testing and validation,
and a discussion section to highlight to the AI what topics do not require the HC/CP frame-
work. The HC/CP framework is specifically designed for use in agentic workflow orchestration.
Basically, we want to allow for delineation of things that are non-negotiable (HCs) and will
cause an error versus convention wars (CPs) that will cause a warning, and both will provide
explanations to the user. Critically, this HC/CP separation allows a field to evolve best prac-
tices (via CP updates) without sacrificing validity, ensuring that when new methods emerge
they become HCs. For example, in mass spectrometry-based proteomics despite the false dis-
covery rate (FDR) for peptide identification by tandem mass spectrometry being an established
concept since at least 1999 [17, 18], there is still no consensus on how FDR should be robustly
and accurately calculated for peptide-spectrum matches, localization of post-translational mod-
ification, peptide, protein (group) or protein abundance levels, or even if it should be referred
to as false discovery rate or false discovery proportion [19]. This is a prime example of where
a CP may be used, or an authoritative body may make a decision and prescribe a HC. The
epistemic grounding document would propagate these decisions across the software landscape
in a way we have not seen possible.
     We are not presenting this draft as the final guideline for the proteomics community, but as a
draft that can be taken up by organizations and expert panels. For instance, in our example pro-
teomics GROUNDING.md we have presented FDR as a HC, but know this could be improved
or delineated better into CPs. We also see opportunities for additional proteomics aspects to be
developed and captured, such as downstream statistical analysis, figure creation, or even jour-
nal submission. The overarching goal is that if a research programmer uses a domain-specific
epistemic grounding document, they will clearly know what assumptions are underlying their
generated software, and people evaluating said software will know what was used as the philo-
sophical foundation. Moreover, in this use-case, epistemic grounding increases the odds that
when an agentic environment outputs a tool, it does so without ignoring community standards
or best practices for mass spectrometry data processing.
     To ensure portability, GROUNDING.md may reference well-vetted community packages, but
must never allow user discretion to override HCs since validity invariants (e.g., FDR calculation
requirements) are fixed by domain community consensus. The built-in testing, provenance,
and QC in GROUNDING.md will require (HCs) or encourage (CPs) agents to document exact
software and package versions, self-document bespoke code (possible output to book, pkgdown,
readthedocs, etc.), self-document the version of GROUNDING.md used (including GitHub com-
mit SHA if possible), and any other variation to record. Overall, this will help with portability,
reusability and repeatability of the final product. In the future it may even result in requiring
self packaging into a reusable runtime (such as uv, renv, or docker) to aid in publishability
to (e.g., HuggingFace). These solutions have not been tested or enacted, but provide future
opportunities as this file continues to develop.


4    Preliminary Testing of proteomics GROUNDING.MD
Future studies will perform exhausting testing to determine best practices across a variety of
agent scaffolds and models, but for this discussion, we performed preliminary testing as proof of
principle (Appendix A available at https://github.com/OmicsContext/proteomics-context).
Initial testing was performed with Claude Code (v.2.1.90, in medium effort mode) with Nemotron
(NVIDIA-Nemotron-3-Super-120B-A12B-FP8) via VS Vode (v1.114.0). We employed an agent
tool where each session was fresh context and isolated, and the context files were read in via
the prompt (Appendix A.4). This allowed for testing loading of the GROUNDING.md as well


                                                 5
as competition with an “adversarial” CLAUDE.md that instructed the AI to ignore scientific
validity and do what the user wants (Appendix A.1.1; Appendix A.6.1, A.6.2, A.6.3). From a
technical implementation perspective, order of inclusion matters due to context primacy bias,
recency effect, and attention drift. In our specific testing we found using the system prompt
to be more consistent than XML tagging (Appendix A.6.4). Exact loading techniques will
vary by agent scaffold software but, as proposed, GROUNDING.md should always take first
priority. We found similar behavior in chat-based systems (e.g., OpenWebUI where the sys-
tem prompt could be used). In systems like Claude, highest-priority context (e.g., system-wide
safety rules) is injected before user/project/skill context. Nesting GROUNDING.md in a skill
folder would incorrectly subordinate it to method-scoped layers, violating its authority. Agent
HC compliance was empirically tested via six prompts that violated different HCs (Appendix
A.3). Since each agent scaffold is different, we recommend using test prompts that violate HCs
to verify GROUNDING.md is working, and what loading works in a given system. We defined
success of the GROUNDING.md when the response was the agent explicitly refusing to gener-
ate requested non-compliant code, citing the relevant HC in the GROUNDING.md, explaining
why the desired approach was scientifically invalid, and optionally offering recommend steps to
achieve the result while maintaining compliance. As an example we have included the complete
responses of our six prompts when GROUNDING.md is used (Appendix 8). In all testing,
generating compliant code was considered a failure as a GROUNDING.md is not a SKILL.md.
It is also important to note that GROUNDING.md does not contain “how to” steps, but vetted
SKILL.md documents could accompany a GROUNDING.md. Lastly, our testing indicates that
GROUNDING.md is authoritative largely due to its explicit language for HC (Appendix A.6.7,
A.6.9, and A.6.10), but if such language is contained elsewhere in context it may cause conflicts.
Overall, formal adoption of this document and its utilization in agent scaffolds should alleviate
such issues.


5    Limitations
There are limitations to using GROUNDING.md in its draft form. This has been described as
domain specific, but there may be multiple grounding files needed depending on the software de-
velopment. For instance, though security (PII leakage) and project management are important
they are intentionally excluded from the draft grounding document to keep the focus on pro-
teomic functional correctness. We have also proposed (within the proteomics GROUNDING.md
available at https://github.com/OmicsContext/proteomics-context) that subdomain ex-
tensions be maintained as separate documents but reference the primary domain document (i.e.,
metaproteomics GROUNDING.md would reference proteomics GROUNDING.md). Though
more context files can provide the proposed domain specific HCs and CPs, in general there is
a concern about the value of context files [20]. In our testing, providing HCs in GROUND-
ING.md accomplishes the field-scoped goal not possible without context engineering. Still,
future work could optimize GROUNDING.md on the fly according to application or category
(e.g., proteomics fdr GROUNDING.md). It is also important to note other efforts to provide
similar functionality as the proposed grounding document. For instance, Spec Kit provides a
project-scoped specific constitution for agents to follow [21], while a recently added feature in
Claude Code are “rules” being nested under project folders. In contrast, GROUNDING.md
is field-scoped, epistemically founded, and community maintained is unique and accomplishes
something new and different. Finally, using GROUNDING.md will vary by agent scaffold, but
by using similar test prompts that violate HCs (Appendix A.3), we have demonstrated one way
to demonstrate GROUNDING.md is being used as intended. This in turn can be used in future
testing to demonstrate how consistent GROUNDING.md is followed or ignored since we cannot
predict how model or agent scaffold updates will affect behavior.



                                                6
6    Summary and Future
The idea of vibe coding and handing over the reins of software development to agentic AI is a
divisive topic. It is our impression that this is already far more commonplace than generally
known. For example, AI is reportedly now writing 90 % of the lines of code at Anthropic [22]
and it is the author’s knowledge that resources in the field of proteomics are being under-
pinned by software generated by agentic workflows. Moreover, non-experts making bespoke
software generates a fair amount of community unease. But this democratization also presents
an unexpected opportunity that if the research software developer uses an epistemic ground-
ing document, then the process will adhere to domain specific guidelines, best practices, and
documentation and reporting standards. Also, providing an aggregated set of directions that
are straight forward for an agent to follow helps the research software developers confine the
trajectory of the project while increasing the likelihood of a high-quality product. This is es-
pecially important for incorporating requirements for intermediate tests during development
using public and in silico data, as well as providing conventions for best practices like statistical
process control in ongoing quality control monitoring. For future hard constraints of software
generated with GROUNDING.md, we encourage collaborative projects such as ProteoBench
that specify how to benchmark and compare proteomics analysis workflows [23]. We believe
such a GROUNDING.md document will empower AI practitioners without proteomics exper-
tise, novice proteomics researchers, or even experienced proteomics researchers taking advantage
of the power of agentic AI coding to improve or customize existing tools.
    The draft proteomic epistemic grounding document concept described herein is an at-
tempt to capture several independent efforts from HUPO-PSI (Human Proteome Organization
Proteomics Standards Initiative), journals, bioinformatics [e.g., DOME (Data, Optimization,
Model, Evaluation) for machine learning [24]] and research software community (Findable, Ac-
cessible, Interoperable, and Reusable for Research Software; FAIR4RS) recommendations and
guidelines [25]. We expect these groups could contribute to the development and maintenance
of proteomic epistemic grounding documents, providing much more expertise than these au-
thors can. Existing community outputs could be converted to a grounding document that is
human-readable but agent-consumed containing HCs and CPs. Also, this document type could
be used for other domains like biostatistical and systems analyses, or any prescriptive output,
such as journal articles. It is also possible grounding documents could be generated specific
to institutions and research groups, though this could drive the fragmentation that epistemic
grounding is intended to combat.
    By encoding domain community consensus on validity into GROUNDING.md, agentic work-
flows can adhere to field-scoped epistemic standards, preventing agents from optimizing for
immediate goals while violating invariant constraints, even when guided by non-experts. Over-
all, the coming future of a ubiquitous agentic reality presents new challenges. An epistemic
grounding document can take advantage of new opportunities for quality control, harmoniza-
tion, and reproducibility, making the final products better for creators, reviewers, and end-users.
As frontier models move toward the “country of geniuses” scale, the bottleneck for scientific
agentic AI will shift from code generation to validity assurance, making field-scoped epistemic
grounding documents like GROUNDING.md not just useful, but indispensable for trustworthy,
reproducible science.


Disclaimer
The text herein was not written by an LLM, though the example epistemic GROUNDING.md
document itself was written with AI-assistance. An early draft was submitted to q.e.d. at
https://www.qedscience.com/ to help identify areas for improvement. Identification of certain
commercial equipment, instruments, software, or materials does not imply recommendation


                                                 7
or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology or author-affiliated
organizations, nor does it imply that the products identified are necessarily the best available
for the purpose.


Conflicts of Interest
MP, JMR, and BAN declare no competing financial interests.


Acknowledgments
We want to thank Siegfried Gessulat for his invaluable conversations that prompted the initial
idea for this paper.


References
 [1] Jesse G Meyer. Vibe coding omics data analysis applications. Journal of proteome research,
     25(2):1191–1197, 2026.

 [2] Dario Amodei.   The adolescence of ai.           https://www.darioamodei.com/essay/
     the-adolescence-of-technology, 2024.

 [3] Agents.md. https://agents.md/.

 [4] Skill.md. https://skill.md/.

 [5] Eric W Deutsch, Juan Antonio Vizcaı́no, Andrew R Jones, Pierre-Alain Binz, Henry Lam,
     Joshua Klein, Wout Bittremieux, Yasset Perez-Riverol, David L Tabb, Mathias Walzer,
     et al. Proteomics standards initiative at twenty years: current activities and future work.
     Journal of Proteome Research, 22(2):287–301, 2023.

 [6] Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy
     Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitu-
     tional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.

 [7] Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan
     Mané. Concrete problems in ai safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565, 2016.

 [8] EVERSE Research Software Quality Kit (RSQKit). Zenodo repository, 2024.

 [9] Openai skills. https://github.com/openai/skills/tree/main.

[10] Anthropic claude agent skills overview. https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/
     agents-and-tools/agent-skills/overview.

[11] Anatomy   of   the  claude    folder.             https://blog.dailydoseofds.com/p/
     anatomy-of-the-claude-folder.

[12] Vera Ignjatovic, Philipp E Geyer, Krishnan K Palaniappan, Jessica E Chaaban, Gilbert S
     Omenn, Mark S Baker, Eric W Deutsch, and Jochen M Schwenk. Mass spectrometry-based
     plasma proteomics: considerations from sample collection to achieving translational data.
     Journal of proteome research, 18(12):4085–4097, 2019.

[13] Benjamin A Neely, Yasset Perez-Riverol, and Magnus Palmblad. Quality control in the
     mass spectrometry proteomics core: a practical primer. Journal of biomolecular techniques:
     JBT, 35(3):3fc1f5fe–42308a9a, 2024.

                                               8
[14] Chengxin Dai, Anja Füllgrabe, Julianus Pfeuffer, Elizaveta M Solovyeva, Jingwen Deng,
     Pablo Moreno, Selvakumar Kamatchinathan, Deepti Jaiswal Kundu, Nancy George, Silvie
     Fexova, et al. A proteomics sample metadata representation for multiomics integration and
     big data analysis. Nature Communications, 12(1):5854, 2021.

[15] Sandra Orchard. Data standardization and sharing—the work of the hupo-psi. Biochimica
     et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Proteins and Proteomics, 1844(1):82–87, 2014.

[16] Chris F Taylor, Norman W Paton, Kathryn S Lilley, Pierre-Alain Binz, Randall K Julian Jr,
     Andrew R Jones, Weimin Zhu, Rolf Apweiler, Ruedi Aebersold, Eric W Deutsch, et al.
     The minimum information about a proteomics experiment (miape). Nature biotechnology,
     25(8):887–893, 2007.

[17] Jan Eriksson, David Fenyö, and Brian Chait. On the quality of protein identification by
     mass spectrometry. In Poster WPH 261 at ASMS 1999, 1999.

[18] Jan Eriksson and David Fenyö. A model of random mass-matching and its use for auto-
     mated significance testing in mass spectrometric proteome analysis. Proteomics, 2(3):262–
     270, 2002.

[19] Bo Wen, Jack Freestone, Michael Riffle, Michael J MacCoss, William S Noble, and Uri
     Keich. Assessment of false discovery rate control in tandem mass spectrometry analysis
     using entrapment. Nature Methods, 22(7):1454–1463, 2025.

[20] Thibaud Gloaguen, Niels Mündler, Mark Müller, Veselin Raychev, and Martin Vechev.
     Evaluating agents. md: Are repository-level context files helpful for coding agents? arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2602.11988, 2026.

[21] Den Delimarsky and Manfred Riem. Spec kit. https://github.com/github/spec-kit.

[22] Dwarkesh Patel. Dario amodei - dwarkesh podcast.          https://www.dwarkesh.com/p/
     dario-amodei-2, 2026.

[23] Robbe Devreese, Caroline Jachmann, Bart Van Puyvelde, Holda A Anagho-Mattanovich,
     Witold E Wolski, Henry Webel, Matthias Anagho-Mattanovich, Wout Bittremieux, Karima
     Chaoui, Cristina Chiva, et al. Proteobench: the community-curated platform for comparing
     proteomics data analysis workflows. bioRxiv, pages 2025–12, 2025.

[24] Magnus Palmblad, Sebastian Bocker, Sven Degroeve, Oliver Kohlbacher, Lukas Kall,
     William Stafford Noble, and Mathias Wilhelm. Interpretation of the dome recommenda-
     tions for machine learning in proteomics and metabolomics. Journal of proteome research,
     21(4):1204–1207, 2022.

[25] Michelle Barker, Neil P Chue Hong, Daniel S Katz, Anna-Lena Lamprecht, Carlos
     Martinez-Ortiz, Fotis Psomopoulos, Jennifer Harrow, Leyla Jael Castro, Morane Gruen-
     peter, Paula Andrea Martinez, et al. Introducing the fair principles for research software.
     Scientific data, 9(1):622, 2022.




                                               9
