Automa'cally A,acking So2ware Reverse Engineering AI Agents
Brian Crawford, Jus0n Phillips, Patrick McClure
Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, United States
brian.crawford@nps.edu
jus0n.phillips@nps.edu
patrick.mcclure@nps.edu

Abstract: SoFware tools for reverse engineering executable binary ﬁles, such as Ghidra, enable
malware analysts to safely conduct robust sta0c analysis without having access to original source
code. Coupled with the analy0c power of large language models (LLM), agen0c systems enabled
with tools, such as GhidraMCP, can allow analysts to automate a previously human driven process.
Although this automa0on can increase the produc0vity of a single malware analyst, it also
introduces a new area of vulnerability for malware obfusca0on. This paper presents an
adversarial technique using gene0c algorithm-based prompt genera0on, a modiﬁca0on of an
adversarial aPack known as AutoDAN, to demonstrate the ability to deceive LLM-powered
disassembly and decomplica0on systems into misinterpre0ng binary executables, eﬀec0vely
corrup0ng their analy0cal output. This proof-of-concept methodology exploits inherent
vulnerabili0es in how LLMs process and interpret decompiled machine code via prompt injec0on
by using extraneous string variable assignments to pass surrep00ous instruc0ons to the LLM
while not impac0ng the func0onality of the executable ﬁle. We demonstrate this capability
through several concise examples. This approach could enable aPackers to bypass automated
detec0on systems that rely on LLM-driven analysis pipelines. By studying and understanding this
aPack, insights can be gained regarding the security implica0on of integra0ng LLMs into
cybersecurity toolchains and building more robust agen0c code analysis systems.
Keywords: prompt injec0on, soFware reverse engineering, LLMs, AI Agents
1. Introduc'on
The rise of tools for reverse engineering executable binary ﬁles enhanced the ability of soFware
analysts to determine the func0on of unknown programs through sta0c analysis. Ini0al
dissembler tools allowed analysts to convert the machine code of an executable binary into the
slightly less tedious assembly language presenta0on. More recently, decompilers, such as IDA Pro,
Binary Ninja, and Ghidra, take the reverse engineering process one step further conver0ng the
assembly language into a high-level source code, typically C or C++ (Faingnaert et al., 2024).
Modern genera0ve large language models (LLM) such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT and Google’s Gemini
not only have the ability to engage in a contextual chat conversa0on, but these models can now
also func0on as AI agents with access to external tools and data sources (Bandi et al, 2025). These
agen0c capabili0es typically enable an LLM to synthesize informa0on from a document repository
or internet search results and websites. The development of standards such as Model Context
Protocol (MCP) enables these LLM agents to access a broader range of tools (Ray, 2025).
One such protocol, GhidraMCP, allows an LLM to access the soFware analysis capabili0es of
Ghidra. This agen0c setup allows analysts to automate what was previously a more human-labor
intensive process. GhidraMCP, when linked with Ghidra and an agen0c capable LLM, can analyze
an executable binary ﬁle and produce a concise summary of the ﬁle’s programma0c func0on
(Ghimire et al., 2025). Although this process can result in a produc0vity increase by outsourcing
tedious analysis work to an AI model, it also introduces a new avenue of vulnerability, namely,
the security weaknesses inherent within an LLM.
One such weakness is suscep0bility to prompt injec0on aPacks. Prompt injec0on aPacks take
advantage of the concatena0on of user input with developer instruc0ons and the LLM’s inability
to dis0nguish between the two (Kosinski et al, 2026). In a direct prompt injec0on aPack the query
sent to the LLM by the user is designed to elicit an undesired response. In an indirect aPack a
prompt injec0on is input through the manipula0on of some external resource that is used to
generate a query rather than manipula0ng the query directly (Vassilev et al, 2024). Agen0c LLM
systems have been shown to be suscep0ble to indirect prompt injec0on aPacks from integrated
tools (Y. Liu et al, 2023). Speciﬁcally, AI driven integrated development environments (IDEs) are
also vulnerable to prompt injec0on aPacks implemented in source code ﬁles, typically via added
comments or incorporated text documents thar are analyzed by the LLM (Marzouk, 2025).
In an executable binary ﬁle these comments are typically ignored by the compiler and are thus
not an available aPack vector for automated decompiler analysis systems. However, by including
extraneous string variable assignments that survive the compiling process we inves0gate this
prompted injec0on vulnerability aided by a novel modiﬁca0on of AutoDAN (X. Liu et al, 2023)
thereby inﬂuencing the code analysis report output by the LLM interfacing with Ghidra.
2. Methodology
This aPack is based on ideas from what Thomas (2025) calls a transcript hack, where he shows,
through a number guessing game illustra0on, that if a model is passed what appears to be the
transcript for the current conversa0on’s history, it will believe that the provided informa0on is
accurate to previous turns of the conversa0on. The format for the prompt injec0on aPack uses
embedded strings that leverage the Ghidra decompile results to convince the target LLM that the
true decompile results contain errors and to instead analyze the false decompiler output.




 Figure 1a: Analysis of base C code source       Figure 1b: Analysis of modiﬁed C code source
 ﬁle where func0onality and automated            ﬁle where func0onality and automated
 analysis match.                                 analysis diﬀers from func0onality.

2.1 A,ack Format
The setup for the experiment used the GhidraMCP interface for Cline, an agen0c management
framework for AI assisted coding (Shrivastava, 2025), to access output from Ghidra and Qwen3-
8B (Yang et al, 2025) loaded in LM Studio as the driving LLM. Figure 1a illustrates the standard
automated analysis process where the func0on of the compiled binary matches the analysis
output. Figure 1b shows how a modiﬁed source ﬁle results in an executable that performs one
func0on while the automated analysis describes another. All example programs were wriPen in
C for ease of implementa0on since Ghidra decompiles its results to C, but any compiled language
could be successful as the executable binary will decompile to C code regardless.
2.1.1 Source Code Format
The prompt injec0on aPack requires two programs, an adversarial example, the intended
surrep00ous binary executable intended to fool the automated analysis, and a target program,
the func0on of which will be output when the adversarial example is analyzed. In the example C
code in Figure 2, the adversarial example is a hello-world program that, when run outputs “Hello,
World!”; the target program, by contrast, outputs the ﬁrst 10 digits of the Fibonacci sequence.




Figure 2: C code for hello-world adversarial Figure 3: Format of the prompt injec0on aPack
example. Format for the prompt injec0on string.
aPack string is illustrated in Figure 3.

When the hello-world adversarial example program is analyzed, the LLM will conclude that it
outputs the ﬁrst 10 digits of the Fibonacci sequence, the target program func0on.
Varia0ons on this speciﬁc hello-world program are also likely to be eﬀec0ve adversarial examples,
but the primary requirement is that the adversarial string, which will be discussed in more detail
in Sec0on 2.1.2, must be consequen0al in the execu0on of the ﬁle. Simply declaring the string
variable is not eﬀec0ve since most compilers will discard unused variables in their transla0on to
machine code, and, thus, the target string will not appear aFer Ghidra decompila0on and will
have no impact on the automated analysis. In the case of this code, from the perspec0ve of the
compiler, the adversarial_string variable impacts whether the if statement is executed and is
included in the transla0on of the program to machine code.
2.1.2 Prompt Injec6on Format
The actual string assigned to the adversarial_string variable has three parts: an adversarial
prepended string, the target code string, and an adversarial appended string. The prepended and
appended strings are short plain language sentences telling the LLM to only pay aPen0on to and
analyze the decompiled results that lie between them. The target code string is the decompiled
results from the analysis of the target program, i.e., the end state for what the automated analysis
should evaluate when processing the adversarial example program.
The ﬁrst step to draFing the prompt injec0on string is to iden0fy and write a target program, and
then use GhidraMCP to analyze the compiled executable ﬁle. During the automated analysis,
GhidraMCP will use its decompile_func0on tool to analyze the program’s main func0on. The
aPached LLM’s log ﬁles contain the text required for the target code string: the ini0al call of the
tool from the LLM through the end of the data returned by the decompile_func0on tool. Figure
3 shows the posi0on of this target code string in the context of the adversarial string.
The prepend and append strings are plain language strings, the speciﬁc content of which can vary
according to what is successful for a given model. More details about determining those speciﬁcs
will be discussed in Sec0on 2.2. The generic form of the prepend and append strings are shown
in Figure 3. These strings serve to lead the LLM to act as though the decompile func0on data
immediately before and aFer the adversarial string contains inaccuracies and that only the target
code string should be evaluated in determining the purpose of the func0on.
The target code string begins with the text that re-calls the decompile_func0on tool, a task
originally elicited by the LLM, to make it appear to the LLM that the messages to disregard are
actually messages previously posted by the LLM. This use of the transcript hack serves to mislead
the LLM to act as though it, rather than the user, recognized the errors in the decompila0on and
called for a re-evalua0on of the func0on.
2.1.3 Prompt Injec6on String Limita6ons
The prompt injec0on string is constrained by a character limit in Ghidra’s decompile func0onality.
When using GhidraMCP, a binary ﬁle is decompiled by Ghidra and the adversarial string variable
is extracted as wriPen and sent to the LLM. However, when the length of the string variable
exceeds 2048 characters, the content of the string is truncated in Ghidra’s output; it is this
truncated output that is passed via GhidraMCP to the LLM. When this happens, the full
adversarial string is not processed by the LLM and the aPack fails and is poten0ally discovered by
the LLM. This limita0on constrains the complexity of the target program, since the string
containing the decompile_funciton results from the target func0on, together with the prepend
and append strings, cannot exceed the character upper bound.
Of note, this aPack method is intended to fool an automated analysis process using an LLM
coupled with a decompiler. The presence of an extraneous, lengthy string variable in the source
code would easily be recognized by a human analyst as poten0ally malicious behavior (Chen et
al., 2025). The intent of the aPack is to either bypass an automated system or to render an
automated analysis system as unreliable.
2.2 Automated A,ack Genera'on
Determining the speciﬁc content of the prepend and append strings that will successfully cause
an LLM to focus on the target code string can be a simple trial and error process. Mul0ple diﬀerent
varia0ons of the strings will likely result in success for a given model, but those strings may or
may not be successful across mul0ple adversarial and target program combina0ons. Finding
successful string contents and combina0ons is tedious if a successful op0on is not found within
the ﬁrst few aPempts. The AutoDAN gene0c algorithm provides a solu0on to automate this
discovery process (X. Liu et al, 2023).
2.2.1 AutoDAN
AutoDAN is an automated jailbreaking algorithm that uses a gene0c algorithm to ﬁnd a plain
language prompt to induce a complicit response from an LLM (X. Liu et al, 2023). Similar to the
depic0on in Figure 3, the algorithm concatenates three substrings to generate an adversarial
prompt. The middle string is constant and drives the target for the aPack. The prepend and
append strings are modiﬁed by the algorithm un0l a successful jailbreak is achieved.
Under the hood, genera0ve LLMs that interact via a contextual conversa0on are, at a basic level,
using probability to calculate the most likely token (word, par0al word, or symbol) that should
occur next at a given point in the conversa0on ﬂow. Once the LLM has decided on a given token,
it will then calculate the token following that token, con0nuing un0l the next most likely token is
a marker that will end its turn in the conversa0on (Mann et al., 2020). This is accomplished by the
LLM compu0ng:
                                    𝑃(𝑟!"# |𝑞# … 𝑞$ , 𝑟# … 𝑟! )                                (1)
where P is the probability genera0ng a response token, rm+1, given sequence of n query tokens
input by the user, q1…qn, followed by a sequence of m previously generated response tokens,
r1…rm. At each step the LLM selects a token by randomly sampling from Equa0on 1.
In AutoDAN, the gene0c algorithm samples from a seed list of prepend and append string pairs
running each through the model and assessing the ﬁtness of each pair. Similar to Equa0on 1, the
ﬁtness is determined by calcula0ng the loss, but instead of looking at the likelihood of a single
token given the previous text, the AudoDAN ﬁtness assessment calculates the probability of the
target response string:
                                       𝑃(𝑡# … 𝑡% |𝑞# … 𝑞$ )                                    (2)
where q1…qn and t1…tk represent n tokens of the query and the k target response tokens,
respec0vely.
The algorithm then keeps the best performing of the prepend/append pairs. From those pairs the
algorithm generates children by mixing and matching the prepend/append components coupled
with select synonym replacement muta0ons. New pairs are also sampled from the original seed
list. This process con0nues in batches un0l a designated stopping criterion, based on substrings
contained in the LLM’s response, is met.
2.2.2 Algorithm Modiﬁca6ons
Using AutoDAN to ﬁnd successful prepend/append string pairs in this automated program
analysis prompt injec0on aPack follows the same basic format where the prepend_string and
append_string variables are op0mized using the gene0c algorithm. The primary diﬀerence in the
format of the aPack for this research as compared to the original AutoDAN concept is due to the
adversarial string’s occurrence within the context of the full program analysis conversa0on.
For an instruct model to track conversa0on history the en0re conversa0on record must be passed
as a part of each query. Because the program analysis is a mul0-turn conversa0on, the adversarial
string must be placed in context of the en0re conversa0on record each 0me an prepend/append
string combina0on is tested for success. When using GhidraMCP through Cline, this conversa0on
record also includes the Cline system message outlining the model’s purpose and goals as well as
the tools available on the GhidraMCP server.
Addi0onally, the stopping criteria speciﬁc to the problem must be set. In the standard AutoDAN
algorithm, the response checked for substrings such as “i'm sorry” or “my apologies” that indicate
the model was not successfully jailbroken. In the case of the example in Figure 2, the stopping
criteria is that the response string to contain the substring “ﬁbonacci” (for ﬁnding the target
program behavior) and not contain the substrings “hello” or “world” (for hiding the actual
program behavior).
Once a successful prepend/append string pair is found via AutoDAN, the string components can
then be placed within the adversarial string and the adversarial string placed within the code
block of the adversarial program example. Ideally, the LLM used for the AutoDAN algorithm and
the LLM used to interface with GhidraMCP are iden0cal.
2.2.3 AutoDAN Limita6ons
The design of the AutoDAN algorithm, however, has constraints that limit the models that work
with it. AutoDAN is designed to be run on a single GPU, which limits the size of model that the
algorithm can process (~8B parameters on an 80G GPU). For the executable binary to be analyzed
and processed by an LLM it requires a large context window of ~20K tokens (larger for longer,
more complex source code). Without the large context window, the full conversa0on string,
including the program decompila0on, conversa0on record, and lengthy Cline system message,
cannot be ingested by the model. Modes with such a small parameter size do not typically have
a large enough context window; in fact, all the models tested in the original AutoDAN paper have
context windows that are too small for this aPack (X. Liu et al, 2023). Qwen3-8B is one of the few
models that meets both criteria.
3. Experiments and Results
Experiments were conducted on four executable binary ﬁles: two containing a single main
func0on and two containing a main func0on and another func0on. APack ﬁles were crea0ng
using Qwen3-8B and tested against both Qwen3-8B and GPT-OSS-120B (Agarwal et al., 2025).
3.1 Single Func'on Files
The AutoDAN algorithm using Qwen3-8B found a successful prepend/append string pair for the
adversarial example program (the hello-world program in Figure 2) and the target program (a
program that prints out the ﬁrst ten digits of the Fibonacci sequence). The adversarial_string
variable was then assembled according to the format in Sec0on 2.1.2 with the
decompile_func0on analysis of the target program.
Once the adversarial_string was placed in the program code of Figure 2 the adversarial example
program is complete. When executed, this program prints the phrase “Hello, World!” and
terminates. But, when that same program is passed for analysis using Cline with Qwen3-8B and
GhidraMCP the LLM concludes that the program outputs the ﬁrst ten digits of the Fibonacci
sequence, the func0on performed by the target program instead of the program’s actual
behavior.
In the second single-func0on C code example, the executable binary ﬁle’s behavior is to check to
see if a hard-coded designated ﬁle exists. If it does not exist, the program will create it and place
some text in the ﬁle. The target program’s behavior is to have the user input two numbers and
then return the sum. When the manipulated source ﬁle is compiled, it performs the ﬁle checking
behavior while the automated analysis using Qwen3-8B determines that the func0on is
performing addi0on.
These two single-func0on executable ﬁles were also analyzed using Cline and GhidraMCP with
GPT-OSS-120B as the underlying LLM. The AutoDAN algorithm was not run with GPT-OSS-120B,
but, rather, the same aPacked executable binary ﬁles that proved successful against analysis by
Qwen3-8B were also processed by OGPT-OSS-120B. The aPack was also successful against this
secondary model where the analysis output by the automated system described the target
program instead of the actual program behavior.
GPT-OSS-120B did run an addi0onal GhidraMCP tool that discovered all printed strings (i.e., used
with the prinC command) from both the target program and the base program. In the example
of the code from Figure 2, GPT-OSS-120B did list “Hello, World!” as a printed string, but it did not
take presence of this string into account in its ﬁnal analysis. Of note, although the adversarial
string is a declared string variable, because it was not used with the prinC command, the LLM did
not list it among the other printed strings, and its presence remained hidden in the analysis
report.
3.2 Mul'-Func'on Files
The programs analyzed so far are simple programs with only a main func0on, but the aPack
methodology can also be applied to more complicated programs with mul0ple func0ons. Due to
the Ghidra string length limita0ons discussed in Sec0on 2.1.3, embedding a lengthy target code
string in a program’s main func0on is not feasible.
For more complicated programs, the aPack can be implemented separately in each func0on
within a program. The addi0onal setup required for expanding the aPack to mul0ple func0ons is
to make sure that the target program and the adversarial example program have the same
number of func0ons and that those func0ons have the same names. This aPacked source code
format is illustrated in Figure 4.
This constraint on the func0ons ensures that the target program analysis aligns with the structure
of the adversarial example program since the aPack targets func0on analysis but not program
structure. For example, if the target code analysis men0ons calling func0on_foo, then the target
LLM could produce unpredictable results or expose the aPack if no func0on_foo is found.
Similarly, if the target code does not cover a func0on_bar that is found in the adversarial example
program, the LLM’s analysis will not be consistent.
It is possible to include a single adversarial string in the main func0on that terminates the analysis
in such a way that the LLM will terminate its analysis and not examine other func0ons. However,
this method is more likely to be circumvented if the LLM decides to analyze func0ons besides the
main func0on. It is also likely to be discovered through cursory human analysis if the executable
binary has a large ﬁle size, but returns a program analysis that is too simple.
 Figure 4: C code for an adversarial example with a main func0on and one other func0on.

The AutoDAN algorithm is not conﬁgured to ﬁnd mul0ple successful prompt injec0on aPack
strings within a single input string. Instead of running these mul0-func0on programs through
AutoDAN, the successful prompt injec0on aPack strings found in the single func0on examples
were used in both func0ons of the mul0-func0on source code ﬁles.
In the code example in Figure 4, the base program’s func0on adds two hard-coded numbers then
prints out if the sum of those numbers is greater than or less than 10. The target program’s
func0on is to compare two hard-coded values represen0ng temperature values and then print a
statement about the weather being cold or warm. The compiled modiﬁed source code performs
the func0ons of the base program, but the automated analysis using Qwen3-8B determines the
func0on to be that of the target program.
A second mul0-func0on program was also tested. In the second example, the base program
computes the factorial value of a number while the target program averages the values contained
in an array. When the modiﬁed binary ﬁle is compiled and executed, it performs the func0on of
the base program and the analysis again claims its behavior is that of the target program.
Both of these mul0-func0on adversarial examples were also submiPed for analysis using GPT-
OSS-120B. The aPack was also successful with analysis by this larger model. As in the single
func0on analysis, GPT-OSS-120B discovered printed strings in the base programs. In one of the
ﬁles, the automated analysis aPributed the presence of this code to re-use of older code rather
than as an indica0on of anything nefarious or decep0ve.
4. Conclusion and Future Work
The introduc0on of automated analysis tools can greatly expand the workload capabili0es of a
sta0c soFware analyst, but those same tools also introduce new areas of vulnerability. APacking
the LLM behind these AI-assisted tools undermines this enhanced capacity by requiring a human
analyst to examine the code to determine its true func0onality. The result is either code that is
not properly iden0ﬁed or a loss of the eﬃciency beneﬁt provided by the automa0on process.
To combat this vulnerability further work should be conducted to discover the full extent of the
eﬀec0veness of this aPack, speciﬁcally how broadly it can be generalized to various LLMs
including state-of-the-art commercial level models as well as how eﬀec0vely it can be scaled to
much more complex and poten0ally malicious programs. The executable binaries in the present
research are simple programs; the results of implemen0ng this same style of aPack on more
complex ﬁles needs to be examined further to determine broad applicability of these results.
Future work should also be done to develop defenses to mi0gate the indirect prompt injec0on
aPacks inves0gated in this research.
Ethics Declara'on
The research did not involve human subjects or data containing personally iden0ﬁable
informa0on (PII). Only computer systems administered by the authors were aPacked for this
research.
AI Declara'on
AI was not used in the draFing of this document. AI, however, was used in the development of
this research for wri0ng sample programs to test the method and for genera0ng the seed text
that the AutoDAN algorithm uses for genera0ng prompt injec0on strings.
Disclaimer
The opinions and views expressed are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily represent
those of the U.S. Government, U.S. Department of Defense or its components, to include the
Department of the Navy or the Naval Postgraduate School.
References
Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Ai, J., Altman, S., Applebaum, A., Arbus, E., Arora, R.K., Bai, Y., Baker, B.,
Bao, H. and Barak, B., 2025. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.10925.
Bandi, A., Kongari, B., Naguru, R., Pasnoor, S. and Vilipala, S.V., 2025. The rise of agen0c ai: A
review of deﬁni0ons, frameworks, architectures, applica0ons, evalua0on metrics, and
challenges. Future Internet, 17(9), p.404.
Chen, X., Zhou, A., Ye, C. and Zhang, C., 2025, October. ClearAgent: Agen0c Binary Analysis for
Eﬀec0ve Vulnerability Detec0on. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGPLAN Interna6onal Workshop
on Language Models and Programming Languages (pp. 130-137).
Faingnaert, T., Zhang, T., Van Iseghem, W., Everaert, G., Coppens, B., Collberg, C. and De SuPer,
B., 2024, November. Tools and models for soFware reverse engineering research. In Proceedings
of the 2024 Workshop on Research on oﬀensive and defensive techniques in the context of Man
At The End (MATE) aYacks (pp. 44-58).
Ghimire, A., Zhang, J., Lingala, S.R., Alsulami, F. and Amsaad, F., 2025. A Survey on Applica0on of
AI on Reverse Engineering for SoFware Analysis and Security. IEEE Access.
Kosinski, M. and Forrest, A., 2026. ‘What is a Prompt Injec0on APack?’, Gadesha, V. (ed.) The 2026
Guide to Prompt Engineering [online] Available at: hPps://www.ibm.com/think/topics/prompt-
injec0on (Accessed: 24 February 2026).
Liu, Y., Deng, G., Li, Y., Wang, K., Wang, Z., Wang, X., Zhang, T., Liu, Y., Wang, H., Zheng, Y. and Liu,
Y., 2023. Prompt injec0on aPack against llm-integrated applica0ons. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.05499.
Liu, X., Xu, N., Chen, M. and Xiao, C., 2023. Autodan: Genera0ng stealthy jailbreak prompts on
aligned large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04451.
Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G.,
Askell, A. and Agarwal, S., 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.14165, 1(3), p.3.
Marzouk, A., 2025. ‘IDEsaster: A Novel Vulnerability Class in AI IDEs’, MaccariTA [online] Available
at: hPps://maccarita.com/posts/idesaster (Accessed: 29 January 2026).
Ray, P.P., 2025. A survey on model context protocol: Architecture, state-of-the-art, challenges and
future direc0ons. Authorea Preprints.
Shrivastava, M., 2025. A Compara0ve Featureset Analysis of Agen0c IDE Tools.
Thomas, G., 2025. ‘Why Smart Instruc0on-Following Makes Prompt Injec0on Easier’, Giles’ Blog
[online] Available at: hPps://www.gilesthomas.com/2025/11 (Accessed: 17 December 2025).
Vassilev, A., Oprea, A., Fordyce, A. and Andersen, H., 2024. Adversarial machine learning: A
taxonomy and terminology of aPacks and mi0ga0ons.
Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C. and Zheng,
C., 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388.
