                                                     Test-Time Learning with an Evolving Library


                                                Weijia Xu1          Alessandro Sordoni1          Chandan Singh1           Zelalem Gero1

                                                        Michel Galley1                Xingdi Yuan1                 Jianfeng Gao1




arXiv:2605.14477v1 [cs.LG] 14 May 2026
                                                                                 1
                                                                                   Microsoft Research
                                                                      Correspondence: weijiaxu@microsoft.com



                                                                                        Abstract

                                                     We introduce E VO L IB, a test-time learning framework that enables large language
                                                     models to accumulate, reuse, and evolve knowledge across problem instances
                                                     without parameter updates or external supervision. Instead of adapting model
                                                     parameters, our approach maintains a shared library of knowledge abstractions,
                                                     including modular skills and reflective insights, automatically extracted from the
                                                     model’s own inference trajectories. To support continual improvement, we intro-
                                                     duce a principled weighting and consolidation mechanism that jointly optimizes
                                                     for immediate utility and long-term value. This allows simple, instance-specific
                                                     abstractions to evolve into more general and reusable ones over time. Across
                                                     challenging benchmarks in mathematical reasoning, code generation, and multi-
                                                     turn agentic environments, E VO L IB improves substantially over the top test-time
                                                     scaling and learning methods without ground-truth feedback.


                                         1    Introduction

                                         Humans can learn from past experience and encode that knowledge in abstract, reusable, and
                                         extensible forms. This allows them to accumulate and refine knowledge over time, enabling adaptation
                                         to novel situations with far less repeated effort. By contrast, large language models (LLMs) typically
                                         handle each input problem independently [1–6] or share memory across problem instances by storing
                                         and retrieving past problems and trajectories from a global memory [7–9], which hinders LLMs from
                                         inducing generalized knowledge or skills across problems.
                                         Test-time learning (TTL) bridges this gap by enabling models to adapt during inference, which
                                         improves performance across a sequence of tasks [10–12]. In principle, TTL allows models to correct
                                         systematic errors, discover reusable strategies, and build knowledge across problems. However,
                                         existing approaches face two fundamental limitations in the context of modern LLMs. First, most
                                         methods rely on gradient updates on model parameters to learn effectively from test-time signals.
                                         These approaches are not applicable in the increasingly common black-box setting, where model
                                         weights are inaccessible. Second, many TTL approaches depend on external supervision signals,
                                         such as reward functions or example test cases, to guide learning. Such signals are unavailable in
                                         many real-world application scenarios.
                                         A complementary line of work, test-time scaling, improves performance for black-box LLMs without
                                         external supervision, by allocating more computation per instance (e.g. through sampling [1],
                                         searching [6], or iterative refinement [4]). While effective, these methods treat each problem in
                                         isolation: the knowledge uncovered during the search process is discarded after inference, preventing
                                         the model from inducing generalizable knowledge across problems.

                                         Preprint.
In this paper, we introduce E VO L IB, an evolving library for test-time learning that overcomes these
limitations by enabling knowledge accumulation without parameter updates or external supervision.
The key idea is to maintain a structured, evolving collection of knowledge abstractions. The system
extracts two types of abstractions from model-generated solutions: (1) modular skills, which capture
reusable procedures, and (2) reflective insights, which encode common errors and corrective strategies.
E VO L IB is governed by two central principles:

• Abstraction: Instead of memorizing raw experiences, the library distills them into reusable
  knowledge units that can be flexibly recomposed across tasks. This enables more efficient transfer
  compared to memory-based approaches that store unstructured trajectories.
• Evolution: The library is continuously updated through iterative abstraction extraction, consolida-
  tion and dynamic weight computation. We introduce a novel credit assignment mechanism based
  on Information Gain (IG) and Future Information Gain (Future IG), which jointly capture the
  immediate usefulness of an abstraction and its potential for generating valuable future abstractions.
  This mechanism promotes the emergence of increasingly useful and extensible abstractions over
  time.

Importantly, the entire process is self-supervised – the model evaluates its own generated solutions and
extracts abstractions without relying on external ground-truth signals. This makes the approach appli-
cable to highly challenging tasks and deployment scenarios where external feedback is unavailable or
expensive to collect.
We evaluate E VO L IB on a diverse suite of benchmarks spanning mathematical reasoning, code
generation, and multi-turn agentic tasks. Across all settings, our method demonstrates consistent
improvements over the top test-time scaling and learning approaches with more efficient token usage.
Further results in the continual learning setting support that E VO L IB enables continual learning that
is less dependent on task ordering, whereas existing TTL methods based on linear knowledge updates
are more sensitive to the ordering.

2   Related Work
Test-time scaling and adaptation. There is a growing body of work that improves LLM perfor-
mance by allocating additional computation at inference time rather than updating model parameters.
Representative approaches include best-of-N sampling and self-consistency [1], self-verification
with and without feedback [2–4], iterative refinement and aggregation [5, 6]. While effective, these
methods treat each problem independently: any knowledge discovered during inference is discarded
after solving a single instance. By contrast, E VO L IB explicitly retains and reuses knowledge across
problems, enabling continual improvement over a stream of tasks.
More closely related are test-time learning and test-time training methods that adapt model behavior
at test time. Recent work formulates test-time learning for LLMs as self-supervised optimization
on unlabeled test data [10] or few-shot learning on example test cases [11], often using lightweight
parameter updates [13, 14]. These methods require gradient updates on model parameters, whereas
E VO L IB performs test-time learning purely through abstraction induction and evolution, without any
parameter modification.

Memory-augmented LLMs. Several recent works augment LLMs with external memory to
persist information across queries or interactions. Retrieval-augmented generation and dynamic
prompt construction store and retrieve raw past experience [7, 8]. [9] introduces ExpRAG, a simple
framework for retrieving and reusing prior experience, along with a variant that allows the agent
to iteratively refine the retrieved memory. While these approaches demonstrate the importance of
shared memory across queries, they primarily store unstructured trajectories or episodic experiences.
E VO L IB differs by distilling experience into extensible abstractions and by explicitly promoting
extension and consolidation to produce more general knowledge units.

Skill and knowledge discovery. The idea of learning reusable skills from experience has a long
history in program synthesis and cognitive science [15–17]. One line of work learns how to use
existing tools effectively [18, 19]. Another line of work focuses on extracting reusable skills, such
as subroutines or functions, from solved programs or successful trajectories [20–24], or inducing


                                                   2
Figure 1: Overview of the E VO L IB algorithm. E VO L IB performs test-time learning by repeatedly:
(i) solving tasks using sampled abstractions, (ii) extracting new abstractions, consolidating them
into the library, and propagating credit to both new and previously used abstractions via Information
Gain (IG) and Future IG.

reflective insights from model-generated programs or trajectories together with feedback [25–29].
Furthermore, inspired by the recent development of agentic “autoresearch” loops [30–32], recent
works propose skill evolution by iteratively refining a skill set based on new trajectories [33, 34].
Most existing approaches learn such libraries on training tasks where external success signals are
available, whereas our approach can be applied solely at test-time.
Closest to our setting, AWM [35] proposes to maintain a memory of reusable routines extracted from
action trajectories with optional external feedback, while Dynamic Cheatsheet [36] induces high-level
principles and procedural knowledge via self-reflection. Similarly, a concurrent work constructs a
memory of reasoning strategies distilled from self-judged successful and failed experiences [37].
However, these approaches either treat memory as a monolithic artifact that is refined holistically [36]
or append new items into the memory in a linear fashion [35, 37], making them susceptible to noise in
self-evaluation and induced knowledge. E VO L IB extends this line of work by introducing a principled
weighting, sampling, and consolidation mechanism that drives the emergence and nonlinear evolution
of abstractions, guided by immediate and long-term utility across instances.


3     E VO L IB

E VO L IB is characterized by two key properties. First, abstraction – the library stores generaliz-
able knowledge distilled from raw trajectories, making it easier for LLMs to adapt and reuse past
experience across problems compared to memory-based methods that store raw trajectories. Second,
evolution – the library is continuously updated through a consolidation mechanism and a dynamic
weighting scheme based on Information Gain and Future Information Gain, enabling abstractions to
improve over time.

3.1   Problem Formulation

We represent an agent augmented with E VO L IB as a tuple (Φ, K), where Φ is the base LLM
and K is the library. Starting with an empty library K0 = ∅, the agent is given a sequence of


                                                   3
tasks {x1 , x2 , ..., xT }, each sampled from the task pool T , and the library Kt evolves with the history.
At step t, given the input problem xt and the current library Kt−1 , the agent samples abstractions
from the library and generates a solution ỹt for xt :
                                           {zt−1 } ∼ Sample(Kt−1 , xt ),
                                           ỹt ∼ PΦ (· | xt , {zt−1 }),
then extracts new abstractions {zt } from ỹt :
                                                 {zt } = Extract(xt , ỹt ).
Finally, the agent updates the library based on the current library and this attempt:
                          Kt = Update_Library[Kt−1 , (xt , ỹt , {zt−1 }, {zt })].

3.2     Library Representation

The library K is represented as a weighted collection of knowledge abstractions. It includes two types
of knowledge: 1) modular skills that can be adapted to solve new tasks. For coding tasks, these are
functions; for reasoning tasks, they are sub-problems with corresponding solutions extracted from
complete solution trajectories; for agentic tasks, they are sub-tasks with corresponding workflows
extracted from complete action trajectories. And 2) reflective insights in natural language capturing
lessons learned from past trajectories, including common mistakes and corrective strategies (e.g. “If
the task involves logistic regression, then do not forget to scale the features”).

Sampling. When sampling from the library to solve a new task, we first filter the library entries
based on their embedding-based similarity to the task description and then use weighted sampling
among the filtered entries based on their weights w(z | K). These weights are updated dynamically
after generating new solutions for a problem based on the Information Gain and Future Information
Gain described in Section 3.2.2.

3.2.1    Extracting Abstractions
We extract modular skills {zt } directly from model outputs ỹt , as these skills are typically inherent in
the model’s reasoning steps either explicitly or implicitly. For coding tasks, we extract functions as
skills directly from the synthesized programs. For reasoning and agentic tasks, we extract skills by
breaking down the reasoning steps or an action-observation sequence into several sub-modules and
summarizing each sub-module into a new, self-contained skill through an LLM call.
To extract reflective insights {zt }, we first use the LLM itself to estimate the score SΦ (ỹt | xt ) ∈ [0, 1]
for the model solution ỹt (with optional textual feedback) [38, 2]. For coding tasks, SΦ (ỹt | xt ) is
obtained by instructing the LLM to generate synthetic test cases for the problem xt and measuring
the pass rate of the solution program ỹt against the synthetic test. For reasoning tasks, SΦ (ỹt | xt )
is obtained by majority voting [1] and LLM-as-a-Judge [38] to break tie. For multi-turn agentic
tasks, the score is obtained by passing the action-observation sequence ỹt to the LLM and asking it to
judge how many sub-goals in the task xt have been accomplished. Next, we extract the insights by
instructing the LLM to reflect on the solution ỹt based on xt and SΦ (ỹt | xt ) and summarize it into
several self-contained insights.

3.2.2    Weighting Mechanism
The core mechanism that enables evolution is credit propagation along the evolution chains of
abstractions: useful abstractions not only receive direct reward (through Information Gain), but also
propagate credit backward to the abstractions that enabled their creation (through Future Information
Gain). Specifically, we focus on the evolution chains:
                     x2 ,ỹ2           x3 ,ỹ3        xt−1 ,ỹt−1         xt ,ỹt   xt+1 ,ỹt+1
               {z1 } −−−→ {z2 } −−−→ ... −−−−−−→ {zt−1 } −−−→ {zt } −−−−−−→ ...,
                                                     xt ,ỹt
where each step of the evolution {zt−1 } −−−→ {zt } is realized by:
                               ỹt ∼ PΦ (· | xt , {zt−1 }), {zt } = Extract(xt , ỹt ).


                                                               4
Algorithm 1 E VO L IB
 1: Input: Task pool T of size N , initial library K0 = ∅, model Φ, number of iterations T
 2: Initialize best solutions {yj∗ }N
                                    j=1 for each task xj ∈ T
 3: for t from 1 to T do
 4:    Draw a task xt ∼ T                                                  # Solution Generation
 5:    for k from 1 to K do
                                       (k)
 6:        Sample M abstractions {zt−1 } ∼ Sample(Kt−1 , xt )
                                         (k)               (k)
 7:        Sample solution trajectory ỹt ∼ PΦ (· | xt , {zt−1 })
                                                (k)
 8:        Estimate the accuracy score SΦ (ỹt | xt )
                    (k)
 9:        if SΦ (ỹt | xt ) > SΦ (yt∗ | xt ) then
                       (k)
10:           yt∗ ← ỹt
11:        end if
12:    end for
                               (k)
13:    k ∗ ← arg maxk SΦ (ỹt | xt )
                   ∗
                 (k )
14:    ỹt ← ỹt
15:
16:   Knew ← Kt−1                                                             # Library Update
17:   Extract new abstractions {zt } ← Extract(xt , ỹt )
18:   for zt in {zt } do
19:      Compute IG(zt | xt , Kt−1 ) based on Eq. (3) if zt is a skill else 0
20:      Knew ← Consolidate[(zt , IG(zt | xt , Kt−1 )), Knew ]
21:   end for
                      (k)
22:   for zt−1 in {zt−1 } do
23:      Compute FutureIG(zt−1 | xt , Kt−1 ) based on Eq. (6)
24:      Knew ← Update_FutureIG[(zt−1 , FutureIG(zt−1 | xt , Kt−1 )), Knew ]
25:   end for
26:   Kt ← Knew
27: end for
28: Output: Final library KT , best solutions {yj∗ }N
                                                    j=1



If {zt } is proven to be useful for producing a high-quality solution for the task xt , the credit
should be propagated not only to the new abstractions {zt }, but also to the preceding abstrac-
tions {zt−1 }, {zt−2 }, ..., {z1 } along the evolution chain. In practice, to balance between efficacy and
computational cost, we propagate the credit by two steps, i.e. to {zt } and {zt−1 }.
More formally, to propagate the credit to {zt }, we first define the baseline score for xt given Kt−1 :
                                µbase (Y | xt , Kt−1 ) = Eỹt ,Zt−1 [SΦ (ỹt | xt )] ,                               (1)
where ỹt and Zt−1 follow ỹt ∼ PΦ (· | xt , Zt−1 ) and Zt−1 ∼ Sample(Kt−1 , xt ) in the expectation.
We then define the conditional score given that zt is present in the extracted abstractions:
                µcond (Y | xt , Kt−1 , zt ) = Eỹt ,Zt−1 [SΦ (ỹt | xt ) | zt ∈ Extract(xt , ỹt )] .                (2)
Finally, we define Information Gain (IG), which measures how much better the model Φ can
solve xt when zt is present in the extracted abstractions compared to the average baseline:
                                                                                          
         IG(zt | xt , Kt−1 ) = log µcond (Y | xt , Kt−1 , zt ) − log µbase (Y | xt , Kt−1 ) . (3)

Furthermore, to propagate the credit back to {zt−1 }, we first define the baseline score where zt−1 is
not present in the previously sampled abstractions:1
                   µbase (Y | xt , Kt−1 , zt−1 ) = Eỹt ,Zt−1 [SΦ (ỹt | xt ) | zt−1 ∈
                                                                                     / Zt−1 ] ,                      (4)
and the conditional score where zt−1 is present:
                   µcond (Y | xt , Kt−1 , zt−1 ) = Eỹt ,Zt−1 [SΦ (ỹt | xt ) | zt−1 ∈ Zt−1 ] .                      (5)
   1 Note that IG uses the unconditional baseline, while Future IG uses an exclusion baseline to avoid bias introduced by

repeated sampling of the same abstraction.


                                                           5
And finally, we define Future IG, which quantifies how much better the model can solve xt given zt−1
as one of the preceding abstractions, compared to the baseline score:
                                                                                                  
FutureIG(zt−1 | xt , Kt−1 ) = log µcond (Y | xt , Kt−1 , zt−1 ) − log µbase (Y | xt , Kt−1 , zt−1 ) .
                                                                                                  (6)
Future IG can be interpreted as estimating the contribution of an abstraction to the generation of
useful future abstractions.
Overall, we compute the weight of each abstraction z in the library based on its IG and Future IG
scores:

                    w(z | K) = τ max IG(z | x, K) + Ex∼T FutureIG(z | x, K),                           (7)
                                   x∈T


where τ is a hyperparameter controlling the relative importance of immediate versus future gain. In
practice, we use τ = 1 for all skills and τ = 0 for all insights, as skills can directly contribute to
solution construction, whereas insights may not. Future IG is computed for all abstractions (including
skills and insights), as both can influence future solution and abstraction generation.
We use the maximum IG over tasks to capture the peak utility of an abstraction, encouraging any
abstraction with immediate utility to be sampled and evolve in the future. For Future IG, we take the
expectation of Future IG over tasks randomly sampled from the task pool by maintaining a list of
Future IG scores for each z, initialized by an empty list. At each iteration, when zt−1 is sampled from
the library and integrated in the context to solve a task xt , we compute zt−1 ’s Future IG given xt
based on Eq. (6) and add it to its Future IG list. When computing w(z | K), we estimate the expected
Future IG by averaging over the Future IG scores in the list.
Updating Future IG dynamically in this manner makes the agent less prone to the noise in self-
evaluated scores, as we take the average over Future IG scores across iterations. It also enables
continual evolution of the library – when a more advanced abstraction covering a broader range of use
cases emerges, it typically receives high Future IG, while older, less general abstractions exceeded
by the new abstraction will receive decreasing Future IG. As a result, more advanced abstractions
gradually become more prevalent with higher sampling probability, while older ones are progressively
de-emphasized without explicit removal.


3.3   Library Update

Building on the abstraction extraction (Section 3.2.1) and weighting mechanism (Section 3.2.2), we
now describe how the library is updated. For each abstraction in the library, we maintain its IG score
and a list of Future IG scores obtained on previous tasks. The library is updated in two ways: 1)
abstraction consolidation where new abstractions are consolidated with similar entries and added
to the library, and 2) updating Future IG where for each abstraction integrated in the context for
solving the current task, we update its Future IG list with the new Future IG score.


Abstraction consolidation. When a new abstraction is extracted from a trajectory, we first retrieve
the most similar abstraction of the same type from the library using embedding-based similarity.
We then prompt the LLM to consolidate the new abstraction into the most similar one from the
library when the abstractions are semantically and functionally similar. If the two abstractions can
be merged, the IG and Future IG scores of the old item are also merged into the new consolidated
entry. Otherwise, the new abstraction is added as a separate entry (with the current IG score and an
empty Future IG list) into the library. This consolidation step is critical for promoting the emergence
of abstractions that generalize beyond specific problems.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the full procedure, alternating between solution generation and library
update (as illustrated in Fig. 1). In the solution generation step, the agent samples a set of abstractions
from the current library to construct a contextual prompt, generates and estimates the scores of
candidate solutions. In the library update step, newly extracted abstractions are consolidated into the
library, and the Future IG scores of the sampled abstractions are updated. The agent iterates through
the two steps across successive tasks, enabling the library to continuously grow and evolve.


                                                    6
4     Experiments

4.1    Experimental Setup

Evaluation datasets. We evaluate E VO L IB on a diverse set of benchmarks, including mathematical
reasoning, code generation, and multi-turn agentic tasks, in two different settings: 1) static bench-
marks, where the agent learns through multiple iterations over the whole dataset, and 2) continual
learning, where tasks are presented in a stream and each task is attempted only once. In both settings,
the agent learns in a self-supervised manner without access to the ground-truth answers or tests.
For the test-time learning setting, we evaluate it on challenging math and coding benchmarks includ-
ing a) exam questions from Harvard–MIT Mathematics Tournament (HMMT) 2025–2026, which
is an elite high-school competition featuring complex mathematical reasoning, b) BigCodeBench
Hard [39], which contains 148 challenging programming tasks designed to evaluate compositional
reasoning and the use of existing function calls for real-world programming, and c) LiveCodeBench
v6 Hard [40], which contains 80 highly challenging competitive coding problems.
For the continual learning setting, we evaluate it on multi-turn agentic tasks, including the Science-
World [41] and PDDL [42] tasks from the AgentBoard benchmark suite [43]. These tasks require
multi-round interaction with a partially observable environment. We adopt the task order in the
original dataset in our evaluation. See more dataset details in Section A.1.

LLMs. We evaluate the efficacy of E VO L IB using both general-purpose LLMs, such as GPT-4o (on
BigCodeBench), and LLMs featuring effective reasoning and coding, such as o4-mini (on HMMT,
LiveCodeBench, ScienceWorld, and PDDL). On tasks that require intensive reasoning, such as
HMMT and LiveCodeBench, we use o4-mini with high reasoning effort, while on multi-turn agentic
tasks, we use o4-mini with low reasoning effort.

Baselines. We compare E VO L IB against both test-time scaling (TTS) and test-time learning (TTL)
approaches. For TTS, we adopt a) Best-of-N, which generates N independent solutions and selects
the one with the highest estimated accuracy, and b) Recursive Self-Aggregation (RSA) [6], which
iteratively refines and improves a population of candidate solutions through aggregation of subsets.2
For TTL, we include ExpRAG [9], an agent augmented with a memory of past trajectories and
Dynamic Cheatsheet (DC) [36], a strong TTL framework that augments an LLM with an evolving
textual memory of procedural knowledge.

Evaluation metrics. On HMMT, we evaluate the accuracy of the LLM’s solutions against the
ground-truth answers using the grading script in [44]. On BigCodeBench and LiveCodeBench, we
measure task performance by the pass rate on the true test cases for each problem. On ScienceWorld
and PDDL, we adopt the success rate and progress rate from the AgentBoard [43]. On each
benchmark, we compare the performance of various methods under the same cost budget measured
by weighted token count, where the input token count is weighted by λ = 1 while the output token
count is weighted by λ = 4.3

4.2    Main Result: E VO L IB Consistently Outperforms Baselines

Comparison on static benchmarks. Table 1 shows that E VO L IB achieves the strongest average
performance across all evaluated settings, including math, code generation, and multi-turn agentic
tasks. In the static setting, E VO L IB improves over base sampling by 11-20%, while achieving better
or competitive performance compared with the best TTS baseline. On BigCodeBench, GPT-4o
augmented with E VO L IB even surpasses the strongest reported LLMs (e.g., Gemini-Exp-1206 at
40.5%) on the leaderboard. This suggests that test-time learning can substantially close, and in some
cases overcome, the gap between less and more powerful base models.
Furthermore, as shown in the cost-performance curves in Figs. 2 and B.1, E VO L IB is more token-
efficient than both TTS baselines – it yields larger performance gains under tighter cost budgets (+6-
16% on BigCodeBench and +3-6% on LiveCodeBench when the budget is reduced by half). These
    2We exclude the TTS baselines on the agentic tasks, as each task is attempted only once through multiple rounds.
    3 The weights are based on the typical per-token rates of input and output tokens for proprietary LLMs.




                                                              7
 Table 1: Performance comparing E VO L IB against base sampling, test-time scaling (TTS) methods,
 including Best-of-N and Recursive Self-Aggregation (RSA), along with test-time learning (TTL)
 baselines, including ExpRAG and Dynamic Cheatsheet (DC), across math (HMMT), coding (Big-
 CodeBench and LiveCodeBench), and multi-turn agentic tasks (ScienceWorld and PDDL). For each
 task, we report the average score over three runs for each method. A dash (–) indicates the method is
 not applicable to that evaluation setting. An asterisk (*) denotes that the best score(s) is significantly
 higher than the second-best on each benchmark based on paired student’s t-test with p < 0.05.
                               HMMT            BigCodeBench               LiveCodeBench                       ScienceWorld                       PDDL
            Method
                              Accuracy           Pass Rate                        Pass Rate              Success         Progress       Success               Progress
            Base                 57.0              29.7                                     58.8              53.3        82.9             62.8                79.1
            Best-of-N            74.2              37.2                                    67.5                –               –             –                   –
            RSA [6]              67.2              31.7                                    70.0*               –               –             –                   –
            ExpRAG [9]           60.2              25.0                                     51.3              51.1        80.4             39.4                56.7
            DC [36]              66.7              35.8                                     65.0              55.9        83.6             65.0                83.6
            E VO L IB           77.4*              40.8*                                   70.0*              57.4        84.3            72.8*                86.2


                40                                                                         70
                38                                                                         68
                36
                                                                                           66

Pass Rate (%)                                                              Pass Rate (%)
                34
                32                                                                         64
                30                                                                         62
                                                     EvoLib (GPT-4o)                                                               EvoLib (o4-mini)
                28                                   DC (GPT-4o)                           60                                      DC (o4-mini)
                26                                   Best-of-N (GPT-4o)                                                            Best-of-N (o4-mini)
                                                     RSA (GPT-4o)                          58                                      RSA (o4-mini)
                24
                        20     40         60        80          100                             2   4     6          8    10       12       14           16
                              Weighted Token Count (M)                                                   Weighted Token Count (M)
                             (a) BigCodeBench                                                           (b) LiveCodeBench
  Figure 2: Cost–performance curves comparing E VO L IB with competitive baselines on (a) Big-
  CodeBench and (b) LiveCodeBench. Each curve plots performance (y-axis) as the test-time compute
  cost (x-axis) increases for each method.


  gains indicate that learning and sharing knowledge across problem instances yields consistent
  improvements over TTS.
  Compared to TTL baselines, E VO L IB consistently outperforms DC, the best TTL baseline, by 5-10%
  across three benchmarks. As shown in Fig. 2, it is also more token-efficient than DC.

  Comparison in continual learning setting. Table 1 also highlights that E VO L IB outperforms
  all existing TTL methods in the continual learning setting, improving over both ExpRAG and DC
  baselines. These results demonstrate that E VO L IB transfers what it has learned on past tasks to future
  tasks more effectively than the existing TTL methods.

  4.3                Ablation Study

  Both abstraction types and cross-instance sharing matter. Fig. 3(a) ablates the types of ab-
  stractions stored in the library and how the library is shared. Using only modular skills or only
  reflective insights underperforms the full variant, which suggests that the two abstraction types
  contribute complementary value: insights capture higher-level corrective signals that guide future
  attempts (especially useful at the early stage), while skills provide solution components that can
  be reused and recombined to solve more complex tasks. In addition, the per-instance variant lags
  behind the shared library, especially at larger budgets, which provides strong evidence that the library
  generalizes beyond problem-specific details. It also supports the claim that cross-problem knowledge
  reuse and evolution, rather than iterative knowledge refinement within each problem, drives further
  performance gain.


                                                                                            8
                41                                                                              41
                40                                                                              40
                39                                                                              39


Pass Rate (%)                                                                   Pass Rate (%)
                38                                                                              38
                37                                                                              37
                36                                                                              36
                                                     EvoLib                                                                      EvoLib
                35                                   EvoLib: Per-Instance Lib                   35                               EvoLib: IG Weight
                                                     EvoLib: Insight-Only                                                        EvoLib: Uniform Weight
                34                                   EvoLib: Skill-Only                         34                               EvoLib: No Consolidation
                      10     20   30    40    50     60      70       80                             10   20   30    40    50    60       70      80
                                  Weighted Token Count (M)                                                     Weighted Token Count (M)
                           (a) Ablating Abstraction Types                                        (b) Ablating Weighting and Consolidation
 Figure 3: Ablation study on BigCodeBench. (a) Comparison of variants using different abstraction
 types or per-instance libraries. (b) Comparison of variants with different weighting strategies and
 without consolidation. Each plot shows the performance in pass rate (y-axis) as a function of test-time
 compute cost (x-axis).

  Abstraction consolidation leads to substantial gain Fig. 3(b) shows the impact of abstraction
  consolidation. Disabling consolidation hurts performance, particularly as compute increases. We
  further analyze the role of abstraction consolidation in Section B. Figs. B.2 and B.3 indicate that
  the consolidation step helps control memory growth and turns task-specific abstractions into more
  generic ones that apply across multiple problems.

 Weighting and consolidation are both needed for sustained improvement. Fig. 3(b) also shows
 the impact of IG and Future IG scores in the weighting mechanism. Uniform weighting leads to
 weaker scaling at higher compute budgets, where the library grows larger and effective sampling be-
 comes increasingly important. Removing the Future IG score also degrades performance substantially,
 as it is crucial for selecting abstractions that can evolve into more advanced ones.

  4.4                Robustness To Task Ordering

 We further study robustness to task ordering in the continual learning settings on PDDL, which
 contains multiple distinct task types (see Table B.1 and discussion in Section B for details). We
 find that E VO L IB consistently outperforms DC across easy-to-hard, hard-to-easy, and random task
 streams, with the largest gain (+9%) under random ordering. The result indicates that E VO L IB can
 continually learn from diverse tasks even when they are interleaved, suggesting its practical advantage
 in real-world scenarios where an agent must handle and learn from a mixed stream of heterogeneous
 user requests without relying on a structured curriculum.

  5                  Discussion
 This paper introduces E VO L IB, a framework that enables black-box LLMs to self-improve at test
 time through abstraction induction, reuse, and evolution. A key property of E VO L IB is its favor-
 able scaling behavior: performance improves consistently as more problems are solved and more
 compute is invested, without external supervision. This draws a direct analogy to human cognitive
 development. Just as humans build progressively more abstract mental models through experience,
 the library evolves from concrete, task-specific functions toward more general, reusable abstractions.
 Experiments on mathematical reasoning, code generation, and interactive agentic tasks show that
 E VO L IB consistently outperforms existing test-time scaling and test-time learning methods with
 lower token cost. The framework offers a promising direction for LLMs to learn and self-improve
 during deployment without requiring gradient-based fine-tuning or supervision signals.

 Limitations. The current E VO L IB framework assumes that the model’s own judgment of a solution
 provides more useful signals than noise for self-evaluation. Thus, the method works best for tasks in
 which verifying a solution is easier than generating one (e.g., coding tasks with executable test cases).
 For tasks where verification requires comparable or even greater effort than solution generation,
 a powerful external verifier model may be necessary to reliably assess each candidate solution.
 Additionally, the current evaluation focuses on math, coding, and agentic tasks. It is unclear how


                                                                                                 9
well the approach generalizes to other domains, such as open-ended question-answering or scientific
tasks, with different knowledge types and feedback characteristics.

Future work. One promising direction is to enable LLMs to meta-learn the design of the library
itself, including the choice of abstraction forms, the weighting mechanism, and the library update
algorithm. Rather than fixing these components, the system could optimize them over time based on
previous tasks and sampled trajectories, the structure of the task stream, potentially leading to more
efficient test-time learning schemes. Another direction is to deploy the framework in long-horizon
settings with a mixed stream of diverse tasks. Such settings would better reflect real-world usage and
help identify challenges related to scalability, distribution shift, and knowledge retention.

References
 [1] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
     and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In The
     Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
 [2] Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Fei Xia, Bin Li, Shizhu He, Shengping Liu, Bin Sun, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao.
     Large language models are better reasoners with self-verification. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and
     Kalika Bali, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages
     2550–2575, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
 [3] Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute optimally can be
     more effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314, 2024.
 [4] Yufan Zhuang, Chandan Singh, Liyuan Liu, Yelong Shen, Dinghuai Zhang, Jingbo Shang, Jianfeng Gao,
     and Weizhu Chen. Test-time recursive thinking: Self-improvement without external feedback. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2602.03094, 2026.
 [5] Niklas Muennighoff, Zitong Yang, Weijia Shi, Xiang Lisa Li, Li Fei-Fei, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Luke
     Zettlemoyer, Percy Liang, Emmanuel Candès, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. s1: Simple test-time scaling. In
     Christos Christodoulopoulos, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Carolyn Rose, and Violet Peng, editors, Proceedings of
     the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 20275–20321, Suzhou,
     China, November 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics.
 [6] Siddarth Venkatraman, Vineet Jain, Sarthak Mittal, Vedant Shah, Johan Obando-Ceron, Yoshua Bengio,
     Brian R Bartoldson, Bhavya Kailkhura, Guillaume Lajoie, Glen Berseth, et al. Recursive self-aggregation
     unlocks deep thinking in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26626, 2025.
 [7] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Peter Clark, and Yiming Yang. Memory-assisted prompt editing to improve
     GPT-3 after deployment. In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang, editors, Proceedings
     of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2833–2861, Abu
     Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
 [8] Tao Feng, Pengrui Han, Guanyu Lin, Ge Liu, and Jiaxuan You. Thought-retriever: Don’t just retrieve raw
     data, retrieve thoughts, 2024.
 [9] Tianxin Wei, Noveen Sachdeva, Benjamin Coleman, Zhankui He, Yuanchen Bei, Xuying Ning, Mengting
     Ai, Yunzhe Li, Jingrui He, Ed H Chi, et al. Evo-memory: Benchmarking llm agent test-time learning with
     self-evolving memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.20857, 2025.
[10] Jinwu Hu, Zitian Zhang, Guohao Chen, Xutao Wen, Chao Shuai, Wei Luo, Bin Xiao, Yuanqing Li, and
     Mingkui Tan. Test-time learning for large language models. In Aarti Singh, Maryam Fazel, Daniel
     Hsu, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Felix Berkenkamp, Tegan Maharaj, Kiri Wagstaff, and Jerry Zhu, editors,
     Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 267 of Proceedings of
     Machine Learning Research, pages 24823–24849. PMLR, 13–19 Jul 2025.
[11] Ekin Akyürek, Mehul Damani, Adam Zweiger, Linlu Qiu, Han Guo, Jyothish Pari, Yoon Kim, and Jacob
     Andreas. The surprising effectiveness of test-time training for few-shot learning. In Aarti Singh, Maryam
     Fazel, Daniel Hsu, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Felix Berkenkamp, Tegan Maharaj, Kiri Wagstaff, and Jerry
     Zhu, editors, Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 267 of
     Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 942–963. PMLR, 13–19 Jul 2025.
[12] Mert Yuksekgonul, Daniel Koceja, Xinhao Li, Federico Bianchi, Jed McCaleb, Xiaolong Wang, Jan
     Kautz, Yejin Choi, James Zou, Carlos Guestrin, et al. Learning to discover at test time. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2601.16175, 2026.


                                                     10
[13] Yu Sun, Xinhao Li, Karan Dalal, Jiarui Xu, Arjun Vikram, Genghan Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xinlei Chen,
     Xiaolong Wang, Sanmi Koyejo, et al. Learning to (learn at test time): Rnns with expressive hidden states.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04620, 2024.

[14] Yuri Kuratov, Matvey Kairov, Aydar Bulatov, Ivan Rodkin, and Mikhail Burtsev. Gradmem: Learning to
     write context into memory with test-time gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.13875, 2026.

[15] Joshua B Tenenbaum, Charles Kemp, Thomas L Griffiths, and Noah D Goodman. How to grow a mind:
     Statistics, structure, and abstraction. science, 331(6022):1279–1285, 2011.

[16] Kurt VanLehn. Cognitive skill acquisition. Annual review of psychology, 47(1):513–539, 1996.

[17] François Chollet. On the measure of intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547, 2019.

[18] Viraj Prabhu, Yutong Dai, Matthew Fernandez, Jing Gu, Krithika Ramakrishnan, Yanqi Luo, Silvio
     Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Junnan Li, Zeyuan Chen, et al. Walt: Web agents that learn tools. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2510.01524, 2025.

[19] Zhengxi Lu, Zhiyuan Yao, Jinyang Wu, Chengcheng Han, Qi Gu, Xunliang Cai, Weiming Lu, Jun
     Xiao, Yueting Zhuang, and Yongliang Shen. Skill0: In-context agentic reinforcement learning for skill
     internalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.02268, 2026.

[20] Elias Stengel-Eskin, Archiki Prasad, and Mohit Bansal. ReGAL: Refactoring programs to discover
     generalizable abstractions. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria
     Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp, editors, Proceedings of the 41st International Conference
     on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 46605–46624.
     PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024.

[21] Zora Zhiruo Wang, Apurva Gandhi, Graham Neubig, and Daniel Fried. Inducing programmatic skills for
     agentic tasks. In Second Conference on Language Modeling, 2025.

[22] Yimeng Liu, Misha Sra, Jeevana Priya Inala, and Chenglong Wang. Reuseit: Synthesizing reusable ai
     agent workflows for web automation. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Intelligent
     User Interfaces, pages 885–908, 2026.

[23] Libin Qiu, Zhirong Gao, Junfu Chen, Yuhang Ye, Weizhi Huang, Xiaobo Xue, Wenkai Qiu, and Shuo
     Tang. Autorefine: From trajectories to reusable expertise for continual llm agent refinement. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2601.22758, 2026.

[24] Matthew Ho, Chen Si, Zhaoxiang Feng, Fangxu Yu, Yichi Yang, Zhijian Liu, Zhiting Hu, and Lianhui Qin.
     Arcmemo: Abstract reasoning composition with lifelong llm memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.04439,
     2025.

[25] Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel: Llm agents
     are experiential learners. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(17):19632–
     19642, Mar. 2024.

[26] Rong Wu, Xiaoman Wang, Jianbiao Mei, Pinlong Cai, Daocheng Fu, Cheng Yang, Licheng Wen, Xuemeng
     Yang, Yufan Shen, Yuxin Wang, et al. Evolver: Self-evolving llm agents through an experience-driven
     lifecycle. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.16079, 2025.

[27] Haochen Shi, Xingdi Yuan, and Bang Liu. Evolving programmatic skill networks. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2601.03509, 2026.

[28] Yuxiao Qu, Anikait Singh, Yoonho Lee, Amrith Setlur, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Chelsea Finn, and Aviral
     Kumar. Rlad: Training llms to discover abstractions for solving reasoning problems. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2510.02263, 2025.

[29] Yiqing Xie, Emmy Liu, Gaokai Zhang, Nachiket Kotalwar, Shubham Gandhi, Sathwik Acharya, Xingyao
     Wang, Carolyn Rose, Graham Neubig, and Daniel Fried. Hybrid-gym: Training coding agents to generalize
     across tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.16819, 2026.

[30] Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The ai scientist:
     Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292, 2024.

[31] Alexander Novikov, Ngân Vũ, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner,
     Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco JR Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, et al. Alphaevolve: A
     coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131, 2025.


                                                       11
[32] Yiping Wang, Shao-Rong Su, Zhiyuan Zeng, Eva Xu, Liliang Ren, Xinyu Yang, Zeyi Huang, Xuehai
     He, Luyao Ma, Baolin Peng, et al. Thetaevolve: Test-time learning on open problems. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2511.23473, 2025.

[33] Ziyu Ma, Shidong Yang, Yuxiang Ji, Xucong Wang, Yong Wang, Yiming Hu, Tongwen Huang, and Xiangx-
     iang Chu. Skillclaw: Let skills evolve collectively with agentic evolver. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.08377,
     2026.

[34] Salaheddin Alzubi, Noah Provenzano, Jaydon Bingham, Weiyuan Chen, and Tu Vu. Evoskill: Automated
     skill discovery for multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.02766, 2026.

[35] Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. Agent workflow memory. In
     Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
[36] Mirac Suzgun, Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. Dynamic cheatsheet:
     Test-time learning with adaptive memory. In Proceedings of the 19th Conference of the European Chapter
     of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7080–7106, 2026.

[37] Siru Ouyang, Jun Yan, I-Hung Hsu, Yanfei Chen, Ke Jiang, Zifeng Wang, Rujun Han, Long T Le, Samira
     Daruki, Xiangru Tang, Vishy Tirumalashetty, George Lee, Mahsan Rofouei, Hangfei Lin, Jiawei Han,
     Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. Reasoningbank: Scaling agent self-evolving with reasoning memory. In
     The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.

[38] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin,
     Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Judging llm-as-a-
     judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and
     S. Levine, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pages 46595–46623.
     Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.

[39] Terry Yue Zhuo, Vu Minh Chien, Jenny Chim, Han Hu, Wenhao Yu, Ratnadira Widyasari, Imam Nur Bani
     Yusuf, Haolan Zhan, Junda He, Indraneil Paul, Simon Brunner, Chen GONG, James Hoang, Armel Randy
     Zebaze, Xiaoheng Hong, Wen-Ding Li, Jean Kaddour, Ming Xu, Zhihan Zhang, Prateek Yadav, Naman Jain,
     Alex Gu, Zhoujun Cheng, Jiawei Liu, Qian Liu, Zijian Wang, David Lo, Binyuan Hui, Niklas Muennighoff,
     Daniel Fried, Xiaoning Du, Harm de Vries, and Leandro Von Werra. Bigcodebench: Benchmarking
     code generation with diverse function calls and complex instructions. In The Thirteenth International
     Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.

[40] Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Armando Solar-
     Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. Livecodebench: Holistic and contamination free evaluation of large
     language models for code. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.

[41] Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. ScienceWorld: Is your
     agent smarter than a 5th grader? In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang, editors, Proceedings
     of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 11279–11298, Abu
     Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.

[42] Mauro Vallati, Lukas Chrpa, Marek Grześ, Thomas Leo McCluskey, Mark Roberts, Scott Sanner, et al.
     The 2014 international planning competition: Progress and trends. Ai Magazine, 36(3):90–98, 2015.

[43] Chang Ma, Junlei Zhang, Zhihao Zhu, Cheng Yang, Yujiu Yang, Yaohui Jin, Zhenzhong Lan, Lingpeng
     Kong, and Junxian He. Agentboard: An analytical evaluation board of multi-turn llm agents. In A. Glober-
     son, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pages 74325–74362. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024.

[44] Mislav Balunović, Jasper Dekoninck, Ivo Petrov, Nikola Jovanović, and Martin Vechev. Matharena:
     Evaluating llms on uncontaminated math competitions. Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing
     Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmark, 2025.

[45] Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow,
     Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276,
     2024.




                                                     12
                           Table A.2: Summary of datasets used in evaluation.
    Domain               Dataset                       # Instances     Notes
                         HMMT Feb 2025                      30         Competitive math problems
    Math Reasoning       HMMT Nov 2025                      30         Competitive math problems
                         HMMT Feb 2026                      33         Competitive math problems
                         HMMT (Total)                       93         Competitive math problems
                         BigCodeBench Hard                  148        Real-world programming problems
    Code Generation
                         LiveCodeBench v6 (Hard)             80        Competitive programming problems
                         ScienceWorld                       90         Scientific experiment tasks
    Agentic Tasks
                         PDDL                               60         Symbolic planning tasks



A     Experimental Setup Details
A.1    Dataset Details
We evaluate our method on a diverse set of benchmarks spanning mathematical reasoning, code generation, and
multi-turn agentic tasks. All datasets used in this work are publicly available.
For mathematical reasoning, we use exam problems from the Harvard–MIT Mathematics Tournament
(HMMT), an elite high-school competition featuring challenging mathematical reasoning questions spanning
algebra, combinatorics, geometry, and number theory. Specifically, we combine problem sets from three recent
competitions: February 2025, November 2025 and February 2026, all obtained from the MathArena collection
on HuggingFace.4 We evaluate performance using accuracy against ground-truth answers, following the official
grading scripts provided by MathArena.
For code generation, we evaluate on the BigCodeBench Hard benchmark, a subset of BigCodeBench designed
to assess real-world programming and compositional reasoning abilities,5 and LiveCodeBench, a benchmark of
competitive programming problems.6 Performance is measured using pass@1-style accuracy (pass rate), i.e.,
whether the generated program passes all ground-truth (including hidden) test cases.
For evaluating multi-turn agentic behavior, we use tasks from the AgentBoard benchmark suite.7 Specifically,
we evaluate on ScienceWorld, a simulated environment requiring sequential decision-making and scientific
reasoning, and PDDL, symbolic planning tasks defined in the Planning Domain Definition Language. Each
task involves multi-step interaction with an environment, where the model generates actions conditioned on
observations. Tasks are partially observable and require planning over multiple turns. We evaluate performance
using the success rate (whether the task is completed) and progress rate (fraction of sub-goals achieved) provided
by AgentBoard.
Table A.2 summarizes the information of each dataset.

A.2    Model Details
We use GPT-4o (version 2024-11-20) [45] with a temperature of 0 and top_p = 0.5 on BigCodeBench. On
ScienceWorld and PDDL, we use o4-mini (version 2025-04-16) with low reasoning effort.8 On LiveCodeBench
and HMMT, we use o4-mini (version 2025-04-16) with high reasoning effort.

A.3    Baseline Details
We compare our method against representative test-time scaling (TTS) and test-time learning (TTL) methods. For
TTS, we include Best-of-N sampling, which generates N independent candidate solutions per task and selects
the one with the highest self-estimated score. We also evaluate Recursive Self-Aggregation (RSA) [6], a stronger
TTS method that iteratively refines a population of reasoning trajectories by aggregating subsets of candidates,
enabling progressive improvement across iterations. We run it with the population size N = 16 and aggregation
subset size K = 4 with GPT-4o and o4-mini to balance between inference cost and performance. For TTL

   4 https://huggingface.co/datasets/MathArena/hmmt_feb_2025,      https://huggingface.co/datasets/
MathArena/hmmt_nov_2025, https://huggingface.co/datasets/MathArena/hmmt_feb_2026
   5 https://huggingface.co/datasets/bigcode/bigcodebench-hard
   6 https://github.com/LiveCodeBench/LiveCodeBench (we use the hard subset of v6).
   7 https://hkust-nlp.github.io/agentboard/
   8 https://deploymentsafety.openai.com/o3/




                                                       13
                                 77.5
                                 75.0
                                 72.5


                 Pass Rate (%)
                                 70.0
                                 67.5
                                 65.0                                                    EvoLib (o4-mini)
                                 62.5                                                    DC (o4-mini)
                                                                                         Best-of-N (o4-mini)
                                 60.0                                                    RSA (o4-mini)
                                              6              8         10        12           14          16
                                                         Weighted Token Count (M)
Figure B.1: Cost–performance curve comparing E VO L IB with competitive baselines on HMMT. Each
curve plots performance (y-axis) as the test-time compute cost (x-axis) increases for each method.


Table B.1: Success and Progress Rate on PDDL under different task orders. We report mean ±
standard deviation over three runs for each method.
                                        Easy → Hard                  Hard → Easy                    Random
          Method
                                  Success         Progress        Success     Progress        Success          Progress
          DC                     66.7 ± 2.9   82.2 ± 2.5         65.6 ± 1.9   80.7 ± 0.6     65.6 ± 1.0    81.5 ± 0.8
          E VO L IB              71.1 ± 2.5   85.5 ± 3.0         68.9 ± 4.8   86.3 ± 0.7     74.4 ± 1.9    88.1 ± 1.5



baselines, we include ExpRAG [9],9 which augments the base model with a global memory of raw trajectories,
and Dynamic Cheatsheet [36],10 which maintains an adaptive memory (i.e. a cheatsheet) of high-level principles
and procedural knowledge extracted through self-reflection. For all baselines, we run them with varying token
cost budget (i.e. varying N for Best-of-N and varying number of iterations for the other methods) and compare
performance under the same cost budget.

A.4     E VO L IB Details
To estimate the baseline and conditional scores, the agent typically samples multiple times for each problem xt ,
except for the continual learning experiments where the agent attempts each task only once. In this case, the
agent uses samples at previous turns for the same task to estimate the scores. We set the number of trials K = 3
on code generation tasks, and K = 10 for mathematical reasoning, while on multi-turn agentic tasks, each task
is attempted only once (following the continual learning setting). To retrieve similar functions for abstraction
consolidation, we set the embedding-based similarity threshold to 0.8. For weighted sampling, we sample at
most 10 insights and 10 skills into the LLM prompt, and set the task-abstraction similarity threshold to 0.2 on
agentic tasks and to 0 on the other benchmarks (since the problems within each benchmark are highly related on
these benchmarks). We use text-embedding-3-small as the embedding model.


B     Extended Results
Cost-Performance Curve on HMMT. Fig. B.1 shows the cost–performance curve on HMMT. E VO L IB
maintains a consistent advantage across the compute range, similar to the trends observed on coding benchmarks
in the main paper. Although E VO L IB adds an average of 1-2 LLM calls per iteration for scoring, maintaining
and updating the library, it improves performance more rapidly with fewer attempts than the TTS approaches.

Library growth and the role of consolidation. Fig. B.2 compares the growth of the library with and
without consolidation. Without consolidation, the number of entries increases nearly linearly with the number of
iterations, reflecting the accumulation of task-specific abstractions. In contrast, with consolidation, the growth
    9We set the number of retrieved entries to 4 as recommended and use text-embedding-3-small as the embedding model.
  10We use the DC-Cumulative variant in all our experiments as it outperforms the other variant in the preliminary experiment.




                                                                     14
                               4000

                               3000

                Library Size   2000

                               1000
                                                                   EvoLib
                                  0                                EvoLib: No Consolidation
                                      0   1000      2000         3000         4000         5000
                                                      # Iteration
Figure B.2: Growth of the library size over iterations with and without consolidation on Big-
CodeBench. The x-axis shows the number of iterations and the y-axis shows the number of abstrac-
tions stored in the library.


is substantially slower at later stage. Fig. B.3 provides a concrete example of the consolidation process. A
newly extracted function and an existing function are merged into a more general abstraction that subsumes
both behaviors. This illustrates how the library evolves from specific, task-level functions into abstractions that
apply across multiple problems. Such generalization is central to enabling transfer across tasks without explicit
supervision. These results support the role of consolidation in controlling memory growth while encouraging the
emergence of generic abstractions.

Evolution of abstraction quality. Fig. B.4 examines how the quality of the most useful abstractions
evolves over time. Both the average IG and average Future IG among the top entries increase as the number of
iterations grows. The increase in IG indicates that the library progressively contains abstractions that directly
improve solution quality. The increase in Future IG suggests that the library also becomes better at generating
abstractions that enable further learning. Together, these trends provide evidence that the weighting mechanism
prioritizes abstractions that contribute both immediate and future utility.

Effect of task order in continual learning. Table B.1 compares E VO L IB with Dynamic Cheatsheet (DC)
under different task orders, including easy-to-hard, hard-to-easy, and random permutations. E VO L IB consistently
outperforms DC across all settings, achieving higher success rates and progress rates. Notably, the advantage is
largest under random ordering, where no curriculum structure is present, suggesting that E VO L IB is more robust
to variations in the task stream.
Importantly, since PDDL comprises four different types of tasks that require different types of actions and
planning strategies, strong performance under random ordering indicates that E VO L IB can effectively handle and
continually learn from a heterogeneous mixture of task types without relying on a structured curriculum. This
property is desirable in real-world scenarios, where an agent must respond to diverse user requests in arbitrary
order and still accumulate useful abstractions over time.
Overall, these results support the hypothesis that E VO L IB enables continual learning that is less dependent on
task ordering, whereas methods based on linear knowledge updates are more sensitive to the ordering.




                                                        15
                           New Function                                                                        Existing Function
                           def validate_dataframe_columns(data, min_columns):                                  def validate_minimum_categories(data, columns,
                               if not isinstance(data, pd.DataFrame):                                                                          min_categories=2):
                                   raise ValueError(...)                                                           for col in columns:
                               if data.shape[1] < min_columns:                                                         if data[col].nunique() < min_categories:
                                   raise ValueError(...)                                                                   raise ValueError(...)




                                                     Consolidated Function
                                                     def validate_dataframe(data, min_columns=None,
                                                                            column_category_constraints=None):
                                                         if not isinstance(data, pd.DataFrame):
                                                             raise ValueError(...)

                                                             if min_columns is not None:
                                                                 if data.shape[1] < min_columns:
                                                                     raise ValueError(...)

                                                             if column_category_constraints is not None:
                                                                 for col, k in column_category_constraints.items():
                                                                     if col not in data.columns:
                                                                         raise ValueError(...)
                                                                     if data[col].nunique() < k:
                                                                         raise ValueError(...)




  Figure B.3: Example of abstraction consolidation. A newly extracted function is merged with a
  similar existing function into a more generalized abstraction.




                    0.35
                                                                                                              0.35




                                                                                   Average Top100 Future IG
                    0.30



Average Top100 IG
                    0.25                                                                                      0.30
                    0.20
                                                                                                              0.25
                    0.15
                                                                                                              0.20
                    0.10

                           0         1000    2000      3000        4000     5000                                        1000      2000      3000     4000     5000
                                               # Iteration                                                                          # Iteration
                               (a) Average IG Among Top 100 Entries                                            (b) Average Future IG Among Top 100 Entries
 Figure B.4: Average Information Gain (IG) and Future Information Gain (Future IG) among the top
 100 abstractions in the library over iterations on BigCodeBench. The x-axis shows the number of
 iterations and the y-axis shows the average score for the top-ranked abstractions.




                                                                                16
NeurIPS Paper Checklist
    1. Claims
      Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s
      contributions and scope?
      Answer: [Yes]
      Justification: The abstract and introduction clearly state the main contribution (EvoLib) and its scope,
      including knowledge accumulation without parameter updates and empirical improvements across
      benchmarks (Sections 1 and Abstract).
      Guidelines:
         • The answer [N/A] means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the
           paper.
         • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions
           made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A [No] or [N/A] answer to this
           question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
         • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the
           results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
         • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not
           attained by the paper.
    2. Limitations
      Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?
      Answer: [Yes]
      Justification: The paper includes a dedicated discussion of limitations (Section 5, “Limitations”).
      Guidelines:
         • The answer [N/A] means that the paper has no limitation while the answer [No] means that the
           paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
         • The authors are encouraged to create a separate “Limitations” section in their paper.
         • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of
           these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification,
           asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these
           assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be.
         • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested
           on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit
           assumptions, which should be articulated.
         • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For
           example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or
           images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide
           closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon.
         • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how
           they scale with dataset size.
         • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems
           of privacy and fairness.
         • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers
           as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that
           aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize
           that individual actions in favor of transparency play an important role in developing norms that
           preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize
           honesty concerning limitations.
    3. Theory assumptions and proofs
      Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete
      (and correct) proof?
      Answer: [N/A]
      Justification: The paper does not include any theoretical results.
      Guidelines:
         • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
         • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced.


                                                    17
      • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
      • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in
        the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide
        intuition.
      • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by
        formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
      • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.
4. Experimental result reproducibility
   Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main experimental
   results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper
   (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: The paper describes the algorithm, experimental setup, datasets, baselines, and evaluation
   metrics in sufficient detail to reproduce results, including pseudocode (Algorithm 1), method and
   dataset descriptions (Section 4 and Appendix A). The full code (including prompts) is released in the
   supplementary material.
   Guidelines:
     • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments.
     • If the paper includes experiments, a [No] answer to this question will not be perceived well by
       the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and
       data are provided or not.
     • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make
       their results reproducible or verifiable.
     • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For
       example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice,
       or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either
       make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to
       the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but
       reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results,
       access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model
       checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed.
     • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submissions
       to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the
       contribution. For example
       (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to
            reproduce that algorithm.
       (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the
            architecture clearly and fully.
       (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be
            a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g.,
            with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset).
       (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are
            welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of
            closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g.,
            to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to
            reproducing or verifying the results.
5. Open access to data and code
   Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instructions to
   faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: The full code (including prompts) is released in the supplementary material. All datasets
   used are referenced.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer [N/A] means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
      • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https://neurips.cc/public/
        guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
      • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible,
        so [No] is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless
        this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark).


                                                 18
      • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce
        the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https://neurips.cc/
        public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
      • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access
        the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
      • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed
        method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which
        ones are omitted from the script and why.
      • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if
        applicable).
      • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is
        recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.
6. Experimental setting/details
   Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters,
   how they were chosen, type of optimizer) necessary to understand the results?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: The paper specifies all the dataset, model, hyperparameter, evaluation, and configuration
   details in Sections 4 and Appendix A.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments.
      • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is
        necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
      • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material.
7. Experiment statistical significance
   Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate informa-
   tion about the statistical significance of the experiments?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: We report statistical significance of the main result in Table 1 and explain how they were
   calculated.
   Guidelines:
      • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments.
      • The authors should answer [Yes] if the results are accompanied by error bars, confidence intervals,
        or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the
        paper.
      • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example,
        train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given
        experimental conditions).
      • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a
        library function, bootstrap, etc.)
      • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
      • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the
        mean.
      • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report
        a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is
        not verified.
      • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures
        symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g., negative error rates).
      • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, the authors should explain in the text how they were
        calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.
8. Experiments compute resources
   Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the computer
   resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: Figure 2 and B.1 shows the amount of compute needed (in token count) to reach varying
   levels of performance for each method on each dataset.
   Guidelines:


                                                19
       • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments.
       • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud
         provider, including relevant memory and storage.
       • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental
         runs as well as estimate the total compute.
       • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the
         experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into
         the paper).
 9. Code of ethics
    Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code
    of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: The research adheres to standard machine learning experimentation practices, uses public
   datasets, and does not involve human subjects, sensitive data or harmful applications as presented.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer [N/A] means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
       • If the authors answer [No], they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation
         from the Code of Ethics.
       • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consideration due
         to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).
10. Broader impacts
    Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts
    of the work performed?
   Answer: [Yes]
   Justification: Section 5 explicitly discusses this work as a stepping stone toward self-improving
   agents, which is a positive societal impact on effective AI assistant. The “Limitations” paragraph
   further discusses potential negative impact when there is a misalignment between human and LLMs’
   judgment.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer [N/A] means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
       • If the authors answer [N/A] or [No], they should explain why their work has no societal impact
         or why the paper does not address societal impact.
       • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g.,
         disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deploy-
         ment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy
         considerations, and security considerations.
       • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular
         applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications,
         the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in
         the quality of generative models could be used to generate Deepfakes for disinformation. On the
         other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks
         could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster.
       • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used
         as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used
         as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional)
         misuse of the technology.
       • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies
         (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitor-
         ing misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the
         efficiency and accessibility of ML).
11. Safeguards
    Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of
    data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pre-trained language models, image generators,
    or scraped datasets)?
   Answer: [N/A]
   Justification: The work does not release new high-risk models or datasets and does not involve
   potentially sensitive or misuse-prone assets.


                                                 20
    Guidelines:
       • The answer [N/A] means that the paper poses no such risks.
       • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary
         safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to
         usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters.
       • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should
         describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
       • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require
         this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort.
12. Licenses for existing assets
    Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper,
    properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected?
    Answer: [Yes]
    Justification: All datasets, baseline methods, and models used are cited and used in accordance with
    their license.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not use existing assets.
       • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
       • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL.
       • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
       • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of
         that source should be provided.
       • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should
         be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets has curated licenses for
         some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset.
       • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived
         asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
       • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s
         creators.
13. New assets
    Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided
    alongside the assets?
    Answer: [Yes]
    Justification: The full code together with clear documentation are released in the supplementary
    material.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not release new assets.
       • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their sub-
         missions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations,
         etc.
       • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is
         used.
       • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an
         anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.
14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects
    Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include
    the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about
    compensation (if any)?
    Answer: [N/A]
    Justification: The research does not involve human subjects or crowdsourced data collection.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human
         subjects.


                                                   21
       • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribution of the
         paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main
         paper.
       • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other
         labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector.
15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects
    Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such
    risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an
    equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained?
    Answer: [N/A]
    Justification: The study does not involve human participants and therefore does not require IRB
    approval.
    Guidelines:
       • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human
         subjects.
       • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be
         required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state
         this in the paper.
       • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and
         locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for
         their institution.
       • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applica-
         ble), such as the institution conducting the review.
16. Declaration of LLM usage
    Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard
    component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing,
    or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigor, or originality of the
    research, declaration is not required.
    Answer: [Yes]
    Justification: LLMs are a core component of the method (used for solution generation, evaluation,
    abstraction extraction, and consolidation), and their role is explicitly described throughout the paper
    (Sections 3 and 4).
    Guidelines:
       • The answer [N/A] means that the core method development in this research does not involve
         LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components.
       • Please refer to our LLM policy in the NeurIPS handbook for what should or should not be
         described.




                                                 22
