                                              ExComm: Exploration-Stage Communication for
                                                 Error-Resilient Agentic Test-Time Scaling


                                                     Woomin Song1 Beomjun Kim1 Daewon Choi1 Sai Muralidhar Jayanthi2
                                                                Saket Dingliwal3† Jinwoo Shin1 Aram Galstyan2
                                                                        1              2                    3
                                                                            KAIST          Amazon AGI           Together AI




arXiv:2605.22102v1 [cs.AI] 21 May 2026
                                                                                             Abstract
                                                      A common failure mode in long-horizon agentic test-time scaling is error propa-
                                                      gation, where factual errors or invalid deductions introduced at intermediate steps
                                                      persist in the agent’s belief state and contaminate later reasoning. Existing test-time
                                                      scaling methods provide limited control over this process, as they often rely on
                                                      agents to detect their own mistakes, select among flawed trajectories, or refine
                                                      solutions only after errors have already shaped the reasoning path. We propose
                                                      ExComm, a communication protocol for exploration-stage agentic test-time scaling.
                                                      ExComm is motivated by the empirical observation that the majority of interme-
                                                      diate errors in parallel agentic reasoning produce detectable cross-agent factual
                                                      conflicts. Leveraging the iterative structure of agentic workflows, ExComm period-
                                                      ically audits agent belief states to detect such conflicts, resolves them through a
                                                      dedicated tool-based verification loop, and returns concise, targeted feedback to the
                                                      involved agents. Corrections are incorporated through soft belief updates, which
                                                      append verified feedback rather than overwriting existing beliefs. Furthermore, to
                                                      prevent collapsing trajectory diversity due to communication, ExComm further
                                                      introduces a trajectory diversification module that redirects redundant trajectories
                                                      toward orthogonal strategies. Experiments on AIME 2024, AIME 2025, and GAIA
                                                      with Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite and Qwen3.5-4B show that ExComm consistently
                                                      outperforms strong test-time scaling baselines, achieving average performance
                                                      gains of 5.7% and 5.0% over the best-performing baselines, respectively. Further
                                                      analyses demonstrate improved error recovery, favorable scaling behavior, stronger
                                                      diversity than adapted communication baselines, and the best performance-cost
                                                      trade-off among the evaluated methods.


                                         1    Introduction
                                         Test-time scaling has emerged as a powerful approach for improving LLM performance without
                                         additional training [1]. By allocating additional computation at inference time, methods such as
                                         sequential revision [2, 3], parallel sampling strategies including Best-of-N and Self-Consistency
                                         [4, 5], and tree search techniques [6, 7] have achieved substantial gains across reasoning benchmarks.
                                         Recently, this paradigm has been extended to agentic workflows [8, 9], where models solve problems
                                         through multiple rounds of generation, tool use, and interaction with an environment.
                                         A common failure mode in long-horizon problem solving is error propagation, where factual errors
                                         or invalid deductions introduced at intermediate steps persist in the agent’s belief and contaminate
                                         later decisions. Existing test-time scaling methods provide limited control over this process. Parallel
                                         sampling relies heavily on agents detecting their own mistakes, which is often unreliable [10, 11].
                                         Tree search mitigates errors through branch selection rather than explicit correction. Therefore, errors
                                             † Work done at Amazon.




                                         Preprint.
  Stage 1: Gather Agent States           Stage 2: ExComm Communication Layer                          Stage 3: Apply Per-Agent
                                                                                                       Updates and Continue

                                               Online Belief Consistency Module                                  Agent !$

          Agent !#            {$! }$
                                   !"#                                                           ℛ!        Soft Belief Update
                                                                                                            Retain prior state &
            Agent !"                                                                                      append verified feedback
             Belief %#
                                             Detect           Verify with      Return targeted
                                            conflicts            tools          resolutions ℛ                              + verified
              Agent !!                                                                                   old belief
                Belief ℬ"                                                                                                  feedback
              Plan $#
                                               Trajectory Diversification Module
                  Belief ℬ!
                Plan $"                                                                                     Plan Redirection
                              {"! }$
                                   !"#                                                           &!        Avoid redundant path &
                                                                                                         explore orthogonal direction
                   Plan $!
                                            Detect redundancy                                           - redundant         + new
                                                                        Return diversification
                                               and suggest                                                  plan           direction
                                                                            directives "
                                           orthogonal directions



                                                  Repeat at each exploration step


Figure 1: Overview of ExComm. ExComm augments a standard agentic test-time scaling loop with
an exploration-stage communication step. After each execution step, the Online Belief Consistency
Module gathers agent belief states {Bi }N   i=1 , detects factual conflicts, resolves them through tool-
augmented verification, and produces a set of targeted resolutions R. Each agent Ai receives only
the relevant subset Ri ⊆ R, which is applied as a soft belief update by appending verified feedback
without overwriting the prior belief state. In parallel, the Trajectory Diversification Module analyzes
agent plans {Pi }Ni=1 , identifies redundant strategies, and produces a set of diversification directives
D. When a directive is assigned to agent Ai , it receives di ∈ D and updates its plan to encourage
orthogonal exploration. The updated agents then continue the base execution loop at the next
exploration step.



that are not pruned can continue to shape downstream reasoning. Post-hoc aggregation or refinement
methods intervene only after errors have already shaped the reasoning trajectory.
At the same time, agentic workflows provide a natural point of intervention for error control. Unlike
static reasoning, they involve dynamic interaction with an environment, where agents alternate
between reasoning and actions such as tool calls while updating intermediate beliefs over multiple
rounds. This iterative structure creates a natural opportunity for early error detection and correction
during the exploration stage of agentic test-time scaling, where agents are still gathering evidence
and forming their reasoning trajectories, before candidate solutions are created. We hypothesize that
structured communication among parallel reasoning trajectories at this stage can help detect and
resolve belief-level errors before they propagate, ultimately improving final answer quality.
To this end, we propose ExComm, an exploration-stage communication protocol for agentic test-time
scaling. ExComm is motivated by the empirical observation that the majority of intermediate errors
in parallel agentic reasoning introduce cross-agent factual conflicts (67–71% across benchmarks, see
Section 3.2), making them detectable without relying on self-correction. Figure 1 illustrates the core
components of ExComm. When a conflict is detected, the Online Belief Consistency Module resolves
the discrepancy using its own tool-based verification loop. The resulting correction is then returned to
the involved agents as concise, targeted feedback. Each agent applies a soft belief update, appending
the correction to its belief state rather than overwriting the original belief. This allows agents to
benefit from verified information while retaining the ability to recover from potential verifier errors.
A key challenge in exploration-stage communication is the risk of diversity collapse. Excessive
information sharing can prematurely synchronize reasoning trajectories, undermining the benefits
of parallel scaling. To avoid this, the consistency module provides targeted feedback that addresses
only the specific inconsistency, rather than a broad summary of other agents’ beliefs. ExComm
further incorporates a trajectory diversification module, which monitors high-level strategies across
agents and encourages orthogonal directions when trajectories become overly similar. By combining
targeted belief correction with explicit diversity preservation, ExComm mitigates error propagation
while maintaining the benefits of parallel exploration.


                                                                   2
We evaluate ExComm on challenging tool-based reasoning setups, including AIME 2024 and AIME
2025 [12] with code interpreter access, and GAIA [13] with code interpreter, file management
tools, and web search. Experiments on Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite [14] and Qwen3.5-4B [15] show that
ExComm consistently outperforms strong test-time scaling baselines, including sequential revision,
parallel scaling, and test-time tree search. ExComm achieves average performance gains of 5.7%
and 5.0% over the best-performing baselines with the two models, respectively. Further analysis
shows that ExComm substantially improves error recovery during reasoning, supporting our claim
that exploration-stage communication helps agents correct erroneous beliefs before they propagate.
Additional analyses show that ExComm scales with both model size and the number of agents, con-
sistently outperforming baselines across settings. We also compare against adapted communication
protocols, including Multi-Agent Debate [16] and Mixture-of-Agents [17], and show that ExComm
achieves stronger accuracy while preserving higher trajectory diversity. Ablation studies validate the
contributions of both the consistency module and the trajectory diversification module to accuracy and
error recovery. Finally, efficiency analysis shows that ExComm achieves the best performance-cost
trade-off among the evaluated methods, making it a practical approach for agentic test-time scaling.

2     Related Works
LLM Agents. Large Language Models (LLMs) have evolved from static text generators into agents
capable of solving complex, real-world tasks [18–20]. By integrating tools such as calculators, search
engines, and APIs, agentic systems can extend standalone models with capabilities such as precise
computation and real-time information retrieval [21, 22]. Unlike static reasoning, agentic workflows
are often implemented through a ReAct loop [18], alternating between reasoning and tool use. This
iterative structure provides a natural intervention point during exploration, before a final answer is
produced, which ExComm uses for error recovery.
Test-Time Scaling. Test-time scaling (TTS) improves model performance by allocating additional
computation during inference without modifying model parameters [1]. Common approaches include
parallel sampling [4, 5], sequential revision [2, 3], and search-based methods [6, 23, 7]. While most
work studies TTS in static, text-based settings, its application to agentic workflows remains relatively
underexplored [8]. We study an agentic TTS framework focused on preventing error propagation.
One line of TTS research improves reasoning through communication among multiple LLM agents
[16, 17]. Representative methods such as Multi-Agent Debate and Mixture-of-Agents iteratively
exchange, aggregate, or refine intermediate outputs to improve candidate solutions. ExComm is
designed for a different problem: exploration-stage error control. Rather than refining candidate
solutions, ExComm detects factual conflicts during execution, resolves them through tool-based
verification, and returns concise, targeted feedback before errors propagate.

3     ExComm
In this section, we present the architecture of ExComm. We begin in Section 3.1 by formalizing a
base agent loop that serves as the minimal substrate on top of which our framework is built. We
then introduce the two core modules of ExComm. In Section 3.2, we describe an online belief
consistency module that detects and resolves factual inconsistencies across parallel agents, preventing
erroneous beliefs from propagating through subsequent reasoning steps. In Section 3.3, we present a
trajectory diversification module that jointly analyzes agents’ plans and selectively redirects redundant
trajectories toward orthogonal reasoning strategies. Together, these modules allow the agents to detect
and recover from errors early-on, preventing the error from propagating and contaminating the later
reasoning stages. An overview of the resulting control flow is provided in Figure 1.

3.1   Base Agent Loop

Before introducing our approach, we first formalize the problem setup. Motivated by recent progress
in plan-based execution and memory-based agents, we consider an agent that maintains explicit plans
and a structured belief. Formally, a stateful problem-solving agent is defined as
                                           A := (B, P, T ),
where B, P , and T denote the agent’s belief, plan, and available toolkit, respectively.


                                                   3
The belief B is a compact document containing fac-
                                                        Algorithm 1 Base Agent Loop
tual information available to the agent about the prob-
lem, including the problem specification itself as well   procedure I NITIALIZE AGENT(p, T )
as information acquired during the problem-solving           B ← I NIT B ELIEF S TATE(p)
process. The plan P is a to-do list that records both        P ← P LAN I NIT(p, B)
                                                             return B, P, T
executed steps and remaining planned actions. The
                                                          end procedure
toolkit T represents the set of tools available to the    procedure AGENT S TEP(B, P, T )
agent during execution.                                      /* Deliberation */
Algorithm 1 illustrates the agent loop used through-            t ← S ELECT TASK(P, B)
out this work. Given a problem instance p, the agent            /* Execution Loop (ReAct) */
                                                                ξt ← E XECUTE TASK(t, B, T )
first initializes its belief state B using the informa-         /* Belief update */
tion provided in the problem, and then constructs an            B ′ ← U PDATE B ELIEF(B, ξt )
initial execution plan based on p and B. The agent              /* Optional replanning */
subsequently proceeds through a sequence of execu-              P ′ ← R EPLAN(P, B ′ , ξt )
tion steps, iteratively processing tasks corresponding          return B ′ , P ′
to individual items in the plan.                             end procedure
                                                             procedure AGENT L OOP(p, T )
At each execution step, the agent selects a task t from         B, P, T ← I NITIALIZE AGENT(p, T )
the current plan and executes it using a ReAct-style            while not T ERMINATE(P, B) do
loop with access to the toolkit T . Upon completion                 B, P ← AGENT S TEP(B, P, T )
of the task, the agent updates its belief B using the           end while
resulting execution log ξt . The plan P is then op-             return B
tionally revised based on the updated belief and the         end procedure
execution log. We refer to the resulting sequence of
execution steps as a reasoning trajectory.
In the following sections, we describe the core components of ExComm in detail. The proposed
modules are applied on the parallel problem-solving agents after they finish each execution step.

3.2   Online Belief Consistency Module

Long-horizon agentic reasoning is vulnerable to error propagation, where an incorrect intermediate
claim, once internalized, impacts all subsequent reasoning steps. Motivated by the intuition that
detecting conflicts across multiple reasoning trajectories is substantially easier than identifying errors
within a single trajectory, we introduce the Online Belief Consistency Module.
This module identifies mutually exclusive factual conflicts across the beliefs of parallel agents,
employs a tool-based reasoning loop to resolve these conflicts, and applies concise, targeted updates
to the agents’ beliefs to improve factual correctness. In contrast to post-hoc verification methods that
operate on preliminary solutions, our module is integrated directly into the agent loop immediately
after each execution step. By acting on the beliefs that govern future planning and execution, the
module stabilizes agent reasoning before downstream decisions are made.
Observation. In Table 1, we categorize errors in par-     Table 1: Error Type Analysis. Error types
allel agentic reasoning trajectories into three types.    in generation trajectories from four parallel
Specifically, we define errors as conflicting, com-       Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite agents, averaged over
mon, or neutral based on whether other agents hold        three critic models. Details in Section C.
opposing beliefs, matching incorrect beliefs, or no
relevant beliefs at the same reasoning step. Notably,       Error Type                 AIME      GAIA
67.0% to 71.5% of errors are categorized as con-
                                                            Common                      5.6%    13.6%
flicting, suggesting that most errors are detectable        Neutral                    22.9%    19.4%
by inspecting factual inconsistencies across multiple       Conflicting (Detectable)   71.5%    67.0%
agents’ beliefs. This observation naturally motivates
our design of the consistency module.
Conflict extraction. After parallel problem-solving agents {Ai }N      i=1 complete an execution step,
the consistency module collects their beliefs {Bi }N    i=1  and  extracts conflicts, defined as sets of
mutually exclusive factual claims. Each conflict c is represented as a structured object containing the
information described alongside. The module may also flag factual errors from individual agents,
similar in spirit to self-reflection. A conflict instance is created for each set of mutually exclusive
factual claims, and all conflicts are gathered into a conflict report C.


                                                    4
Conflict resolution via agentic reasoning. Given           Structure of a Conflict
the conflict report C, the consistency module initiates
a dedicated ReAct loop to resolve the identified con-      conflict :
flicts. The sole purpose of this loop is to determine        agents : [0 , 1 , 2]
the correct factual information for each conflict. Im-       description : |
                                                               Brief description of the conflict
portantly, this conflict-resolution loop is decoupled        claims :
from the parallel problem-solving agents, ensuring             agent_0 : Claim from agent 0
                                                               agent_1 : Claim from agent 1
that no agent can directly access another agent’s              agent_2 : Claim from agent 2
belief state, thereby preserving diversity. After res-
olution, the module produces a set of resolutions R.
Each resolution r ∈ R is transmitted only to the
problem-solving agents originally involved in the          Structure of a Resolution
conflict, as specified in the agents field. This de-       resolution :
sign provides corrected information only to agents           agents : [0 , 1 , 2]
that require it, while preventing unrelated agents           description : |
                                                               Brief description of the conflict
from being influenced by irrelevant information.             claims :
                                                               agent_0 : Claim from agent 0
Soft belief update. Once an agent Ai receives the              agent_1 : Claim from agent 1
resolutions associated with its index, it updates its          agent_2 : Claim from agent 2
belief Bi accordingly. A straightforward approach is         correct_claim : |
                                                               Claim verified by module
to directly replace conflicting belief entries with the      justification : |
resolved values, which we refer to as a hard update.           How the claim was verified
However, conflict resolution is not guaranteed to be
perfect, and incorrect resolutions may occasionally
be produced. Blindly overwriting belief entries therefore risks introducing new factual errors that
may propagate through subsequent reasoning steps. Such errors are particularly difficult to detect
later, since multiple agents may share the same incorrect belief, reducing the likelihood of future
conflicts. Moreover, even correct resolutions can reduce trajectory diversity if they repeatedly
overwrite agent-specific beliefs with shared information.
To mitigate these risks, we adopt a soft update strategy. Each resolution is appended to Bi rather than
replacing the original conflicting information. The resolution is treated as an external suggestion that
contradicts the existing belief and may itself be correct or incorrect. This preserves the agent’s ability
to recover from erroneous resolutions while encouraging it to re-examine the conflicting belief in
subsequent reasoning. If the resolution is incorrect, the remaining inconsistency can be more easily
detected by the agent later in the trajectory.

3.3   Trajectory Diversification Module

Maintaining diverse trajectories is critical for effective exploration in parallel agentic reasoning.
It also supports the Consistency Module, since factual conflicts are easier to detect when agents
pursue sufficiently distinct reasoning paths. However, agents initialized with identical prompts may
suffer from trajectory collapse, especially when sharing information. To mitigate this, we introduce
a Trajectory Diversification Module, which updates agent plans after each execution step to keep
parallel trajectories sufficiently diverse.
Batched analysis of plan-level redundancy. Sim-
ilar to the Consistency Module, the diversification      Structure of a Diversification Directive
module adopts a centralized design. Given the set        directive :
of plans {Pi }N                                N
               i=1 from parallel agents {Ai }i=1 , the     target_agent_index : |
module jointly analyzes all plans to identify redun-          Index of the agent to modify plan
                                                           modification_instruction : |
dancy and underexplored reasoning directions. Oper-           Instruction specifying how to
ating over this global plan configuration, the module              orthogonally shift the plan
produces a structured set of diversification directives
D. Specifically, it checks whether multiple trajecto-
ries are overly similar or whether plausible orthogonal reasoning paths remain unexplored. Each
directive specifies how a particular agent’s plan should be shifted to encourage exploration, and at
most one directive is assigned to each agent at a given step.
This batched formulation ensures globally consistent diversification decisions and avoids oscillatory or
conflicting local interventions. Once generated, directives are transmitted only to their corresponding


                                                    5
Table 2: Benchmark Evaluations. Comparison of test-time scaling methods on AIME 2024, AIME
2025, and GAIA. For AIME, agents have access to a Python code interpreter (C). For GAIA, agents
have access to a Python code interpreter (C), file management tools (F), and web search tools (S).
Parallel methods use four problem-solving agents. Due to cost constraints, GAIA L1/L2 is evaluated
on a 50-sample subset. Scores are averaged over three runs, with the best values highlighted in bold.

                           N > 1?   AIME 2024      AIME 2025        GAIA L1   GAIA L2   GAIA L3   Average
Available Tools                         C                C          C/F/S     C/F/S     C/F/S
                                            Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite
Base Agent                   ✗        61.4            46.1           35.8      21.5       5.9      34.1
Sequential Revision (SR)     ✗        60.3            46.9           35.2      21.8       4.9      33.8
Independent Scaling          ✓        65.3            52.2           44.0      28.5       9.0      39.8
Independent Scaling + SR     ✓        65.3            54.2           42.7      29.2       5.6      39.4
Tree Search                  ✓        67.2            53.9           41.0      30.0      10.2      40.5
ExComm (Ours)                ✓        72.5            60.6           52.2      30.8      14.8      46.2
                                                Qwen3.5-4B
Base Agent                   ✗        76.9            60.0           53.7      38.8      16.4      49.2
Sequential Revision (SR)     ✗        78.6            60.6           54.0      36.7      21.0      50.2
Independent Scaling          ✓        84.2            70.6           61.7      46.8      20.1      56.7
Independent Scaling + SR     ✓        83.3            72.2           60.8      43.7      26.5      57.3
Tree Search                  ✓        78.3            62.8           58.7      45.3      16.7      52.4
ExComm (Ours)                ✓        87.8            75.8           69.5      49.8      28.7      62.3




agents. As with the consistency module, this targeted design prevents agents from inspecting other
agents’ plans, since they receive only the resulting directives rather than the full plans.
Plan shifting via explicit instructions. Diversification directives are applied independently to
the targeted agents. Unlike the soft belief update used in the consistency module, plan shifting is
enforced once a directive is issued. Because different directives are assigned to different agents,
this intervention does not risk inducing mode collapse. Rather, it is designed to explicitly promote
diversity across trajectories. By confining intervention to the plan level while leaving task execution
fully autonomous, the diversification module expands coverage of the solution space while preserving
the coherence and interpretability of each reasoning trajectory.



4   Experiments

In this section, we evaluate ExComm across diverse reasoning benchmarks and analysis settings.
We first describe the common experimental setup and baselines. In Section 4.1, we present main
benchmark results comparing our method against standard test-time scaling strategies across multiple
backbone models. We then analyze the sources of performance gains through error recovery analysis
in Section 4.2. Next, we demonstrate the scalability of our framework in Section 4.3 by scaling model
size and the number of agents. In Section 4.4, we compare ExComm with other communication pro-
tocols. Section 4.5 provides an ablation study examining the contributions of individual components
and their effects on error recovery. Finally, in Section 4.6, we discuss the efficiency of our approach.
Common setup and baselines. All experiments are conducted within the Co-Sight framework, which
we treat as an instantiation of the base agent loop described in Algorithm 1. We compare against the
following baselines: Base Agent (N = 1), which performs a single pass without test-time scaling;
Sequential Revision (N = 1), which introduces periodic self-revision; Independent Scaling, where
multiple solver agents run in parallel without communication; Independent Scaling + Sequential
Revision, which is a parallel version of Sequential Revision; Tree Search, implemented as beam
search over reasoning trajectories; and ExComm (ours), which augments the base loop with the
Online Belief Consistency Module and the Trajectory Diversification Module.
Unless otherwise stated, we use N = 4 solver agents for all parallel scaling methods. We evaluate all
methods on AIME 2024, AIME 2025, and GAIA, reporting majority-vote accuracy.


                                                     6
4.1   Main Results

This experiment evaluates whether ExComm improves performance over commonly used test-time
scaling strategies. We compare single solver, sequential self-revision, independent parallel scaling
with and without self-revision, and tree search baselines against our method across diverse benchmarks
spanning mathematical reasoning (AIME 2024, AIME 2025 [12]) and multi-level agentic reasoning
(GAIA Levels 1-3 [13]). For reliability, all scores are averaged over three repeated runs.
As shown in Table 2, our method consistently outperforms the baselines across models and bench-
marks, achieving average-score gains of 5.7% and 5.0% over the best-performing baseline. Indepen-
dent scaling and tree search provide moderate improvements over a single solver. Sequential revision
sometimes yields additional gains but remains limited by its reliance on error detection within a single
reasoning trajectory. In contrast, our communicative approach achieves the strongest performance by
combining the Consistency Module with trajectory diversification, mitigating error propagation and
improving search-space diversity.


4.2   Error Recovery Analysis

To better understand why ExComm outperforms         Table 3: Error Recovery Rates. Comparison of er-
independent and sequential baselines, we inves-     ror recovery rates (%) across benchmarks, defined
tigate the mechanisms of error detection and        as the percentage of factual or logical errors that
correction during execution by comparing the        are corrected during execution. Scores are aver-
error recovery rates across different methods.      aged over three critic models. Detailed experiment
Experimental Setup. Adopting the step-wise setup is outlined in Section B.
evaluation methodology from ProcessBench
                                                                         AIME               GAIA
[24], we compare agent execution results against
                                                     Method           2024 2025      L1      L2  L3  Avg.
ground-truth reference solutions to identify fac-
tual or logical errors and determine whether they                     Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite
are later resolved. Our primary metric is the Er- Independent         32.6   20.5 16.6 12.9      9.7 18.5
ror Recovery Rate, which is the percentage of Independent
                                                     Tree Search
                                                                 + SR 28.7
                                                                      22.5
                                                                             25.2 18.6 12.8 14.4 19.9
                                                                             10.8 12.3 10.6      8.4 12.9
instances where an initial factual or logical error ExComm (Ours) 50.6 43.9 42.7 30.7 25.6 38.7
is successfully identified and corrected before                            Qwen3.5-4B
the final answer is generated. To ensure a robust Independent         67.1   59.6 43.3 38.5 30.7 47.8
analysis, we employ a critic model to provide Independent + SR 69.8 71.2 55.5 46.2 45.7 57.7
binary labels of step-wise correctness, following Tree Search         66.6   59.3 44.6 48.9 37.5 51.4
the critic model design from ProcessBench. Fur- ExComm (Ours) 70.7 76.3 61.7 53.7 46.5 61.8
thermore, we repeat the evaluation with three
different critic models, namely Gemini-3-Flash [25], GPT-5-nano [26], and Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite
[14], and take the average of their results.
Results. As shown in Table 3, ExComm shows superior error detection and correction compared
to baselines. ExComm significantly outperforms all baselines, achieving average recovery rates of
38.7% and 61.8% for the Gemini and Qwen models, respectively, being consistently higher than
the best-performing baselines. Our framework achieves this resilience through its sophisticated
communicative design, that allows agents to collaboratively identify and correct invalid reasoning
steps that would otherwise propagate unchecked in isolated settings.


4.3   Performance with Further Scaling

To evaluate the scalability of ExComm, we extend the evaluation in two dimensions. First, we scale
the parameter size of the base LLM to test whether the gains of our framework extend to larger
models. To this end, we evaluate our approach on Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct [27]. Second, we
scale the number of solver agents to test whether the benefits of the communication protocol extend
to more agents. Specifically, we double the agent count and evaluate Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite with
8 parallel solver agents instead of 4. As shown in Table 4, ExComm consistently outperforms the
baselines in both scaling regimes, demonstrating the scalability of our approach. This suggests that
the effectiveness of our approach is complementary to underlying model capacity rather than specific
to a particular model size or number of agents.


                                                   7
Table 4: Scaling experiments. We evaluate ExComm under two scaling regimes: (a) model scaling
with Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct and (b) agent scaling with N = 8 parallel Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite
agents. We report majority-voting accuracy across AIME and GAIA, averaged over three runs. The
best values are highlighted in bold, and runner-up values are underlined.
   (a) Model Scaling: Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct                    (b) Agent Scaling: Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite (N = 8)
                     AIME               GAIA                                            AIME                GAIA
Method             2024   2025   L1      L2    L3     Avg.       Method              2024    2025     L1       L2     L3     Avg.
Base Agent         80.6   69.7   53.7   39.7   21.0   52.9       Independent         71.5    60.4    46.7      32.7   12.5   44.7
Seq. Revision      80.8   69.2   53.2   39.3   23.8   53.3       Independent + SR    69.4    61.5    48.1      32.2    9.6   44.2
Independent        89.2   76.4   60.8   46.5   22.8   59.1       Tree Search         67.8    53.9    48.6      30.9    9.3   42.1
Independent + SR   88.9   74.2   59.3   45.0   29.9   59.5       ExComm (Ours)       74.6    64.0    59.3      40.8   14.0   50.5
Tree Search        86.1   75.0   57.7   45.7   25.3   58.0
ExComm (Ours)      89.7   83.1   62.7   50.2   29.3   63.0




4.4   Comparison Against Other Communication Protocols

Many representative communication protocols,                 Table 5: Communication Baselines. Compari-
including Multi-Agent Debate [16] and Mixture-               son of ExComm against Multi-Agent Debate and
of-Agents [17], are primarily designed for                   Mixture-of-Agents, adapted to the exploration-
solution-stage refinement. In this setup, agents             stage agent loop using Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite.
exchange, critique, or aggregate preliminary                 We report majority-voting accuracy and diversity
answers and the accompanying reasoning tra-                  scores, defined as 100 − Self-BLEU.
jectory to improve candidate solutions. In
contrast, ExComm targets a different problem:                                            AIME                  GAIA
exploration-stage error control. Rather than in-             Method                   2024   2025     L1        L2    L3     Avg.
tervening after preliminary answers have already                                    Majority Voting Accuracy
formed, ExComm intervenes during the agent                   Multi-Agent Debate       64.4    52.8   49.3      30.0    8.3   41.0
execution loop to detect factual conflicts, resolve          Mixture-of-Agents        63.9    52.5   51.3      34.0   11.1   42.6
them before they propagate, and preserve trajec-             ExComm (Ours)            72.5    60.6   52.2      30.8   14.8   46.2
tory diversity for subsequent reasoning.                                       Diversity Score (Trajectory-Level)
                                                             Multi-Agent Debate       53.3    54.7   51.1      51.5   54.2   53.0
In this section, we compare ExComm with                      Mixture-of-Agents
                                                                       2.8      2.5     5.4     5.7 4.5 4.2
two representative communication protocols,                  ExComm (Ours)
                                                                      63.1     62.1 59.7 58.7 59.1 60.5
namely Multi-Agent Debate and Mixture-of-                          Diversity Score (Step-Level)
Agents. In Multi-Agent Debate, agents repeat- Multi-Agent Debate 46.2 45.4 42.3 42.3 44.8 44.2
edly share their progress with one another and Mixture-of-Agents 10.9 11.3 13.3 13.3 11.8 12.1
revise their reasoning based on peer responses. ExComm (Ours)         55.4     52.6 51.0 48.2 49.1 51.3

In Mixture-of-Agents, agents’ outputs are cen-
trally aggregated at each synchronization step, and subsequent reasoning proceeds from the aggregated
state. These methods were originally designed for iterative refinement of candidate solutions, rather
than exploration-stage communication within an agent execution loop. We therefore adapt them
to this setting as strong communication baselines, allowing us to test whether generic information
exchange is sufficient or whether the targeted design of ExComm is necessary for reducing error
propagation.
As shown in Table 5, ExComm consistently outperforms both protocols across benchmarks. This
gap reflects the different objective of our communication design. Multi-Agent Debate and Mixture-
of-Agents exchange broad intermediate information, which can improve consensus but may also
cause premature synchronization of reasoning trajectories. In contrast, ExComm uses targeted
communication, sharing only conflict resolutions with the agents involved and applies explicit
trajectory diversification to maintain independent exploration. This allows ExComm to reduce error
propagation without collapsing agents into a shared reasoning path.
This distinction is further supported by the diversity analysis. Following prior work [28, 29], we
adopt 100 − Self-BLEU to measure semantic diversity among agent trajectories. In addition to
trajectory-level diversity, we measure step-level diversity by comparing the reasoning traces of
parallel agents at the same step. For both metrics, ExComm consistently shows higher trajectory
diversity across benchmarks, indicating that exploration-stage communication can improve reliability
while preserving diverse reasoning paths.


                                                             8
4.5   Ablation and Analysis

In this section, we analyze ExComm to isolate      Table 6: Component Ablation. Ablation of Ex-
the contributions of the Consistency Module,       Comm on AIME 2024 and GAIA Level 3 using
soft belief updates, and trajectory diversifica-   Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite. We report majority-voting
tion. Unless otherwise specified, we use N = 4     accuracy and error recovery rates. Soft belief up-
solver agents across all methods in this section.  dates improve belief consistency by avoiding rigid
As shown in Table 6, adding the Consistency synchronization, while trajectory diversification
Module without soft belief updates slightly de- yields the largest gains, especially on GAIA.
grades GAIA Level 3 accuracy, suggesting that
conflict resolution alone may introduce harm-                                     AIME 2024 GAIA Level 3
ful synchronization in more open-ended search                        Majority Voting Accuracy
spaces. Soft belief updates mitigate this issue by
appending resolutions as external suggestions Independent                             65.3      9.0
                                                     + Consistency Module             68.3      8.0
rather than overwriting agent beliefs. This im-      + Soft Belief Updates            71.4      9.3
proves performance on both benchmarks, indi-         + Diversification Module         72.5     14.8
cating that agents benefit from peer-derived cor-                     Error Recovery Rates
rections while retaining their independent rea-
                                                   Independent                        32.6      9.7
soning trajectories.                                 + Consistency Module             33.5     12.0
Finally, adding the Diversification Module           + Soft Belief Updates      33.6        13.3
                                                     + Diversification Module   50.6        25.6
yields the strongest performance, with partic-
ularly large gains on GAIA Level 3 and error
recovery rates. This suggests that diversification is essential in large search spaces, where agents
must explore complementary reasoning paths rather than prematurely converge on a single trajectory.
Overall, both components are necessary. Belief consistency improves error detection and correction,
while diversification preserves broad search-space coverage and substantially improves recovery from
earlier errors.

4.6   Cost Analysis

To assess the efficiency of ExComm, we analyze the
per-sample API cost of each method and summa-            76                                           N=8




                                                          Majority Voting Accuracy (%)
rize the performance-cost trade-off in Figure 2. Ex-     74
                                                                        N=4
Comm achieves the best trade-off, matching or out-                             N=8
performing the N = 8 baselines with only N = 4           72

solver agents while requiring lower API cost. This       70
                                                                                              N=8

suggests that targeted exploration-stage communica-                 N=4
                                                                                     N=8
                                                         68
tion can be more cost-effective than simply increas-
                                                                N=4   N=4
ing the number of independent trajectories. We also      66
                                                                                         Independent
report latency in Table 7. For example, ExComm           64                              Independent + SR
has a similar per-sample latency to the N = 8 Inde-                                      Tree Search
pendent + SR baseline (10.45 min. vs. 9.57 min.),        62                              ExComm (Ours)

while requiring significantly less API cost and im-          1.0        1.5      2.0        2.5       3.0
proving accuracy on both AIME and GAIA. Over-                            Normalized API Cost
all, ExComm achieves a favorable performance-cost
trade-off while maintaining latency in a comparable Figure 2: Performance-Cost Trade-Off. We
range to parallel baselines.                         plot majority-voting accuracy versus normal-
                                                     ized API cost on AIME 2024 using Gemini-
                                                     2.5-Flash-Lite. Error bars are standard errors.
5     Conclusion
We introduce ExComm, a communication protocol for the exploration stage of agentic test-time scal-
ing. By auditing agents’ beliefs for factual inconsistencies and coordinating plan-level diversification,
ExComm directly addresses a key failure mode of agentic systems, specifically the propagation of
incorrect intermediate beliefs that corrupt downstream reasoning. Our results suggest that the design
space of exploration-stage communication (what to share, when to intervene, and how to balance
correction with diversity) is a promising and largely unexplored axis for scaling agentic reasoning.
As demonstrated in the results, targeted interventions in this space yield substantial gains over both
independent scaling and adapted solution-stage communication protocols.


                                                    9
References
 [1] Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute opti-
     mally can be more effective than scaling model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314,
     2024.
 [2] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
     Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
     with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:46534–46594,
     2023.
 [3] Kuang-Huei Lee, Ian Fischer, Yueh-Hua Wu, Dave Marwood, Shumeet Baluja, Dale Schu-
     urmans, and Xinyun Chen. Evolving deeper llm thinking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09891,
     2025.
 [4] Xinyun Chen, Renat Aksitov, Uri Alon, Jie Ren, Kefan Xiao, Pengcheng Yin, Sushant Prakash,
     Charles Sutton, Xuezhi Wang, and Denny Zhou. Universal self-consistency for large language
     model generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17311, 2023.
 [5] Bradley Brown, Jordan Juravsky, Ryan Ehrlich, Ronald Clark, Quoc V Le, Christopher Ré,
     and Azalia Mirhoseini. Large language monkeys: Scaling inference compute with repeated
     sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21787, 2024.
 [6] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
     Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Ad-
     vances in neural information processing systems, 36:11809–11822, 2023.
 [7] Edward Beeching, Lewis Tunstall, and Sasha Rush.    Scaling test time com-
     pute for open models.       https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/
     blogpost-scaling-test-time-compute, 2024.    Hugging Face Blog, Accessed:
     2025-09-20.
 [8] King Zhu, Hanhao Li, Siwei Wu, Tianshun Xing, Dehua Ma, Xiangru Tang, Minghao Liu, Jian
     Yang, Jiaheng Liu, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, et al. Scaling test-time compute for llm agents. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2506.12928, 2025.
 [9] Hongwei Zhang, Ji Lu, Shiqing Jiang, Chenxiang Zhu, Li Xie, Chen Zhong, Haoran Chen,
     Yurui Zhu, Yongsheng Du, Yanqin Gao, et al. Co-sight: Enhancing llm-based agents via
     conflict-aware meta-verification and trustworthy reasoning with structured facts. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2510.21557, 2025.
[10] Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xinying
     Song, and Denny Zhou. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2310.01798, 2023.
[11] Ryo Kamoi, Yusen Zhang, Nan Zhang, Jiawei Han, and Rui Zhang. When can llms actually
     correct their own mistakes? a critical survey of self-correction of llms. Transactions of the
     Association for Computational Linguistics, 12:1417–1440, 2024.
[12] Mislav Balunović, Jasper Dekoninck, Ivo Petrov, Nikola Jovanović, and Martin Vechev. Math-
     arena: Evaluating llms on uncontaminated math competitions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23281,
     2025.
[13] Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia:
     a benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2024.
[14] Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit
     Dhillon, Marcel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the
     frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic
     capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261, 2025.
[15] Qwen Team.          Qwen3.5:    Towards native multimodal agents.                Qwen. URL:
     https://qwen.ai/blog?id=qwen3.5 (Access Date: 07. 05. 2026), 2026.


                                                10
[16] Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improv-
     ing factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. In Forty-first
     international conference on machine learning, 2024.
[17] Junlin Wang, Jue Wang, Ben Athiwaratkun, Ce Zhang, and James Zou. Mixture-of-agents
     enhances large language model capabilities. International Conference on Learning Representa-
     tions, 2025.
[18] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
     Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international
     conference on learning representations, 2023.
[19] Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang.
     Hugginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 36:38154–38180, 2023.
[20] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi
     Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, et al. Openhands: An open platform for ai software
     developers as generalist agents, 2024b. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2407.16741, 2(4):9, 2024.
[21] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettle-
     moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach
     themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023):
     68539-68551., 2023.
[22] Siyu Yuan, Kaitao Song, Jiangjie Chen, Xu Tan, Yongliang Shen, Kan Ren, Dongsheng Li,
     and Deqing Yang. Easytool: Enhancing llm-based agents with concise tool instruction. In
     Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association
     for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
     951–972, 2025.
[23] Ye Tian, Baolin Peng, Linfeng Song, Lifeng Jin, Dian Yu, Lei Han, Haitao Mi, and Dong
     Yu. Toward self-improvement of llms via imagination, searching, and criticizing. Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:52723–52748, 2024.
[24] Chujie Zheng, Zhenru Zhang, Beichen Zhang, Runji Lin, Keming Lu, Bowen Yu, Dayiheng
     Liu, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Processbench: Identifying process errors in mathematical
     reasoning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.06559.
[25] Sundar Pichai, Demis Hassabis, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. A new era of intelligence with gemini
     3. Google. URL: https://blog.google/products-and-platforms/products/gemini/gemini-3/(Access
     Date: 07. 05. 2026), 2025.
[26] Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan
     McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, et al. Openai gpt-5 system card. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2601.03267, 2025.
[27] Qwen Team. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388.
[28] Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Shuming
     Shi, and Zhaopeng Tu. Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through multi-
     agent debate, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.19118.
[29] Tianhui Zhang, Bei Peng, and Danushka Bollegala. Improving diversity of commonsense
     generation by large language models via in-context learning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
     org/abs/2404.16807.




                                                11
A     Further Discussions
A.1   Broader Impact Statement

This work studies methods for improving the reliability of agentic test-time scaling through
exploration-stage communication and error control. By detecting belief-level inconsistencies among
parallel solver agents and resolving them before they propagate, ExComm may contribute to more
robust language-model deployment in complex reasoning settings. The proposed framework also
aims to improve the performance-cost trade-off by using targeted coordination rather than simply
increasing the number of independent trajectories.
At the same time, more capable automated reasoning systems may also be misused or over-trusted,
especially in high-stakes domains where incorrect outputs can have significant consequences. As
with other advances in language-model reasoning, these techniques should be applied responsibly,
with appropriate human oversight, domain-specific validation, and consideration of their broader
societal impacts.

A.2   Limitations and Future Work

Our work focuses on error propagation during the exploration stage of agentic test-time scaling, where
agents are still forming reasoning trajectories through iterative reasoning and tool use. This scope
is intentional, as early belief-level errors can influence many downstream decisions. However, our
method is not designed to replace aggregation or refinement after candidate answers are generated.
Another consideration is the quality of the consistency module. ExComm uses a dedicated agentic
verifier to resolve factual conflicts, and its effectiveness depends on the verifier’s ability to produce
reliable corrections. Since incorrect resolutions may introduce new errors, ExComm uses soft belief
updates that present corrections as external suggestions rather than replacing the original beliefs.
Empirically, ExComm improves performance across all tested models, but in extreme cases, repeated
incorrect verification results could still mislead agents and degrade performance. Improving verifier
reliability and uncertainty estimation is therefore a promising direction for making exploration-stage
communication more robust.

B     Implementation Details on Critic Model
B.1   Design of Critic Model

The Critic Model framework, as introduced in ProcessBench [24], was originally employed in the
mathematical domain to evaluate candidate solutions for a given problem and identify the first
occurence of an error. They reported that critic models utilizing proprietary language models (e.g.,
o1-mini) with simple prompting achieved high agreement with human annotations. Notably, these
models were able to not only correctly localize the erroneous step but also provide a detailed thinking
process and explanation.
Building upon this foundation, we adapt the ProcessBench prompt template to suit our specific
objectives. We introduce two primary modifications:
      1. Additional Use of Reference Solutions. Unlike ProcessBench, which aimed to benchmark
         the performance of the critic itself, our objective is to maximize the accuracy of the critique.
         To this end, we provide the critic with a ground-truth reference solution. This is particularly
         beneficial for tool-augmented benchmarks like GAIA; without a reference solution contain-
         ing necessary intermediate results (e.g., outputs from web searches), the critic is prone to
         misjudgment due to missing context.
      2. Identification of Error Recovery. While ProcessBench focused solely on detecting the
         existence and location of the first error, we extend this scope to determine if the error is also
         recovered in subsequent steps. Although detecting error recovery is a more complex task,
         the provision of a reference solution significantly mitigates the difficulty. By treating the
         reference solution—which contains key intermediate results—as a roadmap, the model can
         effectively compare execution traces and verify if the reasoning trajectory realigns with the
         correct path.


                                                   12
Critic Model Prompt Template

You are an expert Critic. Your goal is to evaluate the solving process
of a specific agent ({agent_id}) regarding the given problem.

# Problem: {problem}

# Reference Solution: {reference_solution}
# Reference Answer: {reference_answer}

# Model Execution of {agent_id}
The execution log below belongs to {agent_id}. Focus on {agent_id}'s workflow only.
<model_execution>
  <step_0>
    Action: {Execution results of step 0}
    Memory Diff: {Updated Intermediate Results of step 0}
  </step_0>
  ...
  <step_K>
    Action: {Execution results of step K}
    Memory Diff: {Updated Intermediate Results of step K}
  </step_K>
</model_execution>

# Your Task
1. Analyze the "Action" and "Memory Diff" of {agent_id}.
2. Identify "Factual Errors" committed by {agent_id}.
   - Definition: A Factual Error is where {agent_id} incorrectly derives
     an intermediate result or maintains an incorrect intermediate result
     that impacts decision-making.
   - Exclusions: Minor tool errors, or errors made by other agents.

3. For each Factual Error:
   - Error Type: Description.
   - Occurrence Step: Step number where {agent_id} introduced the error.
   - Recovered Step: Step number where the error was corrected (or "N/A").

4. Final Check:
   - If the agent's final answer is INCORRECT (differs from Reference Answer),
     there MUST be at least one Factual Error that is "N/A" (Unrecovered).
   - Do NOT mark an error as "Recovered" if the agent proceeded to a wrong
     conclusion based on a related misconception.

# Output Format
Provide your analysis in the following XML format:
<error_recovery_analysis>
  <error>
    <description>...</description>
    <occurrence_step>...</occurrence_step>
    <recovered_step>...</recovered_step>
  </error>
</error_recovery_analysis>



                Figure 3: The prompt template used for the critic model.




                                          13
B.2   Prompt Template

Our critic model utilizes a structured prompt designed to detect factual errors and their subsequent
recovery. The prompt (see Figure 3) inputs include the problem statement, a ground-truth reference
solution, and the target agent’s step-by-step execution log. The critic is instructed to identify “Factual
Errors”, defined as incorrect derivations impacting decision-making, while ignoring minor tool slips
or external noise. Crucially, the prompt enforces a temporal analysis: for each error, the critic must
pinpoint the Occurrence Step and, if applicable, the Recovered Step. To ensure consistency, the
instructions mandate that any trajectory resulting in an incorrect final answer must be associated with
at least one unrecovered error.

C     Error Type Analysis
This section describes the experimental setup for the error type classification reported in Table 1. The
goal is to determine, for each factual error in independent-baseline trajectories, whether the error
would be detectable through cross-agent conflict analysis.
Error identification. We use an LLM-as-a-Judge approach to identify factual errors in each agent’s
execution trajectory. The critic model setup follows the same design described in Section B. Given a
problem, a reference solution, and an agent’s step-by-step execution log, the critic identifies factual
errors and the steps at which they occur. For each identified error, we then classify whether the error
would be detectable by examining the beliefs of other parallel agents at the corresponding step.
Classification procedure. For each identified error, we examine the reasoning logs of the other three
parallel agents at the same execution step. A critic model classifies the error into one of the following
categories based on the other agents’ beliefs at the time of the error:

 • Conflicting: At least one other agent has established a different factual claim on the same topic,
   whether correct or incorrect. The presence of a conflicting claim makes the error detectable via
   cross-agent comparison.
 • Common: All other agents make the same or an equivalent error. No conflicting claim exists, so
   the error is not detectable through cross-agent conflict analysis.
 • Neutral: No other agent explicitly discusses or contradicts this specific fact in their completed
   reasoning at the given step. The error goes unmentioned.

To ensure temporal fairness, each other agent’s reasoning log is truncated to include only steps up
to and including the step at which the error occurs. This prevents the classification from relying on
information that would not yet be available at the time the error is committed.
Evaluation. We run the classification using three critic models (Gemini-3-Flash, GPT-5-nano, and
Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite) and report the average across all three. The analysis is conducted on errors
identified from four parallel Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite agents running Independent scaling on AIME
2024, AIME 2025, and GAIA. The prompt template used for the classification is shown in Figure 4.

D     Latency Analysis
Table 7 reports the per-sample latency of each method. The additional latency of ExComm relative
to Independent scaling mainly comes from the Consistency Module, which runs a separate tool-
augmented reasoning loop, along with the plan analysis performed by the Trajectory Diversification
Module. Despite this overhead, ExComm at N = 4 outperforms all N = 8 baselines on both AIME
and GAIA, suggesting that targeted coordination uses each trajectory more effectively.




                                                   14
    Error Type Classification Prompt Template

    You are an expert analyst evaluating multi-agent reasoning systems.
    Your task is to classify whether a specific factual error made by
    one agent is detectable via cross-agent conflict analysis.

    # Task
    {question}

    # Error Made by Agent {expert_i}
    The following error was introduced at step {occurrence_step}:
    "{error_description}"

    # Reasoning Logs of Other Agents
    Below are the reasoning logs of the other {n_others} agents working on the same task.
    {other_agent_logs}

    # Your Task
    Classify the error above into exactly ONE of these categories,
    based on the other agents' logs:

    CATEGORY 1 (Conflicting -- correct): At least one other agent has
    ALREADY ESTABLISHED the CORRECT value/fact that directly contradicts
    the error.

    CATEGORY 2 (Conflicting -- incorrect): At least one other agent has
    already established a DIFFERENT value/fact on the same topic, but
    that value is also incorrect.

    CATEGORY 3 (Shared): All other agents make the same error.

    CATEGORY 4 (Silent): No other agent explicitly discusses, confirms,
    or contradicts this specific fact.

    CATEGORY 5 (Not an error): The described "error" does not appear to
    be a genuine factual mistake. Category 5 entries are excluded from
    the final computation.

    Think step by step. Then output your classification in the following
    XML format:
    <conflict_detectability_analysis>
    <reasoning>Your step-by-step analysis here.</reasoning>
    <category>1</category>
    </conflict_detectability_analysis>



Figure 4: Prompt template for error type classification. Categories 1 and 2 are merged as “Conflicting”
in Table 1. Category 3 maps to “Common”. Category 4 maps to “Neutral”




Table 7: Latency Analysis. We report median per-sample latency (minutes) with Gemini-2.5-Flash-
Lite. Accuracy columns show the average over AIME 2024/2025 and GAIA L1/L2/L3, respectively.
ExComm at N = 4 outperforms scaled-up baselines at N = 8 while maintaining modest additional
latency.
                               N    Latency (min.)    Accuracy (AIME)    Accuracy (GAIA)
           Independent         8         7.94              66.0                30.6
           Independent + SR    8         9.57              65.5                30.0
           Tree Search         8         7.38              60.8                29.6
           ExComm (Ours)       4        10.45              66.5                32.6




                                                 15
E     Example Illustrations

This section provides concrete examples of the structured objects used by the Consistency Module
and the Trajectory Diversification Module, illustrating the format of conflicts, resolutions, and
diversification directives introduced in Section 3.

E.1   Conflict and Resolution Objects

A conflict is a structured object that identifies mutually exclusive factual claims held by different
agents at the same reasoning step. The claims field records each involved agent’s specific claim on
the contested topic. A resolution is the output of the tool-augmented verification loop that adjudicates
the conflict. It contains the verified correct claim, a justification, and the list of agents that should
receive the correction.
As a concrete illustration, consider a scenario where agents need to identify the largest two-digit
number divisible by both 6 and 8 as an intermediate step. Agent 1 correctly computes 96 (noting
LCM(6, 8) = 24 and 24 × 4 = 96). Agent 2 stops at 72 (24 × 3 = 72, having not searched far
enough). The Consistency Module flags this disagreement and extracts the following conflict:

                    Example Conflict

                    conflict :
                      agents : [1 , 2]
                      description : |
                        Agents disagree on the largest two - digit number
                        divisible by both 6 and 8. Agent 1 identifies 96;
                        Agent 2 identifies 72.
                      claims :
                        agent_1 : "96"
                        agent_2 : "72"




The Consistency Module then invokes a tool-augmented ReAct loop that tests both candidates via the
Python interpreter, without assuming either agent is correct. It verifies divisibility of both 96 and 72
by 6 and 8, confirms both are valid multiples, and selects the larger one:

                    Example Resolution

                    resolution :
                      agents : [1 , 2]
                      description : |
                        Agents disagree on the largest two - digit number
                        divisible by both 6 and 8.
                      claims :
                        agent_1 : "96"
                        agent_2 : "72"
                      correct_claim : "96"
                      reason : |
                        Both 96 and 72 are divisible by 6 and 8 ( verified
                        by Python ) . Since 96 > 72 , 96 is the largest .
                        Agent 2 stopped its search prematurely .




This resolution is then incorporated into the involved agents’ belief states via soft updates, appending
the verified information as an external suggestion rather than overwriting existing beliefs.

E.2   Diversification Directive

Suppose Agents 0 and 1 both plan to solve the same sub-problem by iterating downward from 100
and checking whether each number is divisible by both 6 and 8. The Trajectory Diversification
Module detects this redundancy and issues a directive to redirect one agent toward an orthogonal
approach:


                                                   16
                  Example Diversification Directive

                  directive :
                    target_agent_index : 1
                    modification_instruction : |
                      Instead of iterating downward from 100 , compute the
                      set of all positive integers less than 100 that are
                      divisible by 6 , then filter for those also divisible
                      by 8 , and return the maximum of the resulting set .



This shifts Agent 1 from a sequential brute-force search to a set-based filtering approach, ensuring
that the two agents explore complementary strategies for the same sub-problem.

F    Case Studies
We present representative case studies from evaluation trajectories to illustrate how the Consistency
Module and the Trajectory Diversification Module operate in practice.
Consistency Module (AIME 2024 #19). An agent incorrectly modeled a geometric locus as a
circle rather than an astroid. The Consistency Module flagged the geometric conflict across agents,
verified the astroid equation via tool-augmented reasoning, and issued a soft update. The failing agent
recovered and adopted the correct geometric model without losing its prior reasoning context.
Diversification Module (AIME 2025-II #6). Agent plans initially converged on coordinate geom-
etry, creating a shared structural bottleneck. The Trajectory Diversification Module detected this
redundancy and directed one agent to pivot to synthetic geometry. This produced an orthogonal
trajectory that uniquely solved the task.
Soft update robustness (GAIA e1fc63a2). The Consistency Module erroneously corrected a valid
calculation due to unit confusion. Because corrections are applied as soft updates rather than hard
overwrites, agents retained their valid derivations alongside the flawed suggestion. They recognized
the verifier’s error in subsequent reasoning steps and answered correctly. This case illustrates that the
soft update design is necessary for robustness against imperfect conflict resolution.




                                                   17
