                                                     R EPO M IRAGE: Probing Repository Context
                                                     Reasoning in Code Agents with Perturbations


                                                  Hanyu Li1∗ Yichi Zhang2∗ Speed Zhu3 Hang Su2 Jun Zhu2 Yinpeng Dong2
                                              1
                                                  Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2 Tsinghua University 3 Tencent




arXiv:2605.26177v1 [cs.SE] 25 May 2026
                                                                                             Abstract
                                                     Code agents are currently having skillful performance on repository-level software
                                                     engineering benchmarks, but it remains unclear whether success on end-to-end
                                                     tasks such as issue resolution truly reflects repository context reasoning, the ability
                                                     to identify the task-relevant information across multiple files and reason over the
                                                     relations among them. To investigate this question, we introduce R EPO M IRAGE, a
                                                     two-stage evaluation suite built on SWE-Bench Verified that adopts perturbation
                                                     as a diagnostic tool to increase the demand for context reasoning by transforming
                                                     how the repository is exposed. First, R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb applies three types of
                                                     semantics-preserving repository-level perturbations, revealing a clear performance
                                                     drop when correct solving requires broader context access. R EPO M IRAGE-Extend
                                                     further turns perturbation-targeted structural bottlenecks into explicit tasks beyond
                                                     issue resolution, where the average performance declines from 66.8% in the original
                                                     setting to 25.3%, indicating a significant deficiency in repository context reasoning.
                                                     Further trajectory analysis reveals an exploration drift, where agents access broader
                                                     repository context but fail to turn it into effective structure information. Motivated
                                                     by this observation, we propose R EPOA NCHOR, a structure-first prototype work-
                                                     flow that separates repository exploration from downstream problem solving, and
                                                     show that explicit structural scaffolding yields notable gains. These results uncover
                                                     an previously overlooked gap in repository context reasoning for code agents and
                                                     suggest that stronger structure-aware methods are potential to improve them.


                                         1        Introduction
                                         Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have extended code generation from function-
                                         level [1, 2] and single-file [3, 4] settings to repository-level software engineering tasks [5–8]. As the
                                         deployment of LLMs becomes increasingly wide in practice, spanning diverse settings such as vibe
                                         coding [9] and cybersecurity analysis [10], models are often required to operate over entire repositories
                                         rather than isolated code snippets [11, 12]. Accomplishing these project-level applications essentially
                                         requires gathering distributed evidence across multiple files. Taking issue resolution as an example,
                                         the observed issue in one place may be caused by errors in another module, so determining a correct
                                         fix demands tracing calling relationships and execution constraints elsewhere in the codebase [13, 14].
                                         Nevertheless, existing evaluations mostly treat such tasks in an end-to-end manner, without explicitly
                                         isolating the underlying ability to identify and organize task-relevant information across the code
                                         context [15, 16]. We refer to this capability as repository context reasoning, which typically involves
                                         multi-file understanding and cross-file reasoning in a repository.
                                         Despite the impressive progress of code agents on repository-level benchmarks, it remains unclear
                                         whether their increasing scores are a reliable indicator of repository context reasoning. We investigate
                                         this question through SWE-Bench Verified [17], where our experiments reveal a localized pattern in
                                         issue resolution. Among successfully resolved cases, advanced agents frequently inspect only a few
                                             ∗ Equal contribution; alphabetical order. (mail to: thestudent@bupt.edu.cn,   zyc22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn)


                                         Preprint.
A. RepoMirage-Perturb
                   Gold Patch                               Dependency-Path Indirection                                    Runtime-Target Masking                                         Local-Value Externalization
 diff --git a/src/cache.py b/src/cache.py                                                                        Before                                                           Before
 ......                                               Before                                                                                                                                                              Number 0
                                                                                                     json                                                                         index = 0
 - self.data.popitem()
 + self.data.popitem(last=True)                         import json                                                      app.py           cache.py                    io.py       ......
                                                        import re                                                                                                                 for i in range(0, ...):                 Number 0
                                                                                                     re                                                                           ......
         src /                                                                                                                                                                    index += 1
                                                                                                                   After                                                                                                  Number 1
                                       Target          After
             cache.py                                                                                                                       v1: Fake Bool
                                        file                                                                            cache_v1.py
                                                        from p1 import lib1                                                                 -if i <= self.capacity:               After
                                                        from p2 import lib2                                             cache_v2.py         +if i > self.capacity:
 # cache.py                                                                                                                                                                                          Dict: dep
 import json                                                                                                            cache_v3.py         v2: Fake Imports
 import re                                                                                                                                  -import a as l1 +import a as l2
 ......                                                import json as lib1 import re as lib2                            normal.py           -import b as l2 +import b as l1
 index = 0                                                                                                              cache               v3: Fake Dependency
                                                                                                                                                                                  dep json 1         dep json 2           dep json 3
 data = json.loads("XXX")                                                                                                                   -index=dep["k1"] +index=dep["k2"]     "key1": 0          "key2": 0            "key3": 1
 for i in range(0, len(list1)):                                     json                       re                          __init__.py      -range(dep["k2"])+range(dep["k1"])    "key5": 20         "key8": -1           "key10": 2
     self.data.popitem()


B. RepoMirage-Extend
                 Task1: Multi-File                                 Task2: Proxy Chain                                       Task3: Runtime Target                                             Task4: Missing Constant
 Input                  Capabilities                Input                            Capabilities              Input                     Capabilities                             Input                 dep json 2       Capabilities

                                                     Target File                                                                                                                                        "Erased": 0
   Origin                                                                                                              cache_v1.py                          normal.py               Target File         "key8": -1
  SWE task                                                                                           Proxy 1                                                                                                                         Key-Value
                                                                        Proxy 2                                        cache_v2.py       Identifying runtime-relevant files.
                                                      Proxy 1
  Perturbed             Coordinating edits across    (Erased)                          Tracing dependency              cache_v3.py                                                 dep json 1           dep json 3       Collecting distributed
  Repository                 multiple files.                                                 chains.                                     Test Rule                                "Erased": 0          "Erased": 1            definitions.
                                                                       Proxy 3                                         normal.py                                                  "key5": 20           "key10": 2
 Test Rule                                          Test Rule                                                                              Repaired               Fake File
                                                                                                                       cache               Wrapper                                Test Rule
              CHECK                                         CHECK 1                 CHECK 2
                                                                                                                                            CHECK                     Real File      CHECK 1             CHECK 2             CHECK 3
  Origin SWE FAIL_TO_PASS Scripts                    lib1.__name__=="json"   lib2.__name__ == "re"                      __init__.py                                               dep["key1"] == 0    dep["key2"] == 0    dep["key3"] == 1




Figure 1: Overview of R EPO M IRAGE. R EPO M IRAGE is an evaluation suite for probing repository
context reasoning in code agents. A. R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb. To test whether issue-resolution perfor-
mance remains stable under higher repository-context demands, it applies three semantics-preserving
perturbations while keeping the original task and evaluation unchanged. B. R EPO M IRAGE-Extend.
To make repository context reasoning directly measurable, it builds four explicit task families on fully
perturbed repositories by turning structural bottlenecks into task objectives.
files (see Fig. 2), which indicates that high success rates may not necessarily come from sufficient
reasoning over broader repository context. At the same time, simply constructing new benchmarks
with stronger multi-file demands would not address this challenge, because they are built on new
environments with different task formulations [18, 19], making failures hard to attribute. Therefore,
we need a controlled evaluation that probes repository context reasoning from the existing end-to-end
benchmarks with the original task semantics and codebase instances unchanged, while selectively
examining how much successful solutions depend on broader context access and cross-file reasoning.
In this paper, we use perturbation as a diagnostic tool to facilitate this controlled evaluation, which has
been adopted to study whether model success relies on robust understanding or superficial cues [20,
21]. We introduce this methodology to construct R EPO M IRAGE, a perturbation-based evaluation suite
organized as a two-stage evaluation, as shown in Fig. 1. We begin with R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb, which
applies semantics-preserving perturbations to the task-relevant context in each benchmark instance
while keeping the original task and evaluation protocol unaffected. This stage aims to reveal whether
strong benchmark performance remains stable when successful resolution requires more repository
context reasoning. Concretely, we design three perturbation strategies that obscure previously explicit
dependency paths, hide true runtime targets behind structural indirection, and externalize locally
available definitions into cross-file references, in order to force agents to read more files and reason
over the context rather than following the localized pattern. Empirically, the resolved rates of eight
leading models drop relatively by 27.0% on average while reading substantially more files, showing
that strong performance on issue-solving benchmarks does not directly translate to context reasoning.
Having established this notable performance gap under controlled perturbations, we then introduce
R EPO M IRAGE-Extend to make repository context reasoning more explicitly measurable through
new task formulations. Starting from the same perturbed instances, R EPO M IRAGE-Extend converts
each perturbation strategy into a corresponding task objective, including proxy-chain completion,
runtime target identification, and missing-constant recovery. These three tasks are combined with
the original issue-resolution task involving multi-file gold patches. Derived from our perturbation
strategies, these new tasks correspond to the fundamental structural relations practically common
within project-level problems. On the same underlying benchmark instances, average performance
across eight frontier models drops from 66.8% under the original issue-resolution task to 25.3% under
our perturbation-derived task formulations, further indicating that successfully resolving an instance
in the original benchmark does not imply the ability to understand and reason across the context in
the repository. More importantly, the consistently low completion rates on these explicit tasks suggest
that current code agents are still limited in repository context reasoning.


                                                                                                               2
To better understand this deficiency, we delve into the behavioral patterns in agent trajectories under
perturbations. We notice that while agents spend a larger proportion of their actions searching and
reading files, it fails to result in effective solving. Instead, agents become increasingly prone to remain
exploring rather than making editing decisions. This points to a mechanistic bottleneck where current
agents can access a broader repository context, but often fail to organize the multi-file information into
a coherent structural scaffold for task completion, which is validated by the improved performance
when structural hints are provided. We then implement this idea into R EPOA NCHOR, a prototype
workflow that separates task-related structure exploration from downstream problem solving, by first
constructing a summary of relevant repository context and then using it to guide subsequent actions.
The resulting performance gains with R EPOA NCHOR suggest that explicit structure understanding is
a promising direction for improving repository context reasoning in code agents.
We summarize our main contributions as: ① Conceptually: We identify an evaluation gap between
strong performance on repository-level issue-resolution benchmarks and genuine repository context
reasoning, showing that benchmark success does not necessarily arise from multi-file understanding
and cross-file reasoning. ② Technically: We utilize perturbation as a diagostic tool for capability
probing and present R EPO M IRAGE, a perturbation-based evaluation suite, to quantitatively measure
this gap through two complementary settings, R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb and R EPO M IRAGE-Extend,
revealing the deficiency in repository context reasoning for code agents. ③ Mechanistically: We
provide practical evidence that current agents suffer from exploration drift under higher repository-
context demands, and show that structure-first scaffolding can substantially improve performance.

2     Preliminary
In this section, we describe our experimental setup and present an initial analysis of the file access
behavior on repository-level issue resolution.

2.1   Experimental Setup

We study whether existing benchmarks on project-level problem solving can reliably reflect repository
context reasoning in code agents. For controlled evaluation, we use SWE-Bench Verified as the seed
benchmark, since it is a widely used human-validated benchmark built on real GitHub codebases
for repository-level issue resolution in LLMs. We preserve the program semantics and executable
functionality of each instance under perturbations using the provided test cases. All runs are conducted
with mini-swe-agent [14] under the standard bash-only setting, a simple but effective framework
used in the SWE-Bench [7] leaderboard, which enables standardized comparison while minimizing
confounding differences in agent design. We record agent trajectories, especially shell-command
actions, for later analysis. We evaluate eight advanced LLMs, mainly using GPT-5 [22] and DeepSeek-
V3.2 [23] for analysis. More details are provided in Appendix A.2.

2.2   File Access Analysis in Repository-Level Issue Resolution

While prior work shows that more than 80% of
SWE-Bench Verified instances ultimately require
edits to only a single file [24], and that advanced
models can identify a buggy file path with up
to 76% accuracy even without repository struc-
ture [25], these findings are descriptive and not
grounded in the execution during issue resolution.
We hereby directly examine how many files are
actually accessed in successfully resolved SWE-
Bench Verified instances. As shown in Fig. 2, file Figure 2: Numbers of accessed files per instance
access is highly localized among resolved cases. resolved in SWE-bench Verified for GPT-5 (avg.
For GPT-5, 53.8% of resolved instances involve 2.15) and DeepSeek-V3.2 (avg. 3.97).
inspecting only one file, and 88.0% involve no more than three files, while for DeepSeek-V3.2, 55.7%
of resolved instances still stay within three files. These results suggest that successful issue resolution
is often achieved after accessing only a narrow portion of the repository. This raises the question
of whether strong performance on existing repository-level benchmarks reliably reflects repository
context reasoning in code agents, and, if not, how this capability can be measured more directly.


                                                    3
3     Uncovering Performance Gap Under Repository-Level Perturbations
To probe repository context reasoning in code agents from the success in end-to-end issue-resolution
benchmarks, we need a controlled evaluation to selectively isolate this capability while preserving the
semantics and functionality of the original task. Perturbations provide a natural tool for this purpose.
They have been widely used in vision and language tasks to study whether models rely on robust
representations or superficial patterns by changing how input information is presented [21, 26, 27].
In this paper, we introduce R EPO M IRAGE, a perturbation-based evaluation suite built on the issue-
resolution benchmark, which uses targeted interventions to emphasize repository context reasoning
while preserving the underlying codebase semantics and executable behavior of each instance.
In this section, we begin with R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb, which applies repository-level perturbation
strategies to the original benchmark instances, and evaluate the performance of code agents on the
same task of issue resolution, aiming to see whether there is a gap due to increasing context reasoning.

3.1   Repository-Level Perturbation Strategies

To realize the controlled evaluation, our repository-level perturbations are designed to make task-
relevant information in the context less locally accessible, while keeping the instance semantically
and functionally equivalent to the original setting. Then, performance changes can be interpreted
more directly as evidence of limited repository context reasoning in current code agents. As illustrated
in Fig. 1, we hereby propose the following repository-level perturbation strategies:
1. Dependency-path indirection. Import statements often expose cross-file relations directly,
   allowing agents to localize relevant files without much structural inference over the context. To
   weaken this cue, we replace direct imports in target files with multi-hop proxy paths. Each
   imported library is rerouted through a constructed four-layer proxy chain, so that the visible import
   no longer directly reveals the true dependency. As a result, understanding the role of a referenced
   component requires tracing the dependency path across multiple files.
2. Runtime-target masking. File names and paths often make the patch target easy to localize given
   issue descriptions, offering agents easier textual relevance as a proxy for runtime relevance. To
   weaken this cue, we rename the original target file, create a same-named module directory at its
   previous location, and use __init__.py to re-export the renamed file. We also place nearby fake
   files that remain globally similar to the target but contain locally perturbed details. As a result,
   the agent must distinguish files that merely appear relevant from the file that is actually used at
   runtime, requiring more cross-file comparison and reasoning.
3. Local-value externalization. Task-relevant values such as constant definitions are often placed
   directly near the code using them. This local availability allows the agent to understand or modify
   the target logic within a single file, without understanding how program behavior depends on
   information stored elsewhere. To weaken this cue, we move local constant values from target
   files into external JSON resources and modify the code to load them at runtime. As a result, the
   agent must connect the local program logic with the external resource file and recover the value
   relationship across files, rather than relying on values that are directly accessible in the target file.
To preserve comparability with the original benchmark, we verify that all perturbed instances retain
their original semantics and functionality under the corresponding validation scripts. Full construction
details and validation procedures are provided in the Appendix A.4.

3.2   Code Agent Performance on R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb

We apply three designed perturbations on the instances from SWE-Bench Verified and construct the
dataset of R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb, on which we examine how code agents perform on the same task
of issue resolution. We report both final resolved rates and the average numbers of accessed files.
Tab. 1 compares model performance on the original SWE-B ENCH V ERIFIED instances and their
R EPO M IRAGE-perturbed counterparts under the same issue-resolution task. Across all eight evaluated
models, resolved rates consistently decrease under perturbation, with the average resolved rate
dropping from 66.80% to 49.78% and relative drops ranging from 15.96% for Claude-Sonnet-
4.6 [30] to 52.6% for GPT-4.1 [28]. This indicates that the success in issue resolution is not
stable against the repository-level perturbations. Meanwhile, the perturbations substantially increase


                                                     4
Table 1: Performance on R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb. We compare model performance on the original
SWE-Bench instances and their perturbed counterparts under the same issue task.

                                          Resolved %                             Avg. #Files
    Model
                              SWE-Bench       Perturb      Drop      SWE-Bench       Perturb     Ratio
    GPT-4.1 [28]                  38.40        18.20     -52.60%         1.69          7.10     4.20×
    GPT-5 [22]                    65.00        49.00     -24.61%         2.83          7.04     2.49×
    Gemini-3.1-Pro [29]           70.60        54.40     -22.95%         17.32        24.94     1.44×
    Claude-Sonnet-4.6 [30]        75.20        63.20     -15.96%         2.20          6.76     3.07×
    DeepSeek-V3.2 [23]            70.00        52.00     -25.71%         4.66         14.32     3.07×
    MiniMax-M2.7 [31]             78.20        65.40     -16.37%         2.24          6.92     3.09×
    Qwen3-Coder-Next [32]         69.20        42.60     -38.44%         4.66         26.90     5.77×
    Qwen3.6-35B-A3B [33]          67.80        53.40     -21.24%         2.52         11.90     4.72×


the amount of repository context that agents must access, with the average number of accessed
files rising from 4.77 to 13.24. This confirms that R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb successfully expands the
codebase context necessary to solve the issues, further amplifying the importance of repository context
reasoning in the task. Altogether, these results suggest that, even under the same issue-resolution task,
increasing the demand for repository context reasoning leads to substantially worse performance,
confirming that the gap between issue-resolution success and this capability is significant.
We further examine whether the performance
drop is driven by a single perturbation type or
by their combined effect. Fig. 3 reports an abla-
tion over dependency-path indirection, runtime-
target masking, and local-value externalization.
Each perturbation alone reduces performance
relative to the baseline, indicating that agents
benefit from all three types of direct local cues
in standard issue resolution. Applying all pertur-
bations together further lowers the resolved rates
below any single-perturbation setting, showing
that the three perturbations target complemen-
tary aspects of repository context reasoning.
Overall, these results suggest that standard issue-
resolution tasks do not reliably reflect repository
context reasoning in code agents. This moti-
vates a more explicit probe of this capability by Figure 3: Ablation study of different repository
deriving new task formulations from the same perturbations across models.
instances to isolate the evaluation objective.


4     Measuring Repository Context Reasoning Beyond Issue Resolution

In this section, we move beyond issue resolution and introduce R EPO M IRAGE-Extend, a dataset built
from the same perturbed instances as R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb, which are reformulated into new tasks
derived from the perturbation strategies that explicitly probe the repository context reasoning.

4.1    Perturbation-Derived Task Design

The performance degradation under perturbations in the original issue-resolution task suggests that
the structural relations targeted by R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb are key elements of repository context
reasoning, which indeed correspond to recurring capabilities in practical software engineering, such
as tracing dependency chains, identifying runtime-relevant files, collecting distributed definitions, and
coordinating edits across multiple files. Based on this observation, we construct four task families
in R EPO M IRAGE-Extend, with one of them inherited from the original setting while the other three
derived directly from the corresponding perturbation strategies by turning each targeted structural
bottleneck into an explicit task objective, which are illustrated in Fig. 1 and introduced below:


                                                     5
1. Multi-File Issue Resolution. We notice that a part of the original benchmark already involves
   gold patches spanning multiple files. Such cases naturally require stronger coordination across
   editing locations and therefore place higher demands on repository context reasoning. We retain
   these instances and evaluate how agents perform on them under perturbations, asking whether
   they can still reason over the context and produce multi-file edits that pass the official test cases.
2. Proxy Chain Completion. Dependency-path indirection weakens the direct visibility of cross-
   file dependency relations, so agents can no longer recover the true imported component from
   local import statements alone. This places greater demands on tracing dependency chains across
   files. To make this demand explicit, we construct a proxy-chain completion task by erasing
   one intermediate import in the perturbed chain. The agent must reconstruct the missing proxy
   implementation so that the target file resolves to the correct underlying dependency. A task
   is considered solved if the restored chain passes dependency-specific checks and recovers the
   expected imported objects.
3. Runtime Target Identification. Runtime-target masking weakens the direct correspondence
   between file-level surface cues and the file that is actually executed at runtime. As a result,
   successful solving requires distinguishing merely plausible files from the true runtime-relevant
   target. Starting from a R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb repository, we conceal the reference inside the
   synthetic module that re-exports the true target file. The agent must inspect the wrapper module,
   compare the candidate files, and reconstruct the mapping from the synthetic module to the actual
   runtime target. This task is considered solved if the agent identifies the correct runtime file
   specified by the perturbed wrapper structure.
4. Missing-Constant Recovery. Local-value externalization moves task-relevant values from the
   target file into external resources, requiring the agent to recover value associations across files
   rather than from local context alone. To evaluate this ability more explicitly, we remove the keys
   of several key-value pairs in the external JSON files while keeping their values unchanged. The
   agent must inspect the target code, identify where the missing entries are used, infer the role of
   each key from the local program logic, and reconstruct the corresponding key-value mapping. A
   task is considered solved if the recovered keys match the original externalized definitions.

Instead of converting each benchmark instance into all four tasks, we
assign every original instance to exactly one task family according to
the structural signal it most naturally instantiates. Instances with multi-
file gold patches are retained for Multi-File Issue Resolution, while
the remaining instances are distributed across the three perturbation-
derived tasks in a structure-aware manner based on the most salient
structural signal for each instance. The task distribution is controlled
to be roughly balanced and the distribution is displayed in Fig. 4. Full
partition details are provided in the Appendix A.5.
                                                                              Figure 4: Task distribution
                                                                              in R EPO M IRAGE-Extend.
4.2   Code Agent Performance on R EPO M IRAGE-Extend

We evaluate code agents instantiated with different frontier models on the four tasks in R EPO M IRAGE-
Extend. Tab. 2 reports the success rates on each task. Overall, R EPO M IRAGE-Extend substantially
reduces agent performance across models and task types compared to the original task of issue
resolution on the same instances. Averaged across the models, the success rate over all instances
drops from 66.80% in the original settings to 25.25% on R EPO M IRAGE-Extend, showing that the
deficiency of current agents in recovering the repository context through in-depth reasoning. Moreover,
performance in the original setting does not show an exact correspondence with performance on
new tasks. For instance MiniMax-M2.7 performs strongly on the original tasks but drops sharply
on R EPO M IRAGE-Extend. This mismatch indicates that standard issue-resolution benchmarks do
not fully capture repository context reasoning, and that R EPO M IRAGE-Extend measures a distinct
capability beyond producing a passing patch.
The difficulty also differs across task categories. Proxy Chain Recovery is the most challenging on
average, with mean success dropping to 17.19%, indicating that tracing dependency paths across
files remains difficult even for strong agents. Multi-File Issue Resolution is similarly challenging
(17.86%), reflecting the difficulty of coordinating realistic multi-file edits under weakened repository
cues. Runtime Target Identification and Missing Constant Recovery show larger variation across


                                                    6
Table 2: Performance on R EPO M IRAGE-Extend. Org. denotes performance on the original SWE-
Bench Verified for the same instance subset, and Extend denotes performance on R EPO M IRAGE-
Extend. Bold marks the best result, and underlining marks the second-best result.

                               Multi-File      Proxy Chain         Runtime Target    Missing Constant
    Model                                                                                               Avg.
                             Org.    Extend   Org.    Extend       Org.    Extend    Org.    Extend
    GPT-4.1 [28]             10.00     2.86   45.14        4.17   40.14     3.52     43.75    2.78      3.40
    GPT-5 [22]               31.43    25.71   70.83       11.11   68.31    35.92     72.22    36.80     27.60
    Gemini-3.1-Pro [29]      38.57    14.29   77.08       22.22   76.06    43.66     74.31    71.53     41.40
    Claude-Sonnet-4.6 [30]   41.43    15.71   80.56       36.81   80.28    30.28     81.25    23.61     28.20
    DeepSeek-V3.2 [23]       35.71    20.00   74.31       11.80   75.35    59.86     77.08    57.64     39.80
    MiniMax-M2.7 [31]        45.71    22.86   81.25        7.64   86.62    26.76     81.94    6.25      14.80
    Qwen3-Coder-Next [32]    44.29    17.14   72.92       29.17   75.35     7.04     71.53    34.03     22.60
    Qwen3.6-35B-A3B [33]     31.43    24.29   80.56       14.58   72.41    19.01     68.00    38.89     24.20

models, with average success rates of 28.26% and 33.94%, respectively, suggesting that runtime-
target localization and cross-file value association are not uniformly reliable across current agents.
Overall, these results show that standard issue-resolution benchmarks do not fully reflect repository
context reasoning. When this capability is made more explicit through R EPO M IRAGE-Extend rather
than being left implicit in end-to-end patch solving, current frontier models still perform far from
satisfaction, indicating that repository context reasoning remains a clear limitation of code agents.

5     Diagnosing and Mitigating Failures in Repository Context Reasoning
In this section, we diagnose these failures through the lens of repository exploration. We first analyze
agent trajectories in R EPO M IRAGE to examine how behavior changes under perturbations. We then
test whether structural hints improve performance. Motivated by this, we introduce R EPOA NCHOR, a
prototype that prioritizes structure exploration as a potential mitigation.




                                               ***️                 ***️                       **️
            ***️                                                              ***️                      ***️
                     ***️
                                       ***️




Figure 5: Behavior shifts under R EPO M IRAGE-Extend. ∆ measures the change from SWE-
Bench Verified to R EPO M IRAGE-Extend. Files Inspected counts distinct opened files; Explore Stage
                                                                                            ¯ and ∆0.5
Proportion is the pre-edit step ratio; transition metrics report action-transition changes. ∆
denote the mean and median, respectively.

5.1    Behavioral Diagnosis under Stronger Context Demands

To understand why agents fail under stronger repository context demands, we analyze their action
trajectories, similar to previous work [34–36]. We group agent operations into {explore, edit, test} by
the specific shell commands. For each trajectory, we define the transition probability from actions as
                                      #(a → b)
                        pa→b = P                  ,        a, b ∈ {explore, edit, test}.
                                     s∈S #(a → s)
We summarize the differences compared to original issue resolution in the number of files explored
and the steps of exploration in trajectories, as well as the action transition probabilities, to examine
the behavioral patterns demonstrated by different agents during execution. Due to space limit, we
report the analysis on R EPO M IRAGE-Extend in the main text.
As shown in Fig. 5, the perturbations and new tasks from R EPO M IRAGE consistently encourage
agents toward broader context exploration. For both GPT-5 and DeepSeek-V3.2, the number of files


                                                      7
Normal Agent
                        More exploration, still poor outcome.                     Begin to edit, without usable structural understanding.



 Two-Stage RepoAnchor
 Stage 1 Exploration and Understanding                          INSTRUCTIONS.md                  Stage 2 Problem Solving        Quickly check to verify
                                                                                                                                    the summary
                                                                # 1. Localization
        Task                              Structure             The target files are ..              Read the
      Description                         Summary                                                    Summary
                                                                # 2. Structure                                                    Concentrate on the
                                                                Structure description                                             reasoning of editing
                                                                of the target directory

                                                                # 3. Tips & Unclear                   Task
        Search & Read               Runtime Testing             points ...                          Description
                                                                                                                                   Validate & Refine



Figure 6: Pipeline of R EPOA NCHOR. A normal agent mixes its actions in one trajectory, failing to
retrieve usable information. R EPOA NCHOR separates the process into structure understanding and
problem solving, using an intermediate INSTRUCTIONS.md file to pass repository context forward.

explored before editing increases significantly and the pre-edit exploration stage becomes longer,
indicating that agents need to search and read more broadly before taking action. At the same
time, the transition probability from exploration to exploration increases, while the transition from
exploration to editing decreases. This means that the additional exploration does not effectively
translate into concrete editing decisions and agents frequently remain in the exploration stage.
Together, this phenomenon of exploration drift suggests that while stronger demands on repository
context reasoning trigger broader repository access, code agents still struggle to convert the collected
multi-file information into effective problem solving. As discussed in Appendix B.1, we observe
the same trend on R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb, and finer-grained task-level analyses further confirm the
stability of this conclusion while also showing that different task families induce different types of
behavioral shift.

5.2     Validating the Bottleneck with Structural Hints

The trajectory patterns above sug- Table 3: Effect of structural hints. Providing repository-
gest a possible explanation that al- structure hints substantially improves performance on R E -
though agents explore more files, they PO M IRAGE-Extend.
may still fail to organize them into        Model                Multi Proxy Runtime Const. Avg.
a usable structural understanding for
downstream solving. To test this, we        GPT-5 [22]           25.71 11.11 35.92 36.80 27.60
                                            + Hints              28.57 81.94 60.56 61.81 62.60
conduct a simple structural-hint inter-
vention. Instead of requiring the agent     DeepSeek-V3.2 [23] 20.00 11.80 59.86 57.64 39.80
to infer the perturbed repository struc-    + Hints              24.29 86.11 84.51 85.42 76.80
ture entirely from interaction, we pro-
vide a compact summary describing the perturbation mechanism, the roles of the perturbed files, and
the key structural relations needed for solving the task. These hints approximate the ideal outcome of
repository exploration by directly supplying a structured view of the repository. As shown in Tab. 3,
this intervention substantially improves performance, especially on the perturbation-derived tasks.
This supports our interpretation that the main bottleneck is the failure to transform observed files into
an actionable structural guidance. Full details of structural hints are provided in the Appendix A.7.

5.3     R EPOA NCHOR: Anchoring Code Agents by Prioritizing Repository Exploration

Motivated by the validation above, we introduce R EPOA NCHOR, a initial mitigation method that
separates structure exploration from downstream code construction. As shown in Fig. 6, instead of
interleaving search, reading, editing, and testing within a single trajectory, R EPOA NCHOR organizes
the process into two stages. In the first stage, the agent is instructed to examine the codebase and
write a structured summary into an intermediate Markdown file. This summary is expected to record
the extracted repository context, including potential editing locations, runtime relations, relevant
files, and other salient cross-file dependencies. In the second stage, the agent takes this Markdown
summary together with the task description, and then focuses on implementation, editing, and patch
generation. With this interface to transfer repository understanding between stages, R EPOA NCHOR
anchors downstream editing on a coherent structural view rather than on fragmented observations.


                                                                         8
Figure 7: Performance gains from R EPOA NCHOR. Resolved rates of four representative models
before and after applying R EPOA NCHOR. The consistent gains across task types and models show
that structure-first repository understanding can improve downstream task solving.
Fig. 7 shows that R EPOA NCHOR consistently improves performance across four evaluated models
on all tasks in R EPO M IRAGE-Extend, indicating that structure exploration provides a generally
useful scaffold rather than benefiting only a specific model. Notably, the gains on Multi-File Issue
Resolution are greater than those given the hints, rendering the informativeness of the structure
summary. This suggests that explicit structure anchoring is a promising direction for improving code
agents under complex repository settings demanding context reasoning.

6     Related Work
6.1   Code Agent Benchmarks

Code evaluation has progressed from localized coding to repository-level software engineering. Early
benchmarks target function-level completion [2, 37, 38] and single-file program generation [3, 4,
39], while later work expands to class-level [1], data-science [40], and execution reasoning [41].
Recent benchmarks further evaluate repository-level tasks [8, 42], cross-file reasoning [43], and real-
repository settings [6]. SWE-bench [7, 17] requires agents to fix real issues, and later benchmarks
extend this line with fresher tasks [18], broader ecosystems [5, 44], and harder engineering [15,
16]. Despite these advances, existing benchmarks still primarily measure end-to-end success, so
R EPO M IRAGE weakens superficial cues to make repository context itself the object of evaluation.

6.2   Evaluation with Perturbations

Perturbation-based evaluation tests model reliability under input changes [45], with early robustness
studies showing neural models’ sensitivity to transformed inputs [46, 47]. In NLP, such benchmarks
reveal brittle heuristics behind high accuracy [21, 48, 49]. Similar ideas have been applied to code
generation. Prompt variations can change coding performance [50], while code transformations such
as variable renaming [51] test reliance on surface code patterns rather than program logic [52–54].
Recent work further studies code reasoning [55] and codebase-level understanding [56, 57] under
altered inputs. Different from the study concerning robustness, we take perturbation as a diagnostic
tool to probe the certain capability of repository context reasoning.

7     Conclusion
In this paper, we aim to probe repository context reasoning in code agents from existing end-to-
end benchmarks like SWE-Agent Verified. Using perturbation as a diagnostic tool, we introduce
R EPO M IRAGE, a perturbation-based evaluation containing two stages. First, we develop R EPO M I -
RAGE -Perturb by applying three perturbation strategies to change how task-relevant information is
exposed in the context and find that frontier agents degrade substantially on issue resolution with
perturbed repository context. Based on it, we turn these perturbation-targeted bottlenecks into explicit
tasks and construct R EPO M IRAGE-Extend, where the significant lower performance renders the
deficiency in this capability. Our trajectory analysis further suggests that agents often fail to organize
evidences into actionable structural understanding, which motivates R EPOA NCHOR, a structure-first
scaffolding workflow, to improve the performance and provide a potential solution.


                                                    9
References
 [1] Xueying Du, Mingwei Liu, Kaixin Wang, Hanlin Wang, Junwei Liu, Yixuan Chen, Jiayi Feng,
     Chaofeng Sha, Xin Peng, and Yiling Lou. Evaluating large language models in class-level
     code generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software
     Engineering, pages 1–13, 2024.
 [2] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
     Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
     Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
 [3] Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Ar-
     mando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. Livecodebench: Holistic and contamination
     free evaluation of large language models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07974, 2024.
 [4] Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo,
     Collin Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring coding
     challenge competence with apps. NeurIPS, 2021.
 [5] Daoguang Zan, Zhirong Huang, Wei Liu, Hanwu Chen, Linhao Zhang, Shulin Xin, Lu Chen,
     Qi Liu, Xiaojian Zhong, Aoyan Li, et al. Multi-swe-bench: A multilingual benchmark for issue
     resolving, 2025. arxiv preprint arXiv:2504.02605, 2025.
 [6] Qinyun Wu, Chao Peng, Pengfei Gao, Ruida Hu, Haoyu Gan, Bo Jiang, Jinhe Tang, Zhiwen
     Deng, Zhanming Guan, Cuiyun Gao, et al. Repomastereval: Evaluating code completion
     via real-world repositories. In 2025 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
     Software Engineering (ASE), pages 3672–3683. IEEE, 2025.
 [7] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and
     Karthik R Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In
     The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
 [8] Tianyang Liu, Canwen Xu, and Julian McAuley. Repobench: Benchmarking repository-
     level code auto-completion systems. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2023.
 [9] Ahmed Fawzy, Amjed Tahir, and Kelly Blincoe. Vibe coding in practice: Motivations, chal-
     lenges, and a future outlook – a grey literature review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00328,
     2025.
[10] HanXiang Xu, ShenAo Wang, Ningke Li, Kailong Wang, Yanjie Zhao, Kai Chen, Ting Yu,
     Yang Liu, and HaoYu Wang. Large language models for cyber security: A systematic literature
     review. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 2024.
[11] Kevin Zheyuan Cui, Mert Demirer, Sonia Jaffe, Leon Musolff, Sida Peng, and Tobias Salz.
     The effects of generative ai on high-skilled work: Evidence from three field experiments with
     software developers. Management Science, 2026.
[12] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. Autocoderover: Au-
     tonomous program improvement. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International
     Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, pages 1592–1604, 2024.
[13] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. Agentless: Demystifying
     llm-based software engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01489, 2024.
[14] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik
     Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software
     engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:50528–50652, 2024.
[15] Muhammad Shihab Rashid, Christian Bock, Yuan Zhuang, Alexander Buchholz, Tim Esler,
     Simon Valentin, Luca Franceschi, Martin Wistuba, Prabhu Teja Sivaprasad, Woo Jung Kim,
     et al. Swe-polybench: A multi-language benchmark for repository level evaluation of coding
     agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08703, 2025.


                                               10
[16] Xiang Deng, Jeff Da, Edwin Pan, Yannis Yiming He, Charles Ide, Kanak Garg, Niklas Lauffer,
     Andrew Park, Nitin Pasari, Chetan Rane, et al. Swe-bench pro: Can ai agents solve long-horizon
     software engineering tasks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.16941, 2025.
[17] Neil Chowdhury, James Aung, Chan Jun Shern, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, Giulio Starace,
     Evan Mays, Rachel Dias, Marwan Aljubeh, Mia Glaese, Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Leyton
     Ho, Tejal Patwardhan, Kevin Liu, and Aleksander Madry. Introducing SWE-bench verified,
     2024. URL https://openai.com/index/introducing-swe-bench-verified/.
[18] Linghao Zhang, Shilin He, Chaoyun Zhang, Yu Kang, Bowen Li, Chengxing Xie, Junhao Wang,
     Maoquan Wang, Yufan Huang, Shengyu Fu, Elsie Nallipogu, Qingwei Lin, Yingnong Dang, Sar-
     avan Rajmohan, and Dongmei Zhang. Swe-bench goes live! arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23419,
     2025.
[19] John Yang, Kilian Lieret, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kabir Khandpur, Yanzhe Zhang,
     Binyuan Hui, Ofir Press, Ludwig Schmidt, and Diyi Yang. Swe-smith: Scaling data for software
     engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21798, 2025.
[20] Yinpeng Dong, Fangzhou Liao, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Xiaolin Hu, and Jianguo
     Li. Boosting adversarial attacks with momentum. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
     computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 9185–9193, 2018.
[21] R Thomas McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing
     syntactic heuristics in natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 57th annual meeting of
     the association for computational linguistics, pages 3428–3448, 2019.
[22] Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan
     McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, et al. Openai gpt-5 system card. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2601.03267, 2025.
[23] Aixin Liu, Aoxue Mei, Bangcai Lin, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bingzheng Xu, Bochao Wu,
     Bowei Zhang, Chaofan Lin, Chen Dong, et al. Deepseek-v3. 2: Pushing the frontier of open
     large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02556, 2025.
[24] Mahir Labib Dihan, Faria Binta Awal, and Md Ishrak Ahsan. Patchrecall: Patch-driven retrieval
     for automated program repair. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.10481, 2026.
[25] Shanchao Liang, Spandan Garg, and Roshanak Zilouchian Moghaddam. The swe-bench illusion:
     When state-of-the-art llms remember instead of reason. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12286, 2025.
[26] Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and
     Aleksander Madry. Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features. Advances in neural
     information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[27] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Beyond accuracy:
     Behavioral testing of nlp models with checklist. In Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of
     the association for computational linguistics, pages 4902–4912, 2020.
[28] OpenAI. Introducing GPT-4.1 in the api, April 2025. URL https://openai.com/index/
     gpt-4-1/.
[29] Google. Gemini-3.1-Pro model card, February 2025. URL https://deepmind.google/
     models/model-cards/gemini-3-1-pro/.
[30] Anthropic. Claude system card, 2026. URL https://www.anthropic.com/system-cards.
[31] Google. MiniMax-M2.7 model card, March 2026. URL https://www.minimax.io/models/
     text/m27.
[32] Qwen Team.     Qwen3-coder-next technical report. Technical report, February
     2026. URL https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen3-Coder/blob/main/qwen3_coder_
     next_tech_report.pdf.
[33] Qwen Team. Qwen3.6-35B-A3B: Agentic coding power, now open to all, April 2026. URL
     https://qwen.ai/blog?id=qwen3.6-35b-a3b.


                                                 11
[34] Islem Bouzenia and Michael Pradel. Understanding software engineering agents: A study of
     thought-action-result trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18824, 2025.
[35] Ira Ceka, Saurabh Pujar, Shyam Ramji, Luca Buratti, Gail Kaiser, and Baishakhi Ray. Under-
     standing software engineering agents through the lens of traceability: An empirical study. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2506.08311, 2025.
[36] Myeongsoo Kim, Dingmin Wang, Siwei Cui, Farima Farmahinifarahani, Shweta Garg,
     Baishakhi Ray, Terry Yue Zhuo, Rajdeep Mukherjee, and Varun Kumar. Trajeval: Decomposing
     code agent trajectories for fine-grained diagnosis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.24631, 2026.
[37] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David
     Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large
     language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.
[38] Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Lingming Zhang. Is your code generated
     by chatgpt really correct? rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation.
     Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:21558–21572, 2023.
[39] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond,
     Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code
     generation with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.
[40] Yuhang Lai, Chengxi Li, Yiming Wang, Tianyi Zhang, Ruiqi Zhong, Luke Zettlemoyer, Wen-
     tau Yih, Daniel Fried, Sida Wang, and Tao Yu. Ds-1000: A natural and reliable benchmark
     for data science code generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
     18319–18345. PMLR, 2023.
[41] Alex Gu, Baptiste Rozière, Hugh Leather, Armando Solar-Lezama, Gabriel Synnaeve, and
     Sida I Wang. Cruxeval: A benchmark for code reasoning, understanding and execution. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2401.03065, 2024.
[42] Fengji Zhang, Bei Chen, Yue Zhang, Jin Liu, Daoguang Zan, Yi Mao, Jian-Guang Lou, and
     Weizhu Chen. Repocoder: Repository-level code completion through iterative retrieval and
     generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12570, 2023.
[43] Yangruibo Ding, Zijian Wang, Wasi Ahmad, Hantian Ding, Ming Tan, Nihal Jain, Murali Kr-
     ishna Ramanathan, Ramesh Nallapati, Parminder Bhatia, Dan Roth, et al. Crosscodeeval:
     A diverse and multilingual benchmark for cross-file code completion. Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 36:46701–46723, 2023.
[44] Lilin Wang, Lucas Ramalho, Alan Celestino, Phuc Anthony Pham, Yu Liu, Umang Kumar
     Sinha, Andres Portillo, Onassis Osunwa, and Gabriel Maduekwe. Swe-bench++: A framework
     for the scalable generation of software engineering benchmarks from open-source repositories.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.17419, 2025.
[45] Rohan Taori, Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Nicholas Carlini, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig
     Schmidt. Measuring robustness to natural distribution shifts in image classification. Advances
     in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:18583–18599, 2020.
[46] Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfel-
     low, and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199,
     2013.
[47] Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversar-
     ial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
[48] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Beyond accuracy:
     Behavioral testing of nlp models with checklist. In Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of
     the association for computational linguistics, pages 4902–4912, 2020.
[49] Matt Gardner, Yoav Artzi, Victoria Basmov, Jonathan Berant, Ben Bogin, Sihao Chen, Pradeep
     Dasigi, Dheeru Dua, Yanai Elazar, Ananth Gottumukkala, et al. Evaluating models’ local deci-
     sion boundaries via contrast sets. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
     EMNLP 2020, pages 1307–1323, 2020.


                                                 12
[50] Shiqi Wang, Zheng Li, Haifeng Qian, Chenghao Yang, Zijian Wang, Mingyue Shang, Varun
     Kumar, Samson Tan, Baishakhi Ray, Parminder Bhatia, et al. Recode: Robustness evaluation
     of code generation models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
     Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 13818–13843, 2023.
[51] Jin Wen, Qiang Hu, Yuejun Guo, Maxime Cordy, and Yves Le Traon. Variable renaming-based
     adversarial test generation for code model: Benchmark and enhancement. ACM Transactions
     on Software Engineering and Methodology, 35(1):1–28, 2025.
[52] Zongjie Li, Chaozheng Wang, Zhibo Liu, Haoxuan Wang, Dong Chen, Shuai Wang, and
     Cuiyun Gao. Cctest: Testing and repairing code completion systems. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th
     International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pages 1238–1250. IEEE, 2023.
[53] CheolWon Na, YunSeok Choi, and Jee-Hyong Lee. Dip: Dead code insertion based black-box
     attack for programming language model. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
     Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7777–7791, 2023.
[54] Pedro Orvalho and Marta Kwiatkowska. Are large language models robust in understanding
     code against semantics-preserving mutations? arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10443, 2025.
[55] Nickil Maveli, Antonio Vergari, and Shay B Cohen. What can large language models capture
     about code functional equivalence? In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
     NAACL 2025, pages 6865–6903, 2025.
[56] Man Ho Lam, Chaozheng Wang, Jen-tse Huang, and Michael R. Lyu. Codecrash: Stress testing
     llm reasoning under structural and semantic perturbations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14119,
     2025.
[57] Hyunji Lee, Minseon Kim, Chinmay Singh, Matheus Pereira, Atharv Sonwane, Isadora White,
     Elias Stengel-Eskin, Mohit Bansal, Zhengyan Shi, Alessandro Sordoni, et al. Gistify! codebase-
     level understanding via runtime execution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.26790, 2025.
[58] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu,
     Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large lan-
     guage model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium
     on Operating Systems Principles, 2023.




                                                 13
A     Experimental Details
A.1   Compute Resources

All experiments were executed in Docker-based SWE-Bench repository environments on Ubuntu
20.04.6 LTS servers. The main execution server was equipped with two AMD EPYC 7542 32-core
processors, approximately 1 TiB RAM, and 6.8 TB storage, using Docker 27.1.1. Most proprietary
models were accessed through their commercial APIs, so no local GPU inference was required for
these models. For open-weight models, Qwen3-Coder-Next and Qwen3.6-35B-A3B were deployed
locally using vLLM [58] on four NVIDIA A800-SXM4-80GB GPUs.

A.2   Agent Framework and Execution Protocol

To ensure fair comparison across models, we use the same agent framework and execution protocol
for all experiments. Each evaluated model is instantiated as the backbone of mini-swe-agent [14]
and runs under the standard bash-only setting. The agent interacts with the repository through shell
commands. We keep the agent framework, prompt format, execution environment, and stopping
criteria fixed across all models and task settings. The only varying component is the backbone
language model.
For each instance, the agent is initialized in the corresponding repository environment using docker
images. The input includes the task instruction and the current repository state. The agent proceeds
until it submits a final answer, reaches the maximum step budget of 250, which is the same as
the standard bash-only setting. Unless otherwise specified, we use default temperature, top-p, and
maximum generation length.

A.3   Models

We evaluate eight frontier language models as agent backbones: GPT-4.1, GPT-5, DeepSeek-V3.2,
Gemini-3.1-Pro, Claude-Sonnet-4.6, MiniMax-M2.7, Qwen3-Coder-Next, and Qwen3.6-35B-A3B.
These models are selected to cover major model families from different providers, including both
proprietary and open-weight systems. For each family, we choose either the latest available model
or a widely used stable version at the time of our experiments. This selection is intended to provide
broad and representative coverage of current code-agent backbones, rather than focusing on a single
model provider or model type.

A.4   Perturbation Construction and Functionality Preservation

We implement repository perturbations mainly with LibCST. Instead of relying on unstable regular-
expression rewriting, we transform source files use the syntax-tree. This allows us to preserve the
original code structure more reliably and to ensure that the extracted dependency paths, externalized
values and other expected structures follow our intended perturbation design. We validate each
perturbed instance from two perspectives, functionality preservation and solvability. For functionality
preservation, after applying R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb to the original repository, we run the official
SWE-Bench PASS_TO_PASS test scripts to ensure that existing correct behaviors are not broken by
our transformations. For solvability, we first apply the gold patch to the original repository, then apply
the same perturbations, and finally run the official FAIL_TO_PASS test scripts. This verifies that the
perturbed instance remains solvable under the gold solution and that the original task are preserved.
For Dependency-path indirection, we only construct proxy chains for absolute imports whose
targets are independent of the repository-internal file layout. For example, modules such as json
and re can be safely rerouted because they do not depend on relative paths inside the benchmark
repository. This avoids introducing ambiguity or import errors caused by fragile relative-import
semantics. For each imported module, the generated proxy-chain path is uniquely determined, so the
dependency routing is deterministic and reproducible.
For Runtime-target masking, we rename the original target file and create a package-level wrapper
using the original target-file name. This preserves the original import path, so other modules in the
repository can still reference the target through the same package name after perturbation. It also
keeps the task partially solvability for issues that can only be traced through the package name. An
agent may still locate the wrapper, but must further inspect its loading logic to identify the actual


                                                   14
runtime implementation file. Instead of relying on direct relative imports, the wrapper dynamically
loads the renamed implementation file from its explicit file path while preserving the intended package
name. This avoids edge cases and ensures that the runtime binding remains consistent after the
perturbation. Meanwhile, the generated fake files are placed near the real runtime file, but they are
never imported or executed by the program. They therefore do not affect repository functionality.
For Local-value externalization, we extract only local constant values from the target file. When
more than three constants are extracted, we group every three values into one external JSON file,
increasing the number of cross-file dependencies. The target file reads all related JSON files, merges
them into a single dictionary, and replaces the original values with corresponding dictionary-key
references. This transformation preserves the logic while moving value definitions outside the file.
Overall, the three perturbations mainly modify files around the target file and the relations between
the target file and external resources. They only introduce little change to the internal control flow
and semantic logic of the original code. This design allows R EPO M IRAGE to focus on repository
context reasoning, rather than evaluating robustness to code obfuscation.

A.5   Task Construction and Validation

For R EPO M IRAGE-Extend, we also construct tasks under two perspectives, solvability and verifi-
ability. A valid task should have at least one feasible solution, and the submitted solution should
be automatically checkable by deterministic scripts. All R EPO M IRAGE tasks are built on top of
R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb instances. That is, each task is constructed in a repository where all three
perturbations have already been applied. Agents still interact with the repository through the standard
mini-swe-agent command-line interface.
Before creating each derived task, we first run the corresponding checker on R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb
repository before erasing proxy files, modifying wrappers, or removing dependency keys. The
checker must pass at this stage, which ensures that the task has at least one known feasible solution.
During evaluation, the task prompt specifies the exact set of files that the agent is allowed to modify.
The checker also verifies that no irrelevant files are changed, preventing agents from bypassing the
intended task objective through unrelated edits.
For Proxy Chain Completion, we erase proxy files located in the middle of dependency-routing
paths. The erased proxy files are selected so that their upstream and downstream nodes remain intact,
allowing the missing forwarding logic to be inferred from surrounding files. We also select erased
proxy files from different module-routing paths to avoid reducing the task to repeated copying. Ideally,
the agent should first locate the erased proxy files, trace which lower-level proxy files import them,
follow the chain to the runtime target file, infer which real module each chain is intended to expose,
and then restore the erased forwarding files accordingly. For validation, the agent is only allowed to
modify the erased proxy files. After applying the agent patch, the checker imports the dependency
aliases exposed from the target file and compares the resolved modules with the expected original
modules. In this way, we evaluate whether the dependency path has been functionally restored,
without requiring the agent to reproduce the exact original proxy implementation.
For Runtime Target Identification, the task is constructed by removing the wrapper reference to the
real runtime file. The main challenge is to distinguish the actual implementation file from nearby
fake files. These fake files are generated through small but behaviorally meaningful changes, such
as boolean-condition reversal, shuffled import aliases, or mismatched dependency-key usage. Such
files remain superficially similar to the real target file, but can be distinguished by reasoning about
repository context and by designing targeted runtime probes. Ideally, the agent should identify the
wrapper, collect the candidate implementation files, understand their roles in the local directory, and
determine which file should be loaded by the wrapper. For validation, the agent is only allowed to
modify the wrapper __init__.py. The checker then verifies whether the wrapper correctly resolves
to the real runtime implementation file.
For Missing Constant Recovery, we erase selected keys in external dependency JSON files while
keeping their values unchanged. Ideally, the agent should first locate the JSON files with missing
keys, inspect the target file that loads and merges these JSON resources, identify where the missing
keys are referenced, and infer the role of each missing value from the surrounding code context, such
as loop control, index offsets, or special arithmetic constants. The agent then matches the erased
keys with the remaining values. For validation, the agent is only allowed to modify the JSON files


                                                  15
containing erased keys. The checker loads all related JSON files and merges them into a dictionary
following the same logic as the target file, then verifies whether the reconstructed key-value relations
are correct. This task does not require a unique file-level assignment: if equivalent values appear in
different JSON files and are merged into the same final dictionary, the agent only needs to recover the
correct key-value mapping after merging.
For Multi-File Issue Resolution, the tasks are selected from SWE-Bench Verified instances whose
gold patches modify multiple files. Since these tasks are still issue-resolution tasks on perturbed
SWE-Bench repositories, their solvability and validation follow the original SWE-Bench protocol.
The agent must submit a patch that passes the official evaluation tests.
Overall, R EPO M IRAGE-Extend converts the structural bottlenecks introduced by R EPO M IRAGE-
Perturb into solvable and automatically verifiable tasks. These tasks can be generated through
rule-based procedures and checked with deterministic scripts. By making the perturbed repository
relations explicit task objectives, R EPO M IRAGE-Extend amplifies the evaluation signal for repository
context reasoning.

A.6   File Access and Trajectory Metrics

We record the full shell-command trajectory generated by mini-swe-agent for each run. To analyze
agent behavior, we first classify each command into four operation types: edit, test, search, and
read. The classification is implemented by a rule-based matcher over shell commands. Editing
commands include patch application, in-place rewriting, file creation, file deletion, and script-based
file writes. Testing commands include unit-test execution, task-specific checkers, compilation checks,
and runtime validation commands. Search commands include repository-level locating operations
such as rg, grep, find, ls, and directory traversal. Read commands include commands that inspect
file contents or metadata, such as cat, sed -n, head, tail, and script-based file reads.
For transition analysis, we merge search and read into a single explore state, because both correspond
to gathering repository information before or during problem solving. This produces a three-state
trajectory and we compute the transition probability use the formula in Section 5.1. We compute
transition matrices for each trajectory and aggregate them across instances for each model and task
setting. When comparing two settings, we report the difference in transition probabilities, denoted as
∆pa→b .
We also compute file-access statistics from the same trajectories. A repository file is counted as
accessed only when its contents are explicitly exposed to the agent, mainly through read commands
or content-producing search commands. We normalize file paths and deduplicate repeated accesses
to the same file within one trajectory. Directory listing commands, such as ls and find, are treated
as exploration actions, but files merely listed by these commands are not counted as accessed unless
their contents are later inspected. Temporary files, generated logs, patch files, virtual-environment
files, and version-control metadata are excluded from the file-access count. Finally, we measure the
exploration stage before editing. The exploration-stage length is defined as the share of steps before
the first edit operation. These metrics indicate whether agents can convert repository exploration into
concrete editing decisions, or instead remain in repeated exploration under stronger repository-context
demands.

A.7   Structural Hint Prompts

To diagnose whether agents fail because they cannot access repository information or because they
cannot organize it into a useful structural understanding, we additionally evaluate a hint-based setting.
In this setting, we prepend a structural hint prompt to the original task instruction. The hint describes
the general perturbation mechanisms used in R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb, including renamed runtime
files, decoy files, proxy import chains, external dependency JSON files, and wrapper folders. An
example prompt is shown in Fig. 8.
The structural hints do not reveal the concrete solution of an instance. They do not specify which file
should be edited, which proxy file should be restored, which candidate file is the real runtime target,
or which missing key should be filled. Instead, they only describe the repository-level structural facts
that are shared across perturbed instances. Therefore, the agent still needs to inspect the repository,
trace file relations, and produce the final solution by itself.


                                                  16
  # Structural Hint Prompt

  The task is {Original Problem Statement}.

  # Repository Structure

  The repository you are working on has been intentionally perturbed. Before solving the task, you
  should understand the following structural facts.

  1. Renamed Files: Some files that contain the real runtime logic are renamed, we call them "real
  runtime files" below.
  2. Decoy Files: For each renamed real file, here are also distracting files. These files are decoy only,
  may be very similar to the real file.
  3. Proxy Files: Files whose names start with `proxy_` are proxy import files. Together, they form a
  four-layer import graph. The real runtime files do not directly import the final Python library; instead,
  it reaches that library through this proxy chain.
  4. JSON Files: Files whose names start with `dependency_` are external dependency files. Some
  constants originally belonging to the real runtime files have been extracted into these dependency
  files, and the real runtime files reads those values from them.
  5. Wrapper Folder: The real runtime files are not directly imported by the rest of the repository
  under its own filename. Instead, at the same directory level, there is a folder whose name is the
  original runtime name of that code unit. Inside that folder, an `__init__.py` file re-exports or imports
  the original file. In other words, the repository wraps some files inside a package layer, so the
  effective runtime entry is the package name, not the raw file name itself. When tracing usage, you
  should keep in mind that other files may import the package, which then forwards to the original file.


                             Figure 8: Prompt for repository structural hints.



We use the same hint template for all models under the corresponding task setting. The only instance-
specific part is the original problem statement, which is inserted into the prompt. This design makes
the hint experiment a controlled diagnostic intervention. It approximates the structural understanding
that an ideal exploration process should recover, while keeping the downstream reasoning and editing
process unchanged.


A.8   R EPOA NCHOR Prompts

RepoAnchor uses a two-stage prompting strategy to separate repository-structure exploration from
downstream task solving. In the first stage, the agent works for repository localization and structure-
understanding. As shown in Fig. 9, this agent is explicitly instructed not to complete the task or edit
source code. Instead, it must identify the task-relevant directory, explore the local file structure, infer
file roles and dependency relations, and write the resulting structural summary into INSTRUCTION.md.
The exploration prompt emphasizes runtime evidence rather than surface-level cues. The agent
is encouraged to inspect files, trace import or loading relations, and use lightweight validation
commands when necessary. The generated INSTRUCTION.md follows a fixed structure, including the
files inspected, their roles, relationships between files, runtime evidence, and remaining uncertainties.
This intermediate document serves as the structural anchor passed to the second-stage agent.
In the second stage, the agent also uses an additional guide to read and utilize the generated
INSTRUCTION.md, as shown in Fig. 10. The prompt reminds the agent that the summary contains
the localized target directory, relevant files, and structural relations produced by the exploration-stage
agent. It also allows the agent to verify uncertain points in the summary rather than blindly following
it. Thus, R EPOA NCHOR separates repository exploration from code construction: the first stage
produces an explicit structural anchor, and the second stage uses it to guide editing, testing, and
submission.


                                                     17
    # RepoAnchor Exploration Stage Prompt

    {Original mini-swe-agent instruction prompt}

    You are a repository localization and structure understanding agent.

    Your job is not to complete the task.
    Your goal is to:
    1. Locate the directory or directories most relevant to the task.
    2. Thoroughly explore and understand the structure inside that area.
    3. Infer relative file roles.
    4. Write a structured summary into /testbed/INSTRUCTION.md inside the target directory.
    5. Stop after finishing /testbed/INSTRUCTION.md.

    A second agent will later perform editing based on your output.

    ## Guide

    1. First make a reasonable guess about the aiming directory based on the task description and
    repository layout. The aiming may be multiple.
    2. Enter the guessed aiming directory and list the local files and subdirectories.
    3. Read the files that you think are relevant to the task or necessary for understanding the structure.
    4. Read the files related to the candidate files carefully.
    5. Understanding the structure and logic, you should use small validation testing commands that
    follows the same loading or resolution logic as the code whenever possible. Your final answer must
    based on runtime evidence, do not only trust the searching and reading, do not trust the filename or the
    other surface patterns. You should explore deeply into the actual structure, beyond surface cues.

    ## Strict Structure of INSTRUCTION.md

    1. The directories and all files you have read, and your runtime evidence
    - filename1: XXX; which file uses it: XXX; which file is used by it: XXX; description: XXX.
    - filename2: XXX; which file uses it: XXX; which file is used by it: XXX; description: XXX.
                                                         ......
    2. The detailed struture of the directory. The relationships between files. And your runtime evidence.
                                                         ......
    3. Other unclear points
                   (Do not mention any unclear points that is obviously irrelative to the task)


                        Figure 9: Prompt for exploration stage of R EPOA NCHOR.


B     Additional Analysis and Examples

B.1     Behavior Shifts on R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb

 Fig. 11 shows the behavior shifts on R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb, where agents still solve the original
issue-resolution task but under perturbed repository structures. The results show a pattern consistent
with the trajectory changes observed on R EPO M IRAGE-Extend. After perturbation, both GPT-5
and DeepSeek-V3.2 inspect more files and spend a larger proportion of their trajectories before
the first edit operation, indicating that the perturbations indeed increase the need for repository
exploration. At the transition level, the probability of exploration-to-exploration transitions increases,
while the probability of exploration-to-edit transitions decreases. This suggests that even when the
task objective remains unchanged, repository-level perturbations make agents more likely to stay in
repeated exploration rather than turning gathered information into concrete edits. These results further
support the main paper’s observation that stronger repository-context demands induce exploration
drift.


                                                      18
  # RepoAnchor Problem Solving Stage Prompt

  {Original mini-swe-agent instruction prompt}

  ## Guide

  1. Your colleague has written an INSTRUCTION.md in the /teatbed directory, detailing the
  location of the task target directory and files, the structure of task related files in the target directory.
  2. You should read and utilize this document reasonably. The purpose of this document is to reduce the
  time required for you to understand the directory structure.
  3. You can also focus on any unclear points in the document, since the content here may be wrong and
  it may be an important point.


                   Figure 10: Prompt for problem solving stage of R EPOA NCHOR.




                                                                    ***️
                     ***️               ***️      ***️                        ***️               ***️      ***️
           ***️




Figure 11: Behavior shifts under R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb. ∆ measures the change from SWE-
Bench Verified to R EPO M IRAGE-Perturb. Files Inspected counts distinct opened files; Explore Stage
                                                                                            ¯ and ∆0.5
Proportion is the pre-edit step ratio; transition metrics report action-transition changes. ∆
denote the mean and median, respectively.


B.2   Task-Level Transition Comparison

 Fig. 12 provides task-level transition heatmaps for GPT-5 on R EPO M IRAGE-Extend. We observe
a consistent pattern across all four tasks: the transition from exploration to exploration increases,
while the transition from exploration to editing decreases. This consistent pattern further supports
the observation in the main paper that agents tend to remain in repeated exploration under stronger
repository-context demands, rather than converting the gathered information into concrete editing
actions.
At the same time, the heatmaps also reveal task-specific differences. In Multi-File Issue Resolution,
the increase from testing back to exploration suggests that failed tests often expose missing related
files, pushing the agent to search for additional edit locations. In Proxy Chain Completion, the
strong exploration persistence reflects the need to trace dependency paths across several proxy files
before making a local restoration. In Runtime Target Identification, the larger testing-related
transitions suggest that agents often rely on runtime probes to distinguish the real target file from
decoys. In Missing Constant Recovery, the sharp shift from testing back to exploration indicates
that failed validation frequently forces the agent to revisit the relation between JSON values and their
usage contexts. These differences show that the four tasks impose distinct forms of repository-context
reasoning, while sharing the same general exploration bottleneck.

B.3   Example of R EPOA NCHOR Instruction Summary

 Fig. 13 shows an example of the intermediate INSTRUCTIONS.md generated by R EPOA NCHOR on the
instance django__django-14631 with GPT-5. In the exploration stage, R EPOA NCHOR identifies
the wrapper modules, the renamed runtime files, and their usage relationships. For example, it records
that django/forms/__init__.py dynamically loads the perturbed implementation file for the form


                                                         19
Figure 12: Task-level transition probability differences. Each heatmap corresponds to one R E -
PO M IRAGE -Extend task for GPT-5. Rows denote the current action state, columns denote the next
action state, and each cell reports the transition-probability difference between the R EPO M IRAGE-
Extend setting and SWE-Bench setting. Red cells indicate positive shifts, blue cells indicate negative
shifts, and the annotated values give the exact differences.


system, while django/forms/boundfield/__init__.py loads the perturbed implementation file
for BoundField. It also summarizes the core relation between Field.get_bound_field() and
BoundField, which is directly relevant to the issue.
This example illustrates how R EPOA NCHOR converts scattered repository observations into an
explicit structural summary. Instead of forcing the problem-solving agent to rediscover wrappers,
renamed files, and cross-file relations from scratch, the generated INSTRUCTION.md provides a
compact anchor for later editing and validation.


C     Further Discussions

C.1   Limitations

R EPO M IRAGE still has several limitations. First, due to the substantial engineering complexity
required by repository-level perturbations, our current construction is limited to Python repositories,
where syntax-tree transformation and runtime validation are relatively tractable. Extending R EPO M I -
RAGE to languages with more complex build systems or stricter compilation constraints remains
future work. Second, our tasks still follow a relatively classical problem-solving format, where agents
are asked to modify a repository to satisfy a given objective. Future evaluations could further explore
more diverse software-engineering scenarios, such as code review, repository-level test generation,
refactoring, and maintenance-oriented tasks.

C.2   Broader Impacts

R EPO M IRAGE can have positive impacts by helping researchers and practitioners better evaluate the
reliability of code agents, reducing over-reliance on benchmark scores that may not reflect genuine
repository context reasoning. At the same time, stronger repository-aware agents may increase the
capability of automated code modification systems, which could be misused for harmful code changes
or over-trusted in high-stakes software maintenance. We therefore encourage using R EPO M IRAGE as
a diagnostic benchmark together with controlled deployment, human review, and repository-level
validation safeguards.


D     Release Format and Reproducibility

We provide an anonymized open-source repository at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
RepoMirage. R EPO M IRAGE is released as an executable benchmark-generation and evaluation
toolkit rather than a separately hosted static dataset. We do not redistribute modified copies of SWE-
Bench repositories or Docker images. Instead, our code operates on existing SWE-Bench-compatible
Docker environments and reconstructs perturbed repositories and derived task environments through
documented scripts.


                                                  20
  # Issue (For ease of presentation, it has been simplified)
  Refactor BaseForm._clean_fields() and changed_data to access values via BoundField (e.g.,
  adding BoundField._did_change()) for consistency and to reduce duplicate code paths.

  # Target files
  django/forms/froms.py (Origin) → django/forms/flux_cinder_hh.py (Perturbed)
  django/forms/boundfield.py (Origin) → django/forms/matrix_echo_glyph_mk46.py (Perturbed)


  # INSTRUCTIONS.md from exploration stage

  ## 1. Files read and runtime evidence (usage relationships)

  - django/forms/forms/__init__.py
       Shadow loader for the actual Form implementation.
       Which file is used by it: Dynamically loads and exposes django/forms/flux_cinder_hh.py.
       Runtime evidence: Builds _impl_path = .../flux_cinder_hh.py, then
       spec_from_file_location and exec_module(_module), updates ... to the resolved path.
  - django/forms/flux_cinder_hh.py
  Implementation of the Form system (DeclarativeFieldsMetaclass, BaseForm, Form).
                                                       ......
  - django/forms/boundfield/__init__.py
  Shadow loader for the BoundField implementation.
                                                       ......
  - Which file is used by it: Dynamically loads and exposes django/forms/matrix_echo_glyph_mk46.py.
                                                       ......
  - django/forms/matrix_echo_glyph_mk46.py
    Implementation of BoundField and BoundWidget.
                                                       ......

  ## 2. Detailed structure and relationships (with evidence)
                                                     ......
  - Core classes flow
  - BoundField and Field interaction:
     - fields.py imports BoundField and defines Field.get_bound_field() returning a
  BoundField(form, self, field_name).
                                                     ......

  ## 3. Other unclear points
  - The code uses several obfuscated/proxy modules (e.g., `from proxy_4n108 import dep_ko4r22 as _lll_reit` in
  flux_cinder_hh.py) to provide utilities like deepcopy or constants ......
  - Attempting to import the full `django.forms` package in this environment fails due to missing external
  dependencies ......



              Figure 13: An example of INSTRUCTION.md generated by R EPOA NCHOR




The released code contains two main components. RepoMirage_Perturb/ builds R EPO M IRAGE-
Perturb repository images, applies repository-level perturbations, and exports per-instance metadata.
RepoMirage_Extend/ uses this metadata to assign instances to task families, generate R EPO M I -
RAGE -Extend task images, and provide deterministic validation scripts for agent submissions. The
repository also includes optional utilities for exporting generated task lists into local Hugging Face-
style datasets for mini-swe-agent-style runners.
Users can reproduce the benchmark by first preparing the original SWE-Bench Verified environments,
then running the released perturbation and task-construction workflows. This release format keeps
the source benchmark assets under their original distribution channels while making our perturbation
procedures, task-generation rules, checkers, and evaluation logic reproducible. Since R EPO M IRAGE
does not introduce a separately hosted static dataset, we provide executable code and references to
the SWE-Bench Verified resources instead of a dataset metadata file.


                                                        21
E    The Use of Large Language Models
We used large language models (LLMs) only to assist with polishing the writing of this paper,
including grammar checking and rephrasing for clarity. No LLM was used to generate research ideas,
design experiments, conduct analysis, produce results, or write substantive technical content. All
technical contributions, analyses, and results are the authors’ own work.




                                               22
