                                        Insights Generator: Systematic
                                        Corpus-Level Trace Diagnostics for LLM
                                        Agents
                                        Akshay Manglik∗ , Apaar Shanker, Kaustubh Deshpande† , Jason Qin, Yash Maurya, Veronica




arXiv:2605.21347v3 [cs.AI] 4 Jun 2026
                                        Chatrath, Vijay S. Kalmath, Levi Lentz, Yuan (Emily) Xue
                                        Scale AI

                                        research@scale.com




                                          Abstract
                                          Diagnosing failures in LLM agents remains largely manual. Practitioners inspect a small subset
                                          of execution traces, form ad-hoc hypotheses, and iterate. This process misses patterns that only
                                          emerge across trace populations and does not scale to production corpora where individual traces
                                          span tens of thousands of tokens. We formalize the problem of corpus-level trace diagnostics.
                                          Given a corpus of execution traces, the goal is to produce grounded natural-language insights that
                                          characterize systematic behavioral patterns across trace groups, each linked to supporting evidence.
                                          We present the Insights Generator (IG), a multi-agent system that answers diagnostic questions by
                                          proposing and testing hypotheses across the trace corpus to produce an evidence-backed insights
                                          report. We evaluate IG across qualitative and objective dimensions, spanning rubric-based report
                                          assessment and downstream performance improvements achieved by implementing IG insights.
                                          Human experts using IG reports improve scaffold performance by 30.4 pp over the unmodified
                                          baseline scaffold, and coding agents leveraging IG-derived insights show consistent and stable
                                          gains. Across benchmarks, IG’s scout-investigator architecture produces findings comparable in
                                          detection coverage to competing approaches, while domain experts rated IG reports as leading
                                          depth and evidence quality.




                                        1 Introduction
                                        Agentic systems produce long execution traces of reasoning steps, tool calls, and environment interac-
                                        tions. Debugging is typically driven by evaluation results that flag failed runs; practitioners then inspect
                                        a small subset of traces and form hypotheses [7, 15]. Because evaluations are defined over final task
                                        outcomes, they yield aggregate signals but do not reveal intermediate behaviors. Additionally, they do
                                            † Work conducted while at Scale AI.
                                            ∗ Corresponding author: akshay.manglik@scale.com



                                                                                               1
                                                                                                Scale AI Research



not surface patterns across the broader space of scenarios. Many errors, inefficiencies, and performance
differences consequently remain difficult to identify [7, 11]. This is especially true for failures localized to
specific subsets of inputs, task types, or execution contexts that are not individually prominent enough
to noticeably shift aggregate metrics. Such patterns are invisible to standard evaluation unless the
practitioner already knows to look for them.
Many of these signals emerge only at the cohort level. Systematic differences in tool usage, re-
curring reasoning structures, and patterns correlated with strong or weak performance become
visible only when traces are analyzed collectively. Cohort comparison is a particularly powerful
form of this analysis: examining groups of traces that vary along a single controlled axis, such
as model variant, prompt version, or task category, isolates the behavioral differences attributable
to that axis and provides a stronger targeted diagnostic signal than aggregate metrics alone. Be-
yond diagnosis of known failure modes, there is a distinct need for open-ended discovery. Silent
failures, behavioral trends that reduce reliability without triggering explicit error signals, are a
key example; they rarely appear in evaluation dashboards and require population-level analy-
sis to detect. We refer to such findings as trace insights: grounded natural-language statements
characterizing salient patterns across groups of traces, each supported by trace-level evidence.
For example, a representative IG insight might read: 84% of incorrect Python-using traces
exhibit ‘silent computation failures’: the code executes without errors but implements
the wrong mathematical model. Cross-checking fails to catch these because it verifies
internal consistency within the wrong framework rather than challenging the framework
itself. Observed in 94/112 incorrect Python-using traces (37.6% of all traces); 0/19
cross-checking traces detected the modeling error.
Surfacing trace insights at corpus scale presents two challenges. Scale and Complexity: Trace cor-
pora routinely exceed any single model context window. Individual traces interleave thousands of
tokens of reasoning, tool calls, and environment state. The patterns of interest, i.e. the silent failures,
systematic inefficiencies, behavioral differences between cohorts are semantic and not reducible to
keyword matching or predefined taxonomies [3, 13]. Prior work addresses fragments of this problem
through single-trajectory debugging [2, 7, 10, 27], classification under fixed failure taxonomies [4, 11, 24],
outcome-based categorization [16], or scaffold-centric analysis that treats traces as secondary [9], but
none performs iterative pattern discovery directly over a corpus of traces. No Evaluation Standard:
Trace insights are free-form claims about population-level behavior; whether such a claim is correct,
grounded in cited evidence, and useful to a downstream practitioner cannot be reduced to a single
existing metric, and no shared methodology has been proposed.
We present Insights Generator (IG), a system that addresses the first challenge through iterative hypothesis-
driven aggregation over trace corpora: it decomposes an open-ended diagnostic question into testable
hypotheses, validates each at corpus scale, and synthesizes evidence-backed findings. We make the
following contributions:

• Iterative corpus-level trace analysis. IG separates hypothesis generation from corpus-scale validation
  and routes all trace access and processing through a stateful Python layer, enabling a decompose-
  hypothesize-validate loop that operates over corpora exceeding any single context window. This
  surfaces patterns, such as the silent computation failures above, that single-pass and per-trajectory
  methods miss (Section 2).
• Evaluation framework for insights. We introduce a four-setting framework that varies who evaluates
  (calibrated LLM judge vs. human expert) and what is measured (report quality vs. downstream


                                                       2
                                                                                                  Scale AI Research




Figure 1. Insights Generator (IG) system overview. Left: the input layer provides a diagnostic question, Q, trace
corpus, C , and processed data store, S . Center: the Orchestrator dispatches Scout agents (H: hypothesize over
sampled traces) and Investigator agents (H ∗ : validate via corpus-scale cohort comparison). The Investigator
analyzes H ∗ to generate findings, Fr , which are sent to the orchestrator. The orchestrator then synthesizes and
de-duplicates Fr to generate the final report. Right: the output is an evidence-backed report with findings, fixes,
citations, and prevalence estimates. Bottom: the shared tool layer. Algorithm 1 formalizes the analysis loop.

  scaffold impact), and apply it to a range of trace-analysis systems on multiple benchmarks. Rankings
  are consistent across the four settings, providing the first systematic basis for comparing corpus-level
  trace diagnostic systems (Section 4).
• Measurable practitioner impact. Subject matter experts using IG reports improve scaffold perfor-
  mance by 30.4 pp over the unmodified baseline, nearly doubling the 16.2 pp gain from the next-best
  analysis system. This gap is consistent with IG’s higher scores on evidence depth and mechanism
  explanation in the automated evaluation, and establishes that diagnostic quality translates directly to
  practitioner effectiveness (Section 4.2).


2 Related Work
Single-Trajectory Error Analysis. Most existing agent debugging work focuses on individual trajectory
analysis. Many such methods use counterfactual replay to isolate failure causes: AgentDebug [27]
reasons about alternative decision points, AgenTracer [22] injects programmatic faults and re-executes,
and DoVer [10] replays trajectories with targeted interventions to validate failure hypotheses. AgentRX
[2] draws on software verification techniques, inferring structured constraints from tool schemas and
checking whether agent actions satisfy them. A complementary line classifies known failure types
under predefined taxonomies (MAST [4], AgentFail [11], Who&When [24]), but such approaches cannot
surface failure modes the taxonomy did not anticipate. Even with these methods, per-trace diagnosis
remains difficult: TRAIL [7] provides a comprehensive dataset of annotated errors across traces, yet


                                                        3
                                                                                             Scale AI Research



the best models achieve only 11% joint accuracy. These trajectory-focused methods excel at individual
remediation, but miss systemic patterns that only emerge across corpora of agent runs, which is the gap
our corpus-level approach addresses.


Agentic Insight Generation. More recent work has leveraged agent-based decompositions to surface
insights from agent execution traces. Trace2Skill [16] dispatches a flat parallel fleet of analyst sub-agents
over batches of trajectories to identify skill patches, and then performs hierarchical consolidation to
merge individual patches into a conflict-free skill directory consumed by the agent at inference time.
HALO [5] employs a Recursive Language Model [21] that analyzes traces through tools like search, view,
count, and code, and recursively invokes itself on the relevant snippets, producing a diagnostic report
handed to a downstream coding agent for harness fixes. In contrast, IG differs in its assignment of agentic
roles and maintenance of a stateful data processing layer. First, IG uses typed hypothesis-generation
and validation roles rather than a flat or recursive decomposition, separating breadth (sample-level
pattern proposal) from depth (corpus-scale statistical validation). Second, IG routes all trace access
through a structured Python data processing layer, so findings reflect corpus-level distributions rather
than per-trajectory observations.


Agent Optimization Frameworks. Several recent works frame agent improvement as an automated
optimization task. VeRO [19] introduces an evaluation harness for agent optimization: a coding agent
iteratively modifies a target agent’s implementation, prompts, tools, and orchestration logic, and is
evaluated on the lift it achieves against a fixed benchmark. AFlow [23] and ADAS [8] similarly explore
automated search over agent-as-code representations. Meta-Harness [9] delegates the entire diagnose-
and-propose loop to a single coding-agent proposer that reads source code, scores, and execution traces
of all prior candidates through a filesystem, deliberately avoiding a separate role decomposition. These
systems treat the agent as an artifact to be improved against a specific evaluation set. Our work is
complementary: rather than optimizing an agent toward a fixed target, IG surfaces behavioral insights
latent in a trace corpus, including patterns that no predefined objective would have targeted. These
insights can then be consumed by an agent-optimization framework in a closed loop.


3 Insights Generator
3.1 System Overview
Insights Generator (IG) is a multi-agent analysis system for discovering and validating behavioral
patterns across large trace corpora without requiring full-context loading of raw trajectories. The system
is motivated by a practical bottleneck in agent debugging: manual inspection of small numbers of traces
may be sufficient to form hypotheses, but is insufficient to validate them at scale. IG addresses this
by separating hypothesis discovery from hypothesis validation, and by routing all analysis through a
Python data processing layer rather than passing raw trace content to LLM context directly. Agents
interact with traces exclusively through callable tools (summarization, extraction, cohort comparison)
that return only aggregated results to model context. Figure 1 illustrates the system and its three-zone
structure; Algorithm 1 formalizes the multi-round loop.




                                                     4
                                                                                               Scale AI Research



3.2 Task Definition
The Insights Generator (IG) task takes as input a corpus of agent execution traces C = {τ1 , . . . , τn }, where
each trace consists of interleaved inputs, reasoning steps, tool calls, environment observations, and
outputs. Traces may optionally include metadata such as task-specific model inputs, outcome labels,
configuration variants, or timestamps.
The objective is to produce a set of corpus-level insights describing salient behavioral patterns across
subsets of C . When labels are available, insights may characterize systematic differences between cohorts
(e.g., success versus failure). In the absence of labels, the task reduces to unsupervised pattern discovery
over the trace population. All insights must be supported by trace-level evidence.

3.3 Agent Roles
IG comprises three agent roles. We leverage an Orchestrator, which coordinates the analysis and is the
sole user-facing agent. It decomposes the analysis objective, dispatches subagents in parallel, evaluates
sufficiency of findings across rounds, and synthesizes the final report, performing minimal direct trace
inspection to preserve context capacity for coordination. The Scout Agent explores a representative
sample of traces using LLM-driven summarization and extraction tools to propose candidate hypotheses
based on initial patterns discovered; its objective is breadth, generating diverse testable hypotheses rather
than performing validation. The Investigator Agent receives a specific hypothesis and validates it at
corpus scale, using LLM extraction and programmatic analysis tools to compute distributional statistics,
perform cohort comparisons, and return a finding labeled confirmed, refuted, or inconclusive with
quantitative evidence. System prompts for each role are provided in Appendix A.1; model selections,
temperature settings, and context configurations are in Appendix A.2.

3.4 Data Preprocessing
All agents operate over a processed trace store rather than as raw text input. This enables agents
to conduct arbitrary data science transformations on trace data via Python. All traces and extracted
features are linked together via a trace identifier (a short string), reducing token usage and preventing
hallucinated references common with UUIDs. A schema cache containing per-column statistics, null
rates, value distributions, and notable correlations is computed automatically and injected into every
subagent’s context at dispatch time. For content-based retrieval, traces are additionally indexed in a
hybrid semantic-keyword vector store made available to all agents as a tool.

3.5 Programmatic Tool Use
Each subagent operates within a stateful Python execution environment in which IG’s analysis primitives
are pre-injected as callable functions; from the agent’s perspective, the interface is a single code-execution
tool. The primitives fall into three categories: trace inspection (loading traces, retrieving raw content,
querying the schema cache, hybrid semantic-keyword search); LLM-driven analysis (structured feature
extraction, per-trace and group-level summarization, A/B cohort comparison); and data management
(persisting computed columns and finding-supporting trace cohorts, refreshing the cached DataFrame,
consolidating extraction parquets). Tool availability varies by agent role: the Orchestrator retains a
coordination-oriented subset, the Scout adds extraction, and the Investigator further has access to cohort
comparison and finding persistence. Agents chain multiple operations in a single code block without
intermediate trace content traversing the model context. Appendix A.3 lists each primitive with its full


                                                       5
                                                                                           Scale AI Research



Algorithm 1 Insights Generator Analysis Loop
Require: Trace corpus C = {τ1 , . . . , τn }, analysis query Q
 1: S ← B UILD S CHEMA C ACHE (C)
 2: H ∗ ← ∅ {accumulated candidate hypotheses}
 3: F ← ∅ {confirmed findings}
 4: while Orchestrator has not issued S UBMIT R EPORT do
 5:   a ← O RCHESTRATOR D ECIDE (S , H∗ , F , Q)
 6:   if a = D ISPATCH S COUTS then
 7:      H ← D ISPATCH S COUTA GENTS (Csample , S , Q) {parallel; propose}
 8:      H∗ ← H∗ ∪ H
 9:   else if a = D ISPATCH I NVESTIGATORS then
10:      Hsel ← P RIORITIZE (H∗ )
11:      Fr ← D ISPATCH I NVESTIGATOR A GENTS (C , S , Hsel ) {parallel; validate}
12:      F ← F ∪ { f ∈ Fr : f .status = confirmed}
13:      S ← C ONSOLIDATE (S) {merge new extractions; refresh schema}
14:   end if
15: end while
16: F ← R EMAP T RACE ID S (F , C)
17: return S UBMIT R EPORT (F , Q )



description and per-role availability.

3.6 Iterative Analysis Loop
IG operates as an iterative orchestrator-driven loop. At each turn, the orchestrator inspects the current
set of candidate hypotheses H∗ and confirmed findings F , then decides one of three actions: dispatch a
parallel batch of Scout agents to surface new hypotheses, dispatch a parallel batch of Investigator agents
to validate prioritized hypotheses at corpus scale, or submit the final report. Scout and Investigator
dispatches can interleave in any order and any number of rounds — the orchestrator might run several
scout rounds before any investigation, or alternate, depending on coverage. Once the orchestrator
agent determines no more information is required, it accumulates confirmed findings across rounds and
synthesizes them into a final report. Algorithm 1 formalizes this loop.


4 Evaluation
We evaluate Insights Generator along two orthogonal axes: who performs the evaluation (automated
pipeline vs. Human Expert) and what is measured (output quality via rubric judgment vs. downstream
impact via scaffold intervention). This yields four complementary settings, summarized in Figure 2. For
both the human-expert-as-a-judge and human expert intervention experiments, we fix a benchmark,
generate insight reports for traces within the benchmark, and vary the report condition assigned to
each participant. We choose SpreadsheetBench-Verified as the benchmark [12, 18], which is a subset
of 400 human-verified tasks from SpreadsheetBench. SpreadsheetBench was chosen as the primary
benchmark because it involves tasks that (i) are familiar to technology professionals (manipulating data
in spreadsheets), (ii) can be run quickly by human practitioners as they implement scaffold changes, and
(iii) offer a rich surface for potential improvements at the prompt, tool use, and control flow levels. For


                                                    6
                                                                                            Scale AI Research




Figure 2. Overview of the four evaluation settings used to assess the Insights Generator (rubric-based and
intervention-based).



experiments involving autonomous judges and intervention agents, we vary corpus scale, benchmark
diversity (HLE [17] and SpreadsheetBench [12]), and comparison systems spanning single-agent baselines
to multi-agent alternatives. The benchmarks span diverse agent task domains: SpreadsheetBench tests
spreadsheet manipulation agents on real-world tasks; HLE tests research-style question-answering
agents on expert-level academic questions spanning mathematics, the humanities, and the natural
sciences. Full benchmark descriptions and corpus statistics are provided in Appendix A.4.
Because IG is designed to support agent developers rather than replace them outright, we treat human-
expert intervention performance as the primary measure of downstream utility. Automated patching,
where a coding agent converts diagnostic reports into scaffold edits without human judgment, serves as
a complementary and future-looking evaluation of end-to-end insight transfer.

4.1 LLM-as-a-Judge
We first perform a comprehensive comparison between insight generator architectures. We run IG and
four comparison systems on the same agent execution corpora and assess report quality using a calibrated
LLM judge (Claude Opus 4.6). The comparison systems span a range of architectural complexity: a
Single-Agent Coding system, which performs open-ended analysis using a Claude Code [1] agent with
its native tool surface; CC Subagents, which extends the single-agent coding baseline with subagent
dispatch via Claude Code’s Task tool, implementing the same scout-investigator role decomposition as
IG through an isolated-context interface while leveraging the technically sophisticated scaffold of Claude
Code; a Trace2Skill-style system [16], which dispatches a flat parallel fleet of analyst sub-agents followed
by hierarchical consolidation; and RLM [21], a vanilla Recursive Language Model implementation
at maximum depth 2. Together, these systems isolate the contributions of tool surface, multi-agent
topology, and role decomposition. All five systems answer the same canonical analysis question over the
same trace corpus and produce a structured report as output. Three insight reports for each system are
generated as replicates per benchmark; all reported metrics are mean measurements across the replicates.

                                                     7
                                                                                                Scale AI Research



Table 1. LLM-as-a-Judge results across three evaluation layers. Coverage: % of union-gold clusters (50 per
benchmark) for which the report cited ≥1 member trace; Avg is the mean of SSB and HLE. Pairwise Win Rate:
position-swapped round-robin win rate (%); Avg is the mean of SSB and HLE. Quality: per-dimension rubric
scores (0–3) against union-gold clusters, averaged across both benchmarks; Composite = 13 (Mech. + Spec. + Act.).
The lower block reports IG architecture ablations holding the toolkit and data layer fixed.

                                Coverage (%)         Pairwise WR (%)                  Quality (0–3)
 System                       SSB    HLE     Avg     SSB    HLE      Avg    Mech.     Spec.    Act.    Comp.
 IG                            87     95      91     72.4    83.3    77.9     1.34     1.34    1.27     1.32
 CC Subagents                  93     97      95     63.3    61.4    62.4     1.13     1.11    1.07     1.10
 Trace2Skill                   96     98      97     56.2    49.0    52.6     1.18     1.14    1.23     1.18
 RLM                           89     96     92.5    13.8     9.0    11.4     0.96     0.95    0.84     0.92
 Single-Agent Coding           65     95      80     8.6     12.4    10.5     0.78     0.77    0.73     0.76
 IG architecture ablations
 IG, Generic Subagents         87     93      90     59.0    76.0    67.5     1.14     1.13    1.03     1.10
 IG, Orchestrator-only         78     86      82     35.0    29.0    32.0     0.87     0.87    0.82     0.85


Full implementation details and prompts for each comparison system are provided in Appendix A.6.
Evaluation proceeds through three complementary layers. First, all findings from all systems are pooled
and clustered by an LLM judge into a union-gold reference set of canonical observations, consolidating
semantically similar insights across systems while leaving system-unique ones as independent obser-
vations; each system’s report is then scored on coverage: the fraction of union-gold clusters for which
the report cited at least one trace belonging to that cluster. Second, systems are compared in a pairwise
round-robin tournament: for each unordered pair the judge sees both reports twice in opposite positions
to control for position bias, and win rate is computed as (wins + 0.5 × ties) / nrounds . Third, each system’s
report is scored against the union-gold cluster set on a per-dimension rubric (0–3 per dimension, five
dimensions per cluster). For each cluster, the judge assesses how well the report covers that canonical
observation along detection, mechanism, evidence, specificity, and actionability. The full judge prompts
and rubric anchors are provided in Appendix A.7. We report results on two benchmarks: HLE [17] (250
traces) and SpreadsheetBench [12] (296 traces). Table 1 consolidates all three layers.
Coverage is broadly comparable across multi-agent systems (87–98%), with only the single-agent baseline
falling notably lower on SSB (65%); on HLE all systems reach 95% or above. Coverage alone therefore
does not distinguish the top systems. Pairwise win rates, by contrast, separate them clearly: IG leads
at 77.9% average win rate, followed by CC Subagents (62.4%) and Trace2Skill (52.6%), while RLM and
Single-Agent Coding fall below 15%. The per-dimension quality scores tell a consistent story: IG leads on
mechanism explanation (+0.16 over Trace2Skill) and specificity (+0.20), while Trace2Skill is competitive
on actionability (1.23 vs. IG’s 1.27). The composite score separates into tiers that align with the pairwise
ranking. Taken together, the three layers indicate that while multi-agent architectures reach comparable
breadth of pattern detection, IG’s scout-investigator architecture produces findings of meaningfully
higher evidentiary depth. Component ablations of IG’s subagent roles are reported in Appendix A.8.
We additionally ablate IG’s role decomposition while holding the toolkit, data layer, and orchestrator
dispatch loop fixed: Orchestrator-only disables subagent dispatch entirely, and Generic Subagents
retains parallel dispatch but replaces the typed Scout/Investigator roles with a single untyped subagent



                                                       8
                                                                                                   Scale AI Research



Table 2. Human Expert intervention results (250 held-out tasks from SpreadsheetBench, n = 6 participants per
non-baseline arm, 3 evaluation runs per participant). Baseline is the unmodified scaffold score (single replicate).
Parenthetical values for the report conditions are standard errors of the mean across participants (SEM, in pp). We
also present number of files modified, lines added, lines removed, and net scaffold line changes to characterize the
size of scaffold edits made by participants in each condition.

         Condition               n      Mean         ∆ Baseline   Avg Files    Lines+    Lines−    Net ∆
         Baseline                –       27.0%          –              0         0         0        0
         Claude Code report      6   43.2% (±4.1)    +16.2 pp         3.2       +342      −56      +286
         IG report               6   57.4% (±1.5)    +30.4 pp         4.0       +256      −53      +203


that is given a role at invocation-time by the orchestrator. Both ablations underperform full IG across
all three evaluation layers (Table 1), with the largest gap on pairwise win rate: orchestrator-only drops
45.9 pp (77.9% → 32.0%) and generic-subagents drops 10.4 pp (77.9% → 67.5%). The intermediate
position of generic-subagents isolates the additional contribution of typed role specialization over flat
multi-agent dispatch, and the larger orchestrator-only gap indicates that parallel subagent dispatch, not
just the IG toolkit, drives a substantial fraction of IG’s quality advantage. Per-benchmark breakdowns
are reported in Appendix A.8.

4.2 Human Expert Interventions
The human-expert intervention setting is our primary downstream evaluation: it tests whether IG
reports help practitioners make better scaffold modifications, evaluated on held-out benchmark tasks.
We compare the quality and actionability of insights generated by IG and CC Subagents on the Spread-
sheetBench benchmark. CC Subagents was chosen as the baseline because it showed strong performance
in Section 4.1, and is a lightweight architecture that practitioners can easily adapt in real-world settings.
Practitioners were randomly assigned to one of two report conditions (IG or CC Subagent), blinded to
which system had produced their report, and asked to modify an agent scaffold to improve its perfor-
mance on a held-out benchmark split using standard coding tools. Each participant’s score is the mean
of three independent evaluation runs. Because all participants have identical coding tools, benchmark
access, and a fixed time budget, with only report condition varying, observed performance differences
are consistent with the informational content of the report. Full participant instructions, onboarding
materials, and study protocol are provided in Appendix A.11.
We deliberately recruited professional software engineers developing LLM agents, prioritizing real-world
relevance over sample size; the study measures practitioner effectiveness in a real development context
that crowd-sourced annotation would not replicate. Practitioners given an IG report achieved a 30.4 pp
improvement over the unmodified baseline scaffold; those given a Claude Code report improved by
16.2 pp, a 14.2 pp gap in favor of IG. These gains correspond to absolute pass rates of 43.2% and 57.4% for
the CC and IG conditions respectively, with a statistically significant difference of p ≈ 0.016 (two-sided
Welch’s t-test). Both outperform the 27.0% unmodified baseline. This result is robust under leave-one-
participant-out refits and an exact permutation test on the 12 per-participant means (Appendix A.9).
IG-condition participants modified, on average, more files (4.0 vs. 3.2) and produced smaller per-
participant median net edits (94 vs. 149 net lines changed), with mean net lines changed of 203 vs.
286. The mean-based gap is not statistically significant (Appendix A.9) and is sensitive to a single CC
participant with a +1112-line edit; we therefore report edit size as a descriptive observation rather than a
tested effect.


                                                         9
                                                                                               Scale AI Research



4.3 Human Expert-as-a-Judge
Additionally, we ask human experts to evaluate IG reports against CC Subagent reports for Spreadsheet-
Bench on a structured four-dimension rubric: correctness, depth, evidence quality, and actionability, each
scored on a 1–5 scale. As in Section 4.2, CC Subagents implement the decompose-hypothesize-validate
paradigm via subagent skills. IG and CC Subagents reports are drawn from a 100-sample Spreadsheet-
Bench training split; 12 human-expert evaluators score 23 insights across the two insight-generation
methods (11 IG, 12 CC).
Across 12 evaluators and 23 insights, IG and CC reports receive comparable aggregate ratings (4.25 vs.
4.22, respectively, on a 1–5 scale). At the dimension level, IG leads on depth (+0.17) and evidentiary
support (+0.06), while CC leads on correctness (+0.14); actionability scores are nearly identical. These
findings show the strength of IG’s design principle of performing deep analysis via the investigator
agent to exhaustively identify strong evidence supporting its claims.
Overall, while the LLM-as-a-judge evaluates IG insights as higher quality than those of CC Subagents,
the human experts deem them to be relatively similar (without statistical significance). We suspect this
reflects a human’s inability to effectively evaluate insights across large sets of traces, claims, and evidence
patterns within fixed time budgets. The full evaluation rubric and per-dimension scores are reported in
Appendix A.5.

4.4 Iterative Patcher Loop
We additionally evaluate whether IG reports support iterative scaffold improvement. In a patcher loop,
an autonomous coding agent (Claude Code with Claude Opus 4.6 as the underlying model) modifies
a scaffold based on an analysis report derived from execution traces; each round’s patched scaffold
becomes the input to the next round’s trace collection, analysis, and patching, and the loop terminates on
validation-set saturation (no improvement of ε = 0.01 for two consecutive rounds, or after r = 5 rounds).
The loop probes whether the analysis system continues to surface actionable findings as the scaffold
approaches saturation, and whether acting on those findings avoids regressions. On SpreadsheetBench,
we compare IG against two alternative analysis systems (RLM, CC Subagents) and a no-report pure-
patcher baseline that receives only the scaffold source code. The full protocol, per-round trajectories,
validation trajectories, and grounded per-round examples are reported in Appendix A.10.
The three report-equipped systems each drive the patcher to held-out test pass rates between 0.81 and
0.84 (versus 0.41 unmodified), with IG and RLM improving monotonically through their saturation
points and CC Subagents recovering from a single-round dip to a comparable terminal value. The
Pure-Patcher baseline achieves a strong round-1 gain (0.80) but reverses sharply, ending at 0.58 by
round 3: without an analysis input to ground its priorities, the patcher invents subsequent edits from the
scaffold source alone, including a round-2 prompt instruction that contradicts the SpreadsheetBench
grader’s exact-match contract and accounts for 12 of the 13 round-2 regressed tasks (Appendix A.10). The
contrast between regenerated-report trajectories and the no-report reversal suggests that the regenerated
analysis layer is what sustains improvement as the scaffold approaches saturation.


5 Discussion




                                                      10
                                                                                            Scale AI Research



5.1 Implications for Agent Development
The evaluation results carry a concrete implication for practitioners developing LLM agents: IG-style
corpus-level diagnostic reports support more effective scaffold improvements than competing analysis
approaches when consumed by human experts. The 14.2 pp gap between IG and CC Subagents in
the intervention study (Section 4.2) suggests that report depth and evidentiary grounding matter for
practitioner effectiveness, not only topical coverage. This pattern is consistent with IG’s lead on pairwise
evidence quality under LLM-as-a-judge evaluation, and with the Investigator role’s explicit corpus-scale
validation step.
The iterative patcher loop (Section 4.4) shows that analysis-equipped patchers all converge to comparable
test pass rates while the no-report control regresses, indicating that regenerated corpus-level analysis
sustains improvement under automated patching.

5.2 Computational Requirements
Insights Generator averages approximately $76 in LLM cost and 48 minutes of wall-clock time per
analysis run, against $23 / 20 min for RLM, $26 / 37 min for trace2skill, and $38 / 34 min for
cc_subagents (means across n=6 runs per variant; see Appendix A.13). Cost scales primarily with
input-token volume.

5.3 Limitations and Future Work
This study offers clear directions for follow-on work. The human expert intervention study is conducted
on SpreadsheetBench; whether the 30.4 pp gain generalizes to other agent domains and benchmark
types is an open question, both to assess generalizability and increase statistical power. Per-arm sample
sizes are small due to the expertise required for conducting this task; the reported effect should be
further validated with a fully powered study across multiple challenging benchmarks and larger sample
sizes. Sophisticated benchmarks containing more complex tasks and greater numbers of agent turns,
such as Humanity’s Last Exam [17], SWE-Bench Pro [6], TerminalBench [14], FeatureBench [26], and
APEX-Agents [20], offer challenging tasks amenable to IG’s analysis.
Additionally, conducting further calibration of the LLM-as-judge grader on a larger expert sample
will help quantify the degree to which expert intuitions align with the judge criteria. For the patcher
loop experiment, additional trials of each condition will allow us to assess variance, inherent to long
coding-agent rollouts, in our estimate of downstream benchmark performance improvement. Finally,
deeper subcomponent analysis of IG would provide more information for future improvements.


6 Conclusion
We present Insights Generator, a multi-agent system for corpus-level trace diagnostics. We formalize
population-level pattern discovery in agent traces as a problem distinct from single-trajectory debug-
ging and taxonomy classification, introduce a scout-investigator architecture with purpose-built data
processing tools, and propose a four-setting evaluation framework varying who evaluates and what is
measured.




                                                    11
                                                                                             Scale AI Research



References
 [1] Anthropic. Claude Code. https://docs.claude.com/en/docs/claude-code/, 2024.

 [2] S. Barke, A. Goyal, A. Khare, A. Singh, S. Nath, and C. Bansal. AgentRx: Diagnosing AI agent
     failures from execution trajectories, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.02475.

 [3] A. Bertsch, A. Pratapa, T. Mitamura, G. Neubig, and M. R. Gormley. Oolong: Evaluating long
     context reasoning and aggregation capabilities, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.02817.

 [4] M. Cemri, M. Z. Pan, S. Yang, L. A. Agrawal, B. Chopra, et al. Why do multi-agent LLM systems
     fail? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2025. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.13657.

 [5] Context Labs. HALO: Hierarchical agent loop optimizer, 2025. URL https://github.com/
     context-labs/halo. Software repository.

 [6] X. Deng, J. Da, E. Pan, Y. Y. He, C. Ide, K. Garg, N. Lauffer, A. Park, N. Pasari, C. Rane, K. Sampath,
     M. Krishnan, S. Kundurthy, S. Hendryx, Z. Wang, V. Bharadwaj, J. Holm, R. Aluri, C. B. C. Zhang,
     N. Jacobson, B. Liu, and B. Kenstler. SWE-Bench Pro: Can AI agents solve long-horizon software
     engineering tasks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.16941, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.
     16941.

 [7] D. Deshpande, V. Gangal, H. Mehta, J. Krishnan, A. Kannappan, and R. Qian. TRAIL: Trace
     reasoning and agentic issue localization, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.08638.

 [8] S. Hu, C. Lu, and J. Clune. Automated design of agentic systems. In International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.08435.

 [9] Y. Lee, R. Nair, Q. Zhang, K. Lee, O. Khattab, and C. Finn. Meta-harness: End-to-end optimization
     of model harnesses, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.28052.

[10] M. Ma, J. Zhang, F. Yang, Y. Kang, Q. Lin, et al. DoVer: Intervention-driven auto debugging
     for LLM multi-agent systems. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.06749.

[11] X. Ma, X. Xie, Y. Wang, J. Wang, B. Wu, et al. Demystifying the lifecycle of failures in platform-
     orchestrated agentic workflows, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.23735.

[12] Z. Ma, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Yu, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Luo, X. Wang, and J. Tang. SpreadsheetBench:
     Towards challenging real world spreadsheet manipulation. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14991.

[13] S. Maekawa, H. Iso, and N. Bhutani. Holistic reasoning with long-context LMs: A benchmark for
     database operations on massive textual data. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.11996.

[14] M. A. Merrill, A. G. Shaw, N. Carlini, B. Li, H. Raj, I. Bercovich, L. Shi, J. Y. Shin, T. Walshe, E. K.
     Buchanan, J. Shen, G. Ye, H. Lin, J. Poulos, M. Wang, M. Nezhurina, J. Jitsev, et al. Terminal-Bench:
     Benchmarking agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces. In International Conference
     on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.11868.


                                                     12
                                                                                             Scale AI Research



[15] R. Nanda, C. Maddila, S. Jha, E. M. Khan, M. Paltenghi, and S. Chandra. Wink: Recovering from
     misbehaviors in coding agents, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.17037.

[16] J. Ni, Y. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Sun, M. Zhou, P. Cheng, D. Wang, E. Zhao, X. Jiang, and G. Jiang. Trace2Skill:
     Distill trajectory-local lessons into transferable agent skills, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2603.25158.

[17] L. Phan, A. Gatti, Z. Han, N. Li, J. Hu, H. Zhang, et al. A benchmark of expert-level academic
     questions to assess AI capabilities. Nature, 649:1139–1146, 2026. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09962-4.
     URL https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-025-09962-4.

[18] Shortcut Research Team. SpreadsheetBench Verified: A curated evaluation set. https://shortcut.
     ai/blog/posts/spreadsheetbench-verified, Dec. 2025.

[19] V. Ursekar, A. Shanker, V. Chatrath, Y. Xue, and S. Denton. VeRO: An evaluation harness for agents
     to optimize agents, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.22480.

[20] B. Vidgen, A. Mann, A. Fennelly, J. W. Stanly, L. Rothman, M. Burstein, J. Benchek, D. Ostrofsky,
     A. Ravichandran, D. Sur, N. Venugopal, A. Hsia, I. Robinson, C. Huang, O. Varones, D. Khan,
     M. Haines, A. Bridges, J. Boyle, K. Twist, Z. Richards, C. Mahapatra, B. Foody, and O. Nitski.
     APEX-Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.14242, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2601.14242.

[21] A. L. Zhang, T. Kraska, and O. Khattab. Recursive language models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
     org/abs/2512.24601.

[22] G. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Chen, W. Zhou, K. Wang, and S. Yan. AgenTracer: Who is inducing failure
     in the LLM agentic systems? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.03312.

[23] J. Zhang, J. Xiang, Z. Yu, F. Teng, X.-H. Chen, et al. AFlow: Automating agentic workflow generation.
     In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.
     10762.

[24] S. Zhang, M. Yin, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Han, et al. Which agent causes task failures and when? on
     automated failure attribution of LLM multi-agent systems. In International Conference on Machine
     Learning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00212.

[25] L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin, Z. Li, D. Li, E. P. Xing,
     H. Zhang, J. E. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot
     arena. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05685.

[26] Q. Zhou, J. Zhang, H. Wang, R. Hao, J. Wang, M. Han, Y. Yang, S. Wu, F. Pan, L. Fan, D. Tu,
     and Z. Zhang. FeatureBench: Benchmarking agentic coding for complex feature development. In
     International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.10975.

[27] K. Zhu, Z. Liu, B. Li, M. Tian, Y. Yang, J. Zhang, et al. Where LLM agents fail and how they can
     learn from failures. arXiv preprint, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.25370.




                                                     13
                                                                                          Scale AI Research



A Appendix
A.1 Agent System Prompts
The system prompts below correspond to the production configuration in which both Scout and Investi-
gator subagents are dispatched and the full IG analysis toolkit is enabled. Ablation variants are rendered
programmatically from the same Jinja templates with conditional blocks gated on which subagent roles
are present.


Orchestrator.

     You are the Insights Generator Orchestrator –- an analysis coordinator that
     discovers patterns in AI agent execution traces.
     Your Role. You find failures (explicit actions, silent errors, and omissions –-
     things the agent should have done but didn’t), successes, behavioral differences,
     efficiency issues, and any noteworthy patterns across a corpus of agent traces.
     Your primary job is dispatching specialized subagents and synthesizing their
     findings –- you do NOT do the heavy statistical analysis yourself. You DO have
     light read-only tools so you can deep-dive on a search hit when that informs your
     next dispatch decision; reserve heavy extraction, cohort comparison, and
     cohort-saving for the scouts.
     Workflow. (1) Review the schema. (2) Dispatch scout agents with specific
     exploration directives. (3) Review hypotheses and prioritize the most promising
     ones. (4) Dispatch investigator agents with hypotheses to validate. (5) Evaluate
     coverage. (6) Write the final report.
     Tools. A Python REPL for orientation (schema, trace counts, search, summarization,
     extraction-column plumbing); plus dispatch tools for parallel subagent dispatch.
     Heavy LLM and statistical work is intentionally not in the orchestrator’s toolkit.
     Dispatching subagents. Directives focus on specific areas (“verbose database
     queries correlate with null results”, not “look at tool calls”). Mix directive
     shapes across each batch: some target active errors (wrong action, bad output,
     failure text), others target expected actions or checks the agent may have OMITTED.
     Dispatches return compact summaries with full per-hypothesis evidence written to a
     sandbox sidecar that the orchestrator can read via the REPL.
     Anti-overfitting. Do not generalize from a single scout agent’s sample. Every
     finding must be validated by an investigator agent with statistical evidence.
     Small-cohort findings are often high-value; do not drop a hypothesis because its
     cohort is small.
     Iteration. The pipeline is flexible: each dispatch tool may be called multiple
     times across the run, in any order. Default toward iterating; submit only when no
     credible lead remains undispatched.


Scout (Hypothesis Agent).

     You are a Hypothesis Agent (Scout) –- you explore traces of agent execution to
     discover patterns and generate hypotheses.
     Your role. Look at trace data to find interesting patterns the orchestrator should
     investigate further. Emphasize breadth over depth –- scan many traces to identify
     potential issues, not deeply validate any single one.


                                                   14
                                                                                 Scale AI Research



     What to look for. Explicit failures, silent failures (agent completes but does a
     poor job), efficiency issues, success patterns, behavioral differences, and
     OMISSIONS (steps the agent should have taken but didn’t). Do not limit yourself to
     a failure taxonomy –- discovery is the goal.
     Sampling guidance.   Use representative samples –- typically 50–200 traces –- to form
     hypotheses.
     Workflow. (1) Orient via schema and a small Polars pass to understand data shape.
     (2) Discover via search, issuing per-concept queries (failures, successes, loops,
     escalations, possible omissions). (3) Read samples on interesting hits. (4)
     Quantify by extracting on small focused samples (10–30 traces) to test patterns.
     Before extracting, check what’s already been extracted by other agents. (5) Submit
     hypotheses.
     Searching for omissions. Search cannot match absence directly. Imagine the text an
     agent that HAD performed the expected action would produce, search for THAT, then
     contrast cohorts in Polars or in a follow-up search.
     Output. A JSON list of hypotheses, each with name, description, evidence (trace id,
     verbatim quote, and explanation), and estimated prevalence. Optionally include 1–3
     well-motivated suggestions for further investigation that this Scout did not have
     time or scope to pursue.


Investigator (Explore Agent).

     You are an Explore Agent (Investigator) –- you validate hypotheses about agent
     execution traces with statistical evidence.
     Your role. Take a specific hypothesis and validate it with rigorous evidence from
     the full trace corpus (or a large representative subset). Emphasize depth over
     breadth –- quantify patterns, run comparisons, and provide statistical backing.
     Validation approach (hierarchical). Level A –- broad stats: compute statistics
     across all traces using Polars group-bys. Level B –- focused comparison: extract
     relevant features on 50–100 traces; check existing extractions first to avoid
     duplicating work. Level C –- deep comparison: run cohort comparisons 2–3 times
     with different samples for robust findings.
     Output. A single submission with status (confirmed, refuted, or inconclusive), 1–2
     sentence summary, quantified prevalence, and 8–10+ evidence items. Each evidence
     item contains a trace id, a verbatim quote from the trace, and a 2–3 sentence
     explanation that names the specific mechanism visible in THIS trace and connects it
     to the broader pattern. Hypothesis-test outputs (p-values, Cramér’s V, odds ratios)
     go in additional observations, not the main summary. Provide a single concrete
     suggested action or null.
     Anti-overfitting. Do not generalize from fewer than 20 traces in a comparison.
     Quantify everything. Flag confidence level: high (more than 100 traces), medium
     (20–100), low (fewer than 20).
     Saving the affected cohort. Record the defensible cohort –- the subset you are
     confident exhibits the pattern, NOT the broader pool you analyzed. Submission is
     rejected if this has not been called.




                                               15
                                                                                                Scale AI Research



A.2 Implementation Details
Table 3 lists the production IG configuration used in all reported experiments. All fields correspond
directly to attributes of the IG configuration dataclass; ablation experiments override the relevant fields
and leave the rest at their defaults.
Table 3. IG production configuration. Concurrency, timeout, and sandbox parameters are tuned for paper-grade
runs and may be lowered for cost-constrained deployments.

                Group           Field                        Value
                Models          Orchestrator                 Claude Opus 4.6
                                Hypothesis (Scout)           Claude Opus 4.6
                                Explore (Investigator)       Claude Opus 4.6
                                Cohort comparison            Claude Opus 4.6
                                Per-trace extraction         Claude Haiku 4.5
                                Trace summarization          Claude Haiku 4.5
                Extraction      Concurrency                  50 parallel calls
                                Checkpoint interval          5,000 traces
                                Auto-save threshold          250 traces
                                Per-call timeout             300 s
                Orchestration   Max orchestrator turns       500 (self-terminates via report)
                                Max subagent turns           500 (self-terminate via submit)
                Traces          Long-trace chunk threshold   50,000 tokens
                                Retrieval top-k              20 (search default)
                Ablation        Mode                         full
                                Tool backend                 REPL
                                REPL state                   stateful
                Sandbox         CPU                          16 cores
                                Memory                       65,536 MB (64 GB)
                                Timeout                      14,400 s (4 h)


All LLM calls route through a centralized LLM proxy. Subagents run in a shared sandboxed container
with the analysis primitives pre-injected into a stateful Python REPL session; the orchestrator and each
subagent get their own session.

A.3 Insights Generator Tools
Table 4 lists the 14 IG analysis primitives organized by category, with per-role availability across the
Orchestrator, Scout (Hypothesis Agent), and Investigator (Explore Agent).

A.4 Benchmark and Corpus Statistics
The active experiments in this paper use two benchmarks: SpreadsheetBench (SSB) [12] and HLE [17].
For each benchmark, traces were collected by executing a fixed ReAct-style scaffold over the benchmark’s
task set; all downstream analysis, ablation, and intervention experiments reuse those fixed corpora rather
than re-collecting traces per system. The human evaluation experiments (Sections 4.2, 4.3) use traces
generated by openai/gpt-5.2-2025-12-11, while the LLM-as-a-judge (Section 4.1) and patcher-loop
(Section 4.4) experiments use traces generated by openai/gpt-5.4-2026-03-05. The sole exception is


                                                      16
                                                                                                Scale AI Research



the iterative patcher loop, which, by construction, regenerates a fresh trace corpus each round from the
patched scaffold Ar . Corpus-level statistics for both benchmarks are summarized in Table 5.


SpreadsheetBench (SSB). SpreadsheetBench tasks require an agent to read an Excel workbook, perform
a manipulation specified in natural language (e.g. filter, summarize, transform, write a formula), and
persist the result back to the workbook. Outputs are graded by exact cell-value match against ground
truth, which makes the benchmark deterministically scorable. The scaffold is a ReAct agent with a
5-turn budget that exposes openpyxl and pandas via a Python code-execution tool; the agent has no web
access. The LLM-as-a-judge corpus (ssb_gpt-5.4-med_20260430, used in Section 4.1) contains 296 traces
with a baseline pass rate of 42.2% (125 correct, 171 incorrect). Tasks are categorized by the benchmark
into Cell-Level and Sheet-Level manipulation, with markedly different difficulty profiles (approximately
27% vs. 76% pass rate in our corpus). The human-expert experiments (Sections 4.3 and 4.2) use the SSB
training-split corpus of 250 traces (110 correct, 140 incorrect; baseline pass rate 44%); the training-split
bundle is described in detail in Appendix A.11.1. The iterative patcher loop (Section 4.4) collects fresh
training-split traces on every round from the patched scaffold; the round-0 baseline pass rate is 0.41 on
the held-out test split.


HLE. HLE (Humanity’s Last Exam) is a closed-book expert-level question-answering benchmark
spanning physics, mathematics, biology, chemistry, and humanities, where each task requires the agent
to return a single short answer along with a self-reported confidence in [0, 100]. The scaffold is a ReAct
agent that exposes web search, web-page fetch, and Python code execution; turn counts in our corpus
range from 0 (instant-answer / hang) to 18 with a long-tail distribution. The LLM-as-a-judge corpus
(hle_gpt-5.4_20260430) contains 250 traces with a baseline pass rate of 23.6% (59 correct, 191 incorrect);
207 of 250 traces use at least one tool. The 43 zero-tool traces achieve only 9.3% accuracy versus 26.6% for
tool-using traces, a sub-population gap that surfaces consistently across systems’ findings. Correctness
for HLE is graded by an LLM judge applied to the benchmark’s reference answers (rather than by
deterministic match), so HLE serves as a complementary stressor to SSB’s deterministic grader.

Table 5. Corpus statistics for the two benchmarks used in the active experiments. Backbone agent:
openai/gpt-5.4-2026-03-05 on a generic ReAct agent scaffold for both. “Eval-corpus pass rate” refers to the
corpus released to all comparison systems for the LLM-as-a-judge evaluation (Section 4.1); the human-study and
patcher splits are listed separately.

                                   SpreadsheetBench                    HLE
         Citation                  Ma et al. [12]                      Phan et al. [17]
         Domain                    Spreadsheet manipulation            Closed-book expert QA
         Eval metric               Exact cell-value match              LLM-judged correctness
         Eval-corpus tag           ssb_gpt-5.4-med                     hle_gpt-5.4
         Eval-corpus traces        296 (125 correct / 171 incorrect)   250 (59 correct / 191 incorrect)
         Eval-corpus pass rate     42.2%                               23.6%
         Tool-using traces         all (code-exec mandatory)           207 / 250 (82.8%)
         Tool surface              openpyxl, pandas                    web search, web fetch, code-exec
         Turn budget               5                                   20 (observed max 18)
         Human-study split         250 train (110 / 140), 44% pass     —
         Folds per system (§4.1)   3 independent re-runs               3 independent re-runs
         Union-gold clusters       50                                  50



                                                       17
                                                                                                Scale AI Research



Folds, gold clusters, and trace lengths. For the LLM-as-a-judge evaluation each system is run 3
times per benchmark on the same fixed corpus to capture run-to-run variance, and the corresponding
union-gold reference set per benchmark is built by pooling findings across all systems and folds and
clustering them with the meta-evaluator prompt in Appendix A.7; clustering converges at 50 canonical
observations for each benchmark, which is the cluster count against which coverage and per-dimension
quality are scored in Table 1. Average raw trace length (in agent-context tokens) is not directly reported
here; in practice no single trace exceeds the agent context window, but the full 296-trace SSB corpus
and 250-trace HLE corpus each exceed any single LLM context, motivating the corpus-level analysis
primitives described in Section 3.

A.5 Human Expert-as-a-Judge: Evaluation Rubric and Per-Dimension Scores

Table 6. Human Expert-as-a-Judge results (SpreadsheetBench, 12 evaluators). Parenthetical values are standard
errors of the mean across insights within each cell (n = 12 for CC, n = 11 for IG); per-insight scores are first
averaged across the 12 evaluators and the SEM is then computed across insights.

     Report      N Insights    Correctness    Actionability      Depth        Evid. Quality       Avg
     CC report       12       4.278 (±0.08)   4.174 (±0.12)   4.139 (±0.09)   4.285 (±0.08)   4.219 (±0.07)
     IG report       11       4.136 (±0.12)   4.220 (±0.11)   4.311 (±0.10)   4.341 (±0.12)   4.252 (±0.10)


A.6 Comparison System Implementation Details
All five systems answer the same canonical analysis question (Appendix A.7) over the same trace corpus,
and all emit a session artifact normalized to the same JSON schema by a shared report-utils module. The
systems differ along three axes: tool surface (raw filesystem and coding tools vs. IG’s structured analysis
primitives), topology (single agent vs. multi-agent dispatch), and data layer (raw text vs. structured Polars
store with extraction columns). All systems use Claude Opus 4.6 as their backbone agent model.


Single-Agent Coding. A single Claude Code CLI session, invoked headless, with a filesystem-based
knowledge layout (one file per trace plus an index) and Claude Code’s native tool surface (read, write,
edit, glob, grep, bash). The agent discovers patterns through filesystem retrieval, ad-hoc scripting, and
manual aggregation. Establishes the floor for what a strong coding agent can achieve without a dedicated
trace-analysis scaffold.


CC Subagents. Claude Code with subagent dispatch via the Task tool, implementing the same Scout–
Investigator role decomposition as IG. Each subagent receives a focused directive from the orchestrator
and returns a compact summary; subagents do not share a structured data layer and each runs in an
isolated context, so all cross-agent integration happens via the orchestrator’s reasoning.


Trace2Skill-style. A pipeline modeled after Trace2Skill [16]: a flat parallel fleet of analyst sub-agents
over batches of trajectories, followed by a hierarchical consolidation pass that merges per-batch findings
into a conflict-free output.


RLM. The vanilla Recursive Language Model implementation from Zhang et al. [21], wrapped to
load a parquet of agent traces and produce a structured-report JSON. The root LM dispatches recursive

                                                      18
                                                                                                           Scale AI Research



sub-LM calls at maximum depth 2; sub-LMs at maximum depth fall back to plain LM calls. Distinct from
HALO [5], which extends an RLM with a closed-loop coding-agent stage (Section 2).


IG (this work). The full production IG configuration described in Section 3 and Appendix A.2, with
the orchestrator, scout, and investigator agents operating over a shared structured trace store with
schema-aware extraction primitives (Algorithm 1).

A.7 LLM-as-a-Judge: Evaluation Prompts and Rubrics
The LLM-as-a-judge evaluation in Section 4.1 is layered into three stages, each using a separate judge
prompt. All three stages use the same judge model (Claude Opus 4.6). The shared canonical analysis
question (the input given to every system) is also reproduced below.


Canonical analysis question. Every comparison system received the following question over the same
trace corpus:

     This corpus contains execution traces from an AI agent attempting the {benchmark name} benchmark. Surface
     the notable behavioural patterns in the corpus: recurring errors, silent failures, systematic efficiency issues,
     unexpected strengths, and how sub-populations of traces differ (e.g. correct vs. incorrect, high- vs.
     low-confidence, tool-using vs. not). For every finding: quantify prevalence over the total number of traces in the
     corpus; cite at least 3–5 specific trace IDs and direct quotes as evidence; compare relevant sub-populations; and
     distinguish confirmed / refuted / inconclusive. Do not focus on headline benchmark metrics (accuracy,
     pass-rate); focus on agent behaviours. Return the structured JSON report as specified.


Stage 1: Union-gold clustering. A single judge call ingests every finding from every system and
clusters them by underlying observation. The output is a canonical reference set against which each
system is later scored. Prompt:

     You are a meta-evaluator clustering findings from multiple automated trace-analysis
     systems that all analyzed the SAME corpus of AI-agent execution traces. Each input
     finding is a claim about the corpus. Your job is to produce a ‘union gold’ set:
     the canonical list of distinct observations about the corpus that appear across ANY
     of the systems.
     Rules: (1) Two findings belong in the same cluster iff they describe the same
     underlying phenomenon in the corpus (same behavior, failure mode, or pattern), even
     if their framing, prevalence numbers, or prescriptions differ. Use the affected
     trace-id lists as strong evidence for sameness. (2) A cluster may contain a single
     finding (unique observations are valuable). (3) Give each cluster a crisp canonical
     name (at most 80 characters) and a 1–3 sentence description. (4) Include up to 5
     representative trace ids that most strongly evidence the cluster (prefer ids cited
     by multiple systems). (5) Output VALID JSON. No prose before or after the JSON
     block.


Stage 2: Per-cluster rubric scoring. For each system, a separate judge call scores the system’s report
against each union-gold cluster on five dimensions. Each dimension is scored on a 0–3 scale with explicit
anchor descriptions:


                                                            19
                                                                                             Scale AI Research



       detection       0 absent; 1 passing mention; 2 explicit finding; 3 explicit
                       finding given prominence
       mechanism       0 none; 1 vague; 2 plausible; 3 sharp and testable
       evidence        0 none; 1 single; 2 multiple; 3 quantified across corpus
       specificity     0 generic; 1 mildly specific; 2 specific; 3 precise with quantified
                       scope
       actionability   0 none; 1 vague; 2 concrete; 3 concrete and testable

The judging-discipline instructions explicitly direct the judge to: score 0 when a dimension is not
evidenced in the report (do not give credit for what a well-intentioned reader might infer); cap detection
at 1 if the report makes a factually wrong claim about the observation; and use the report’s own findings
verbatim rather than rewarding paraphrase. The main-body quality table (Table 1) reports mean scores on
the three most discriminative dimensions (mechanism, specificity, actionability) plus a composite; detection
is consumed by the coverage metric and the judged≥2 % indicator reported in Appendix A.8; evidence is
omitted from the main body because it is highly correlated with mechanism in our runs and is reported
alongside the per-cluster JSON in supplementary materials.


Stage 3: Pairwise ranking. For each unordered pair of systems, the judge is presented with both reports
twice in opposite positions to control for position bias [25]. Each round is scored independently. The
pairwise judge prompt:

     You are an expert ML research engineer comparing two automated trace-analysis
     reports that were produced by different systems analyzing the SAME corpus of
     AI-agent execution traces and answering the SAME canonical question.
     Your job: pick the report a scaffold-improvement engineer would find more useful
     for actually fixing the agent. Weigh specificity, evidentiary grounding (cited
     trace ids and quantitative prevalence), novelty (surfacing non-obvious patterns),
     and actionability (concrete scaffold changes). Penalize generic platitudes,
     unsupported claims, and reports that confuse breadth for depth.
     Answer in strict JSON, with fields:           winner (A, B, or tie); confidence (low, med, or
     high); rationale (1–3 sentences).


The win rate reported in Table 1 is computed per system as (wins + 0.5 · ties)/nrounds across all rounds
in which the system participated.

A.8 LLM-as-a-Judge: Per-Benchmark Pairwise Breakdowns and Per-Dimension Scores
This appendix provides per-benchmark breakdowns of the LLM-as-a-Judge results summarized in
Table 1. All metrics are fold-collapsed means across three independent folds per system. The five
comparison systems are described in Section 4.1, along with component ablations of the IG architecture.


Pairwise win-rate rankings. Table 7 reports per-benchmark pairwise win rates sorted by rank. IG
leads on both benchmarks; the gap is larger on HLE (83.3%) than SSB (72.4%).




                                                         20
                                                                                                    Scale AI Research



Table 7. Pairwise win rate (%) by benchmark, sorted by rank. Three folds per system; win rate = (wins +
0.5×ties) / nrounds .

                                SSB                                            HLE
               Rank    System                 WR%             Rank    System                 WR%
                 1     IG                         72.4         1      IG                     83.3
                 2     CC Subagents               63.3         2      CC Subagents           61.4
                 3     Trace2Skill                56.2         3      Trace2Skill            49.0
                 4     RLM                        13.8         4      Single-Agent Coding    12.4
                 5     Single-Agent Coding         8.6         5      RLM                     9.0



Head-to-head win matrices. Tables 8 and 9 show the scaffold-collapsed head-to-head win percentage
of the row system against the column system, computed across all fold×fold matchups (two position-
swapped rounds per pair).

                          Table 8. Head-to-head win % (row vs. column) — SSB.

                                             IG     CC Sub.          T2S   RLM   SA Coding
                      IG                     —           56          50    100       100
                      CC Subagents           44          —           50    94        100
                      Trace2Skill            50          50          —      89        89
                      RLM                     0          6           11    —          56
                      Single-Agent Coding     0           0          11    44         —



                          Table 9. Head-to-head win % (row vs. column) — HLE.

                                             IG     CC Sub.          T2S   RLM   SA Coding
                      IG                     —           67          100   100       100
                      CC Subagents           33          —            72   100       100
                      Trace2Skill             0          28           —    100        89
                      RLM                     0          0             0    —         39
                      Single-Agent Coding     0           0           11    61        —


On SSB the top three systems are closely matched (IG–Trace2Skill is 50–50; IG–CC Subagents is 56–44),
while on HLE the ordering sharpens: IG beats every other system, including a 100–0 sweep against
Trace2Skill and RLM. RLM and Single-Agent Coding lose to all multi-agent systems on both benchmarks.


Per-benchmark rubric scores. Table 10 breaks out the per-dimension quality scores by benchmark. The
cross-benchmark averages reported in Table 1 are the means of these rows.




                                                         21
                                                                                                           Scale AI Research



Table 10. Per-dimension rubric scores (0–3) against union-gold clusters, by benchmark. Composite = 13 (Mech. +
Spec. + Act.).

                       System                     Bench.        Mech.     Spec.      Act.   Comp.
                                                  SSB           1.23          1.23   1.13     1.20
                       IG
                                                  HLE           1.45          1.44   1.41     1.43
                                                  SSB           1.15          1.15   1.05     1.12
                       CC Subagents
                                                  HLE           1.10          1.07   1.09     1.09
                                                  SSB           1.06          1.03   1.08     1.06
                       Trace2Skill
                                                  HLE           1.30          1.25   1.38     1.31
                                                  SSB           0.95          0.95   0.81     0.90
                       RLM
                                                  HLE           0.96          0.94   0.87     0.92
                                                  SSB           0.78          0.75   0.65     0.73
                       Single-Agent Coding
                                                  HLE           0.78          0.78   0.80     0.79


IG’s quality advantage is larger on HLE (composite 1.43 vs. next-best Trace2Skill at 1.31) than on SSB (1.20
vs. CC Subagents at 1.12), consistent with the wider pairwise gap on HLE. Trace2Skill’s actionability score
is notably strong on HLE (1.38), approaching IG (1.41); this is the only dimension on either benchmark
where another system comes within 0.05 of IG.


IG architecture ablations: per-benchmark detail. Table 11 reports the per-benchmark breakdown
of the two IG architecture ablations summarised in Table 1. Both ablations preserve IG’s full analysis
toolkit (Appendix A.3) and stateful Python data layer; they differ only in subagent topology. The
Orchestrator-only variant disables subagent dispatch entirely, forcing the orchestrator to run all ex-
traction, summarisation, and cohort comparison itself within its own context window. The Generic
Subagents variant retains parallel subagent dispatch but replaces the typed Scout (breadth-first hy-
pothesis proposal) and Investigator (depth-first corpus-scale validation) roles with a single generic
analyst-subagent role that receives an unstructured analysis directive.

Table 11. IG architecture ablations, per-benchmark. Coverage and pairwise win rate are reported alongside the
per-dimension judge rubric. IG main reproduces the headline configuration for direct comparison. Composite
= 31 (Mech. + Spec. + Act.).

     System                   Bench.   Coverage (%)         Pairwise WR (%)           Mech.     Spec.   Act.   Comp.
                              SSB            87                        72.4            1.23      1.23   1.13    1.20
     IG (main)
                              HLE            95                        83.3            1.45      1.44   1.41    1.43
                              SSB            87                        59.0            1.02      1.02   0.89    0.98
     IG, Generic Subagents
                              HLE            93                        76.0            1.26      1.23   1.17    1.22
                              SSB            78                        35.0            0.92      0.90   0.79    0.87
     IG, Orchestrator-only
                              HLE            86                        29.0            0.81      0.83   0.85    0.83


The Orchestrator-only variant degrades sharply on both benchmarks (composite 1.32 → 0.85, pairwise
WR 77.9% → 32.0%), and its coverage also drops below the multi-agent floor reached by every other
multi-agent system in Table 1 (82% vs. ≥ 90%). Without parallel subagents, the orchestrator cannot afford
to perform repeated corpus-scale extractions inside its own context, so findings consolidate around a

                                                           22
                                                                                                          Scale AI Research



smaller subset of the union-gold clusters.
The Generic Subagents variant is intermediate: coverage and HLE pairwise WR remain high (90% Avg
coverage, 76% HLE WR), but per-dimension quality drops by roughly 0.20 in composite. The pattern is
consistent across mechanism, specificity, and actionability rather than localised to any one dimension,
suggesting that the typed Scout/Investigator decomposition affects how grounded a finding is (depth of
mechanism, prevalence quantification, citation specificity) rather than whether the finding is surfaced at
all. Together, the two ablations decompose IG’s 77.9% pairwise WR into approximately 35.5 pp from
parallel subagent dispatch (orchestrator-only → generic-subagents) and a further 10.4 pp from typed
role specialisation (generic-subagents → full IG).

A.9 Statistical Analysis of the Intervention Study
This appendix provides robustness analyses supporting the Welch two-sample t-test reported in Sec-
tion 4.2. All analyses operate on the per-participant data (n = 6 per arm; each participant’s score is the
mean of three independent evaluation runs).


Welch two-sample t-test (primary). The CC arm has a per-participant mean of 43.2% (SD 9.95, SEM
4.06); the IG arm has 57.4% (SD 3.69, SEM 1.51). The between-arm difference is 14.17 pp with standard
error 4.33, yielding Welch’s t = 3.27, Welch–Satterthwaite df = 6.35, and two-sided p = 0.016. The 95%
confidence interval on the between-arm difference is [3.56, 24.78] pp; Cohen’s d = 1.89.


Exact permutation test. As a non-parametric robustness check that does not assume normality of the
per-participant means, we enumerate all (12
                                          6 ) = 924 ways of relabeling the 12 participants between arms.
The observed difference (14.17 pp) is matched or exceeded in 12 of 924 relabelings, giving an exact
two-sided p = 0.013, in agreement with the parametric Welch result.


Leave-one-participant-out sensitivity. We refit the Welch test 12 times, each time omitting one of
the 12 participants. The between-arm difference ranges from 12.4 to 17.9 pp; the test statistic ranges
t ∈ [2.60, 6.96] and the two-sided p-value ranges p ∈ [0.0001, 0.0499], with p < 0.05 in every refit. The
worst-case refit leaves p ≈ 0.048; the best-case refit leaves p < 0.001. No single participant is responsible
for the headline result.


Mixed-effects model. Because each participant contributes three evaluation runs, we additionally fit a
random-intercepts linear mixed model to the 2 × 6 × 3 = 36 run-level scores using REML, with arm as a
fixed effect and participant as a random intercept:

               yijk = β 0 + β 1 · 1[armij = IG] + u j + ϵijk ,   u j ∼ N (0, σu2 ), ϵijk ∼ N (0, σϵ2 ).

The fitted arm contrast is β̂ 1 = 14.17 pp (SE = 4.33, z = 3.27, p = 0.001). The estimated participant
random-effect variance is σ̂u2 = 53.3 and the residual variance is σ̂ϵ2 = 8.8, giving an intraclass correlation
of ICC = 0.86. The high ICC indicates that nearly all of the score variance is between-participant rather
than within-participant, which justifies aggregating to per-participant means in the primary analysis.


Edit-size analysis. Applying Welch’s t-test to per-participant net lines changed (286 for CC vs. 203
for IG; Table 2) yields t = −0.45, df = 7.3, p = 0.67, so the difference in arm means is not statistically

                                                         23
                                                                                                   Scale AI Research



distinguishable from zero. The CC mean is heavily influenced by a single participant who modified
+1112 lines; omitting that participant, the CC arm mean drops to 121 and the directionality of the contrast
reverses (IG modifies more lines on average, 203 vs. 121, also not significant: t = 0.93, p = 0.39). Per-arm
medians (94 for IG, 149 for CC) agree with the framing in Section 4.2 that IG-condition edits are typically
smaller, but the mean-based contrast does not survive an outlier sensitivity check. We therefore retain
edit size as a descriptive observation and do not claim it as a tested effect.


Prospective power. A two-sample t-test with n1 = n2 = 6 at α = 0.05 (two-sided) achieves power
≥ 0.80 for standardized effect sizes d ≳ 1.6. We do not claim power to detect smaller effects; a larger
replication remains an important direction for future work.

A.10 Iterative Patcher Loop: Protocol and Per-Round Detail

A.10.1 Protocol

With A0 as the base scaffold, at round r, traces Tr are collected by executing scaffold Ar against the
benchmark training split. The analysis system under test produces a report Rr from Tr , which the Patcher
(Claude Code with Claude Opus 4.6 as the underlying model) consumes alongside the scaffold source
code to produce Ar+1 . Each round’s modified scaffold is evaluated on a held-in validation split; the loop
terminates when validation pass rate fails to improve by ε = 0.01 for two consecutive rounds, or after
r = 5 rounds, whichever comes first. We report held-out test pass rate at each round.

A.10.2 Conditions

We compare four conditions: (i) the IG report; (ii) RLM [21]; (iii) CC Subagents (the same analysis system
used in Sections 4.3, 4.2); and (iv) a no-report pure-patcher baseline in which the Patcher receives only
the scaffold source code, isolating what the Patcher achieves without any analysis input.

A.10.3 Per-round trajectories

Table 12. Iterative patcher-loop trajectory on SpreadsheetBench. Cells show held-out test pass rate at each round.
“–” indicates the loop terminated before that round on the validation criterion; row-wise peak is bold.

                              Method           A0     A1     A2     A3     A4     A5
                              IG               0.41   0.77   0.81   0.80   0.84   0.80
                              RLM              0.42   0.79   0.81   0.84    –       –
                              CC Subagents     0.44   0.76   0.71   0.81    –       –
                              Pure Patcher     0.41   0.80   0.58   0.58    –      –



Table 13. Validation pass rate trajectory at each round, used for the patience-based saturation criterion. Test pass
rates are reported in Table 12. Row-wise peak is bold.

                              Method           A0     A1     A2     A3     A4     A5
                              IG               0.46   0.78   0.84   0.86   0.86   0.84
                              RLM              0.22   0.82   0.80   0.82    –       –
                              CC Subagents     0.24   0.86   0.68   0.78    –       –
                              Pure Patcher     0.42   0.72   0.56   0.48    –      –



                                                        24
                                                                                          Scale AI Research



A.10.4 IG report content evolves across rounds

The findings IG introduces at successive rounds describe failure modes at progressively finer levels
of granularity. At round 1, the dominant finding identifies the agent writing Excel formula strings
into cells using openpyxl, which stores them as literal text rather than evaluating them, a pattern
accounting for 84% of round-1 failures. At round 3, the report identifies a scaffold control-flow bug
in which a fallback path executes the model’s natural-language response as Python when no fenced
python block is present. At round 5, the report identifies an openpyxl API version-skew (the agent uses
wb.defined_names.definedName, removed in the installed version), and a save-and-reload sequence
that shifts row indices and breaks formula references in cells written earlier in the same task. Across
rounds, IG’s report length grows from 4,074 to 4,816 words and the number of distinct findings grows
from 7 to 9.

A.10.5 Pure-Patcher round-2 reversal

The Pure-Patcher condition reaches the highest round-1 test score in the cohort (0.80) and then regresses
to 0.58 at round 2 and again at round 3. We trace the round-2 regression to a single round-2 prompt edit:
the round-2 patcher, lacking a regenerated analysis input, added the instruction “If you are unsure about
a value, write your best estimate rather than leaving it as None — an approximate value is better than
a missing one.” SpreadsheetBench grades cells by exact-value match, including expected None values
for legitimately blank answer cells; the round-1 scaffold passed those tasks by leaving the cells empty.
The round-2 instruction directs the agent to fill them with heuristic guesses, and 12 of the 13 round-2
regressions exhibit the eval detail expected None, got <sentinel> (where the sentinel is a whitespace
character, the string “N/A”, or a hallucinated value). Without an analysis input grounded in the round-1
traces, the patcher’s round-2 priorities are derived from the scaffold source and its own priors, with no
benchmark-grounded check; the resulting edit is confidently structural but contradicts the eval contract.

A.11 Human Participant Study Protocol
We conducted two complementary human-expert studies. Experiment 1 (Section 4.3) elicits expert
ratings of individual insights drawn from competing reports against a structured rubric, isolating report
quality from downstream implementation. Experiment 2 (Section 4.2) measures whether IG reports help
practitioners make better scaffold modifications under a held-out benchmark protocol. Both studies use
SpreadsheetBench [12] as the underlying corpus and Claude Code with subagents as the comparison
report source, and both blind participants to the system that produced each report they evaluated.


Recruitment and eligibility. Participants were professional software engineers with experience in
LLM agent development, recruited through professional networks. Each participant had to be capable of
reading agent traces, diagnosing failure modes, and reasoning about scaffold code in a real development
environment.

A.11.1 Experiment 1: Insight-Level Rubric Judging

Materials. Each participant received (i) the SpreadsheetBench training-split trace corpus (250 agent
traces: 110 correct, 140 incorrect; baseline pass rate 44%); (ii) a benchmark description covering the
agent’s code-execution loop, the available tooling (openpyxl and pandas), the 5-turn budget, and the
cell-by-cell evaluation procedure; and (iii) a sequence of insights drawn from the two reports under
comparison. Insights were presented one at a time and the source system was not disclosed. The trace

                                                   25
                                                                                          Scale AI Research



corpus was provided as a single bundled file (∼6,000+ lines); participants were instructed to use a coding
assistant (Claude Code or Cursor) to navigate and spot-check claims rather than read traces sequentially.


Insight presentation. Each insight followed a fixed structured format identical across both report
systems: a status label (confirmed, refuted, or inconclusive), a corpus-level prevalence estimate, a
narrative description of the pattern, an evidence block with cited trace IDs and verbatim quotes each
accompanied by a per-trace explanation, the full list of affected trace IDs, a suggested scaffold action,
and any additional observations. The shared format prevents presentation-style confounds between
systems.


Rubric. Each insight was scored on a 1–5 scale across four dimensions: correctness (whether the claim is
actually true against the traces), depth (whether the insight explains the underlying mechanism rather
than describing the symptom), evidence quality (whether the claim is backed by specific, verifiable
trace citations), and actionability (whether the suggested improvement is concrete, proportionate to
the evidence, and free of overfitting risk). Anchor descriptions were provided for each level on each
dimension; the full anchors and per-dimension score breakdowns are reported in Appendix A.5. Rubric
instructions explicitly flagged common confounds: correctness and evidence quality are independent (a
finding may cite many traces but draw the wrong conclusion, or be true and verifiable without citing
specifics); a finding that claims population-level prevalence while citing only 1–2 traces was capped at
evidence-quality ≤ 3; and a finding that recommended a sweeping change based on a narrow pattern
received a lower actionability score regardless of its correctness on the cited traces.


Time budget and grading discipline. Approximately 120 minutes total per participant, with a 5–
10 minute target per insight. Participants recorded a start time so that per-insight grading time could be
measured post-hoc. Participants were instructed to score each insight on its own merits, not to adjust
scores based on how other insights had scored, and not to deflate scores when two insights described
overlapping phenomena.


Cohort and sample. Twelve human-expert evaluators scored a held-out sample of 23 insights (11 IG,
12 Claude Code with subagents) drawn from reports generated on the SpreadsheetBench training split.
Each (insight, evaluator) pair produced one set of four dimension scores; aggregate results in Section 4.3
are means over evaluators within each report condition.

A.11.2 Experiment 2: Scaffold-Intervention Study

Random assignment and blinding. Eligible participants were randomly assigned to one of the two
report conditions (IG or CC Subagent). Assignment labels were not disclosed: participants were told that
they would be evaluating one of several candidate analysis-report formats but were not informed which
system had generated the report they received, and the report itself contained no system-identifying
metadata. Graders of the resulting scaffold modifications had access only to the held-out benchmark task
set and the participant’s modified scaffold; they were not told which report condition the participant
had been in.


Baseline-competency screen. Prior to the main intervention task, each participant completed a short
qualification task designed to confirm baseline competence with the trace data and tooling: given a

                                                   26
                                                                                               Scale AI Research



sample of execution traces, the participant was asked to use a coding assistant (Claude Code or Cursor)
to compute the distribution of tool calls per trace. Participants who completed the screen task were
enrolled in the main study; the screen was scored pass/fail on whether the reported counts matched
ground truth on a small held-out sample. The screen was identical across conditions and was completed
before condition assignment was revealed, so it cannot bias the between-arm contrast.


Conditions. Two conditions: participants received either an IG report or a Claude Code analysis report
(six participants per arm). Condition assignment was blinded so participants did not know which
report-generation system produced the analysis they received. Headline results in Section 4.2 compare
both arms against the unmodified baseline scaffold.


Task briefing. Each participant received a self-contained package (∼400 MB) containing: (i) the Spread-
sheetBench scaffold source; (ii) 250 training traces and 50 baseline-eval traces; (iii) the assigned condition’s
insight report; (iv) the reference baseline pass rate (44% on 22/50 dev tasks); (v) a Docker runtime image
with Python, LibreOffice, the benchmark eval data, and the harness; and (vi) a Claude Code warm-up
task to verify environment setup. Participants were instructed to use Claude Code or Cursor as their
coding assistant and were provided a $50 API budget for agent calls (Claude Opus 4.6).


Train/eval split. The 250 training traces were generated with GPT-5.2 and serve as the failure-mode
corpus that each insight report describes; the 50-task evaluation set is run with Claude Opus 4.6, which is
also the model the participant’s modified scaffold is scored against. Train and eval task sets are disjoint,
so this is not a head-to-head model comparison. Participants were instructed to treat training traces as
illustrative of scaffold failure modes rather than as a performance ceiling.


Time and iteration. Maximum 1.5 hours per participant. Iterative scaffold edits via the participant’s
IDE were picked up automatically by the running container, allowing rapid edit/eval cycles.


Locked configuration. Four scaffold parameters were locked and the eval runner enforced the lock: the
model (Claude Opus 4.6), the maximum number of agent turns (5), the number of preview rows shown
to the agent (5), and the per-cell execution timeout (60 s). Participants modified the prompts, the agent
loop, and non-locked configuration fields only. Modifying the eval runner, the task-id list, or the data
directory invalidated a submission.


Evaluation. Each participant’s modified scaffold was scored on the held-out test split (disjoint from the
50-task dev set used during iteration). Scoring was performed by re-running the eval harness three times
per submission and averaging; reported scores in Section 4.2 are these per-participant means. Evaluation
is deterministic per run (cell-by-cell spreadsheet comparison), so run-to-run variance reflects only the
agent’s non-determinism at Claude Opus 4.6.


Submission and audit trail. Participants exported their coding-assistant chat transcripts as part of
the submission, ordered chronologically. The transcript audit trail was used post-hoc to verify that
participants did not bypass the locked configuration or access eval-side artifacts. No participant in either
report condition was excluded for protocol violations.


                                                      27
                                                                                        Scale AI Research



Compensation and labor. To maintain study quality, we provided participants in both experiments with
a comprehensive briefing package governing study procedures, evaluation rubrics, and (for Experiment 2)
the scaffold-improvement task and locked-configuration constraints. Due to the inclusion of personally
identifying recruitment correspondence and proprietary internal protocols, we summarize the core
requirements above and do not release the unredacted briefing materials. On average, each Experiment 1
grading session required approximately 2 hours of expert labor to review traces, score insights, and
submit responses; each Experiment 2 intervention session required up to 1.5 hours of expert labor to
analyze the assigned report, modify the scaffold, and submit results. Participants in both experiments
were compensated under contractual terms that met or exceeded applicable local wage requirements.
No unpaid volunteer or crowd labor was used.

A.12 Patcher Prompt
The Patcher prompt template is rendered at runtime with conditional sections for the four input con-
ditions (Q1–Q4); the template below shows the production form with both an IG report and the trace
bundle present (Q4). For codebase-only (Q1) the IG-report and traces sections are dropped. The
benchmark-specific specification is appended verbatim after these instructions.

     You are a coding agent tasked with improving an agent scaffold to maximize its
     benchmark performance.
     Your workspace. The source directory contains the agent scaffold source code –-
     this is what you modify. An IG report file contains an analysis of the agent’s
     execution traces with identified failure modes and recommended fixes; start by
     reading it. A traces directory contains the agent’s execution traces; use them to
     understand where the agent fails and why.
     Workflow. Approach this rigorously –- plan first, then implement. Premature edits
     produce shallow patches that don’t generalize. Most of your effort should be in
     steps 1–2.
     (1) Explore. Get a thorough understanding of the scaffold code –- its entry points,
     the tool surface, and where the agent’s behavior is configured vs hard-coded. Read
     the IG report carefully for the failure-mode analysis and recommended interventions.
     Examine traces to identify concrete failure patterns from real runs. You may
     dispatch focused-exploration subagents and use a TodoWrite tool to track your plan
     as you progress.
     (2) Diagnose and plan. For each failure mode, name (a) the specific scaffold layer
     that’s wrong (system prompt, tool definition, control flow, retry policy, response
     synthesis); (b) the mechanism –- why the current code produces that failure (not
     just the surface symptom); and (c) the smallest concrete change that fixes it.
     (3) Implement.    Apply the changes from your plan.    Prefer small, targeted edits over
     rewrites.
     (4) Evaluate. Call the evaluate-and-submit tool to test your changes. With one
     attempt available, make your best changes then submit. With multiple attempts, you
     receive evaluation results after each call and can iterate.
     Constraints. Only modify files in the source directory. Do not access anything
     outside it. Do not change the model or LLM configuration. Do not use web search or
     web fetch. Do not access, read, or inspect any evaluation code, test data, ground
     truth, or benchmark task definitions. Do not attempt to read task metadata, answer
     keys, or expected outputs from the environment object. Focus on scaffold changes:


                                                  28
                                                                                          Scale AI Research



     system prompts, tool implementations, error handling, control flow, response
     synthesis.


A.13 Computational Requirements — Detail
Table 14 reports per-variant LLM cost and wall-clock for a single Insights Generator analysis run,
averaged over n=6 runs (3 folds × 2 benchmarks: SpreadsheetBench and HLE). Costs are imputed
from token counts at Anthropic’s published list price (claude-opus-4-6: $15/M input, $75/M output;
claude-haiku-4-5: $1/M input, $5/M output) where the source schema does not persist a dollar field;
otherwise costs are taken verbatim from the harness’s billing telemetry. Wall-clock is the elapsed time of
the IG synthesis pass itself, from the same source records.




                                                   29
                                                                                                      Scale AI Research




Table 4. IG analysis primitives. Each is pre-injected as a callable Python function in subagent REPL sessions and
invoked from agent-authored code. ✓ / × indicate per-role availability.

          Function                   Description                                    Orch.     Scout       Inv.
          Trace inspection
          load_traces                Load full corpus + extractions as a Polars       ✓          ✓        ✓
                                     DataFrame
          get_trace                  Return full content of one trace;                ✓          ✓        ✓
                                     chunk-list outline if oversized
          get_trace_chunk            Retrieve a specific chunk of a long trace        ✓          ✓        ✓
          get_schema                 Per-column metadata: types, null rates,          ✓          ✓        ✓
                                     distributions, correlations
          search_traces              Hybrid semantic-keyword retrieval over           ✓          ✓        ✓
                                     trace content
          get_extractions            List previously persisted extraction             ✓          ✓        ✓
                                     columns and their field definitions
          LLM-driven analysis
          extract                    Structured feature extraction across traces      ×          ✓        ✓
                                     with chunking, batching, and
                                     checkpointing
          summarize_trace            Per-trace LLM summary with caching               ✓          ✓        ✓
                                     and progressive summarization for long
                                     traces
          summarize_group            Single LLM summary characterizing a              ✓          ✓        ✓
                                     group of traces
          compare_segments           Deep A/B comparison between two                  ×          ×        ✓
                                     cohorts with token budgeting
          Data management
          save_column                Persist a computed Polars column as an           ✓          ✓        ✓
                                     extraction parquet
          save_affected_traces       Persist a trace-id list as the cohort            ×          ×        ✓
                                     supporting a finding
          reload_data                Refresh cached DataFrame after new               ✓          ✓        ✓
                                     extractions land
          consolidate                Merge extraction parquets into the base          ✓          ✓        ✓
                                     store and refresh the schema cache



                                          LLM cost ($)                        Wall-clock (min)
               IG variant       Mean     Median               Range   Mean      Median         Range
               RLM∗              23.17     22.08    15.27 – 29.88      19.5         17.5    10.6 – 29.3
               trace2skill       26.43     25.63    22.22 – 32.49      37.3         35.8    28.6 – 53.4
               cc_subagents      38.09     38.05    33.00 – 42.95      34.4         34.3    27.2 – 42.1
               IG (ours)∗        75.65     72.19   20.82 – 139.54      48.4         48.6    38.1 – 56.4

Table 14. LLM cost and wall-clock per IG synthesis run, averaged over n=6 runs (3 folds × 2 benchmarks). ∗ Costs
are imputed from recorded token counts at Anthropic Claude Opus / Haiku list prices; others are persisted by the
source harness. The wide range for IG (ours) reflects the difference between SpreadsheetBench (∼$29 mean) and
HLE (∼$122 mean) corpora; HLE traces are substantially longer.



                                                         30
