                                             C ODE G ENERATION BY D IFFERENTIAL T EST T IME S CALING


                                                        Yifeng He                            Ethan Wang                           Jicheng Wang
                                              University of California, Davis        University of California, Davis       University of California, Davis
                                                  yfhe@ucdavis.edu

                                                                 Xuanxin Ouyang                                      Hao Chen




arXiv:2605.20473v1 [cs.SE] 19 May 2026
                                                                 Wuhan University                             University of Hong Kong
                                                                                                                 chenho@hku.hk




                                                                                             A BSTRACT
                                                  Test-time scaling has emerged as a promising approach for improving code generation by exploring
                                                  large solution spaces at inference time. However, existing methods often rely on public test cases
                                                  that are unavailable in practice, or require extensive LLM inference for candidate selection, leading
                                                  to significant token consumption and time overhead. We present D IFF C ODE G EN, a novel test-time
                                                  scaling method for code generation based on coverage-guided differential analysis. D IFF C ODE G EN
                                                  generates diverse code candidates using various sampling and prompting strategies, then applies
                                                  coverage-guided fuzzing to synthesize inputs without requiring any existing tests or large language
                                                  models. By executing all candidates on these inputs, D IFF C ODE G EN captures their dynamic behav-
                                                  ior and clusters candidates based on behavioral similarity. D IFF C ODE G EN selects the medoid of the
                                                  largest cluster as the final output. Unlike prior test-time scaling methods that invoke additional LLM
                                                  inference for candidate selection, D IFF C ODE G EN performs selection without any extra model calls,
                                                  incurring little to no additional token consumption. D IFF C ODE G EN is fully asynchronous, naturally
                                                  suited to the current trend of agentic coding, and is thus efficient and highly scalable. We evalu-
                                                  ate D IFF C ODE G EN across 4 large language models, demonstrating consistent improvements over
                                                  baselines. Compared to state-of-the-art test-time scaling methods, D IFF C ODE G EN achieves com-
                                                  petitive or superior performance while using only a fraction of time and tokens. D IFF C ODE G EN is
                                                  model-agnostic and can be combined with reasoning models to further boost performance.

                                         Keywords Code generation · Differential testing · Fuzzing · Large language models


                                         1   Introduction

                                         Large language models (LLMs) have become one of the most popular coding assistance tools for software devel-
                                         opment [1, 2]. Unlike open-ended text generation with natural languages, where quality is often subjective, code
                                         generation has an objective notion of correctness: the generated program must execute and satisfy the specification.
                                         However, LLM decoding is inherently stochastic. Sampling creates diversity but also introduces randomness into
                                         response correctness, which often leads to unreliable behavior and unstable performance in practice.
                                         To mitigate this uncertainty during evaluation, prior work often samples multiple candidates for each coding task in the
                                         benchmark. Let K denote the number of sampled candidates. Previous work [3, 4] reports PASS@K, which considers
                                         a task as passed if any of the K candidates passes the tests. Although PASS@K captures the benefit of sampling
                                         during evaluation to overcome the possibility that the LLM fails by chance, it does not match real-world use cases,
                                         where coding assistants must typically return a single solution. Therefore, selecting a high-quality candidate from a
                                         set of samples is crucial for practical code generation.
                                         Test-time scaling (TTS) is a promising direction for searching large solution spaces at inference time [5–8]. However,
                                         many such approaches rely on extensive post-training and reward modeling, leading to significant resource consump-
                                         tion. Recent training-free test-time scaling methods for code generation [9] propose using existing public test cases to
                                  Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling




Figure 1: An overview of the D IFF C ODE G EN approach. Here, “for free” refers to performing candidate selection
without any additional LLM inference, incurring no extra token cost beyond the initial candidate generation.



iteratively debug generated code, then use LLM-synthesized inputs to select the best candidate based on dynamic be-
havior. Although these methods achieve strong benchmark performance, their test-available setting limits applicability
in practice [10]. Furthermore, these iterative approaches pay the cost of LLM inference twice—once for generating
candidates and again for selection—introducing significant time overhead and token consumption. This motivates the
need for a selection method that is both test-free and free of any additional model inference.
Differential testing is a common approach in software engineering to find bugs across different versions of the same
software [11–14]. Intuitively, if most versions behave the same on a set of inputs while a few deviate, the deviating
versions are more likely to be incorrect. Sampling multiple candidates from a code model naturally fits this setting,
as all of them have the same intended functionality as described by the prompt, and differences arise only from
probabilistic decoding. Inspired by this observation, we propose leveraging differential testing to select a candidate
from multiple samples without requiring external oracles.
In this work, we introduce D IFF C ODE G EN (Figure 1), a novel test-time scaling method that selects among candidates
without invoking any additional LLM inference, incurring little to no extra token consumption and overhead. D IF -
F C ODE G EN utilizes different sampling methods to generate diverse candidates from the LLM. During the selection
phase, D IFF C ODE G EN first obtains a set of inputs via coverage-guided fuzzing on one of the candidates, then exe-
cutes all candidates on these inputs to collect their outputs to model their dynamic behavior. Finally, D IFF C ODE G EN
clusters the candidates based on their dynamic behavior and selects the candidate with the shortest relative distance to
all other candidates in the largest cluster as the final output. Through these steps, D IFF C ODE G EN effectively selects
the most likely correct candidate from a large solution space, without requiring any extra model inference or token
consumption.
D IFF C ODE G EN is model-agnostic and can be applied to any LLM. It can also be combined with reasoning and other
test-time scaling methods to further boost performance. We evaluate D IFF C ODE G EN on 4 LLMs, ranging from small
to large and from open-weight to proprietary models. D IFF C ODE G EN consistently improves performance across all


                                                            2
                                   Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


models, and also outperforms existing test-time scaling methods that do not require access to existing public tests.
The main distinguishing feature of D IFF C ODE G EN is its low overhead and token cost, making it a practical choice for
real-world code generation tasks. On L IVE C ODE B ENCH [15], D IFF C ODE G EN takes only one-fifth of the execution
time compared to previous TTS methods on locally-served LLMs, and requires approximately 5% of the time of
previous TTS methods on API-based LLMs. D IFF C ODE G EN also uses significantly fewer tokens compared to existing
methods, consuming only around 4% of the input tokens used by previous work. Overall, D IFF C ODE G EN presents a
highly efficient and effective solution for test-time scaling in code generation. In summary, our contributions are:
         • We propose D IFF C ODE G EN, a novel test-time scaling method combining differential testing and dynamic
           software analysis. D IFF C ODE G EN is both effective and efficient, outperforming existing methods in PASS@1
           performance while using a fraction of time and tokens.
         • We demonstrate the effectiveness of D IFF C ODE G EN across 4 LLMs against two baselines, comprehensively
           evaluating the performance gain of applying D IFF C ODE G EN.
         • We propose and evaluate three distinct differential generation methods, with detailed design and performance
           analysis of their different characteristics.
         • We open-source our implementation of D IFF C ODE G EN to facilitate future research on applying software
           testing and analysis techniques to help AI for software engineering.

2     Background
2.1     Coverage-guided differential testing

2.1.1    Differential testing
Differential testing is a widely-adopted software testing technique that addresses the problem of missing oracle, i.e., the
challenge of determining whether a program’s output is correct when no ground truth specification exists [11]. Instead
of relying on expert-provided oracles (i.e., expected outputs), differential testing compares the behaviors of multiple
implementations that should conform to the same specification. When these implementations produce different outputs
on the same input, at least one of them must contain a bug.
Cross-referencing multiple implementations of the same specification provides a pseudo-oracle, where discrepancies
in outputs indicate potential faults, and agreement suggests the likelihood of correctness [11, 12]. This technique
has proven highly effective for testing compilers [16–18], database systems [19], and other systems where formal
specifications or programmer-provided test oracles are either unavailable or impractical to use.
LLM-based code generation naturally fits the differential testing paradigm. When sampling multiple code candi-
dates from a language model given the same natural language specification, each candidate represents an independent
attempt to implement the described functionality. Although these candidates may differ in implementation details,
variable names, control flow structures, or algorithmic choices, they share the same intended cognitive semantics as
defined by the prompt [20]. This setting mirrors the classical differential testing scenario: multiple implementations of
the same specification that should produce identical outputs on valid inputs. Candidates that exhibit consistent behav-
ior across a diverse set of inputs are more likely to correctly implement the specification, while those that deviate from
the majority suggest potential bugs or misinterpretations of the requirements. By leveraging this insight, differential
testing can serve as an effective oracle-free selection mechanism for LLM-generated code.

2.1.2    Coverage-guided fuzzing
Coverage-guided fuzzing uses code coverage as feedback to guide input generation toward unexplored program re-
gions [21, 22]. Fuzzers instrument the program under test to record which code paths each input exercises, then
prioritize inputs that trigger new coverage [23]. This design enables the fuzzer to record the inputs that are meaningful
for exploring program behaviors.
A fundamental challenge in differential testing is generating inputs that effectively explore the behavioral differences
among implementations. Random input generation often produces trivial test cases that exercise only common code
paths, missing bugs in the deeply nested branches [13, 14, 24]. To address this limitation, the combination of dif-
ferential testing with coverage-guided fuzzing has been proposed to enhance input generation [25–27]. Coverage
guidance ensures that the generated inputs explore diverse program behaviors, while differential comparison across
implementations reveals semantic inconsistencies.
This combined approach addresses a key limitation of traditional differential testing: without coverage guidance, dif-
ferential testing may repeatedly exercise the same code paths while missing bugs in less-frequently-executed regions.


                                                            3
                                       Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


Coverage-guided differential testing systematically explores the behavioral space of all implementations under test,
increasing the likelihood of detecting semantic differences that indicate bugs [28]. For LLM-based code generation,
coverage-guided fuzzing offers a principled alternative to LLM-synthesized test inputs. While previous work has
explored using LLMs to generate test cases for candidate selection [9, 29], such approaches inherit a fundamental lim-
itation: LLMs predict tokens based on statistical patterns in training data rather than executing or simulating program
behavior [20]. As a result, LLM-generated inputs may fail to expose subtle behavioral differences among candidates.
In contrast, coverage-guided fuzzing directly instruments and executes the generated code, systematically discovering
inputs that explore diverse program states [30]. This execution-based approach captures the true dynamic behavior of
code candidates, providing a more reliable foundation for differential analysis than purely generative methods.

2.2     Probabilistic sampling

The nature of generative language models is inherently probabilistic. In language modeling, the probability of gener-
ating a given sequence of tokens t1 , t2 , . . . , tn is defined as
                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                    Y
                P (t1 , t2 , . . . , tn ) = P (t1 )P (t2 |t1 ) · · · P (tn |t1 , . . . , tn−1 ) =         P (ti |t1 , t2 , . . . , ti−1 ).   (1)
                                                                                                    i=1

At each decoding step given all the previous tokens, generative language models predict a conditional probability
distribution over the vocabulary to select the next token P (ti |t1 , t2 , . . . , ti−1 ). Plain greedy decoding always selects
the token with the highest probability, which often leads to repetitive and low-quality outputs [31, 32]. Instead of
always selecting the text that maximizes likelihood, various probabilistic sampling methods have been proposed to
introduce diversity to text generation [32–35].

2.2.1    Temperature
The temperature-based sampling parameter is one of the most widely adopted approaches to this problem [33, 36–39].
Let T denote the temperature parameter and ti denote the next token to be generated, temperature sampling adjusts
the conditional probability distribution by scaling the logits of the token z(ti ) before applying the softmax function:
                                                                                exp (z(ti )/T )
                                            PT (ti |t1 , t2 , . . . , ti−1 ) = P                  .
                                                                                j exp (
                                                                                       z(tj )/T )

Therefore, a low temperature sharpens the probability distribution, thus making the model more deterministic. In
contrast, a high temperature flattens the probability distribution, increasing the chance of selecting less likely tokens.
For problem-solving, especially programming tasks, temperature is often seen as a trade-off between exploration and
exploitation: a high temperature explores the solution space more broadly [39], but also with the higher chance of
generating completely wrong answers [9, 40].

2.2.2    Beam search
Instead of completely maximizing likelihood or reshaping the probability distribution, beam search maintains a set of
highest-probability sequences at each time step [41]. Let k denote the beam width, i.e., the number of highly-likely
sequences to maintain at each decoding step. We have a beam set Bi at step i, |Bi | = k. Intuitively, we select the
top-k tokens at the first decoding step, each of which is the start of a beam. At each subsequent decoding step i, for
each beam sequence in Bi , we append their corresponding top-k tokens to form new candidate sequences, resulting in
k × k candidates. We select the top-k sequences with the overall highest likelihood from all the candidates to form the
new beam set Bi+1 . Formally, the update step is
                                           Bi+1 = Topk {P (s)P (v|s) : s ∈ Bi , v ∈ V } ,
where P (s) is the likelihood of a token sequence given by Equation 1 and v is the text token to generate. At the final
generation step, the beam with the highest overall likelihood is selected as the output. By its nature, beam search only
adds a constant factor of k to the time complexity of decoding (some view greedy decoding as a special case of beam
search with k = 1), making it an efficient way to obtain multiple responses from LLMs in a single decoding pass [41].

2.3     On the effects of prompting

LLMs are brittle to prompt variations [42–45]. Sclar et al. [43] finds that small formatting variations in the prompt lead
to significant performance differences in natural language question-answering tasks across different models. Tony et al.
[46] finds that different prompting techniques affect the security level of code generated by LLMs on security-relevant


                                                                         4
                                   Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


programming tasks. Variation in prompting is also shown to have a vast effect on the quality of LLM-generated
code [47]. The prompting style of text-to-code tasks is not the only factor, Liu et al. [48] show that even small
semantic-preserving perturbations to prompts can lead to differences in the generated code’s functionality.

3     Design of D IFF C ODE G EN
3.1     Overview

In this section, we describe the design of D IFF C ODE G EN. D IFF C ODE G EN fits a zero-shot setting in which the user
provides a natural language prompt describing the expected behavior of the resulting program, and the LLM generates
code in one response accordingly. We consider a real-world scenario in which no test suite or example inputs exist for
the desired new code, as public tests rarely exist before a function is implemented. The workflow of D IFF C ODE G EN
is illustrated in Figure 1 with three major components:

        1. Differential generation (Section 3.2): D IFF C ODE G EN generates multiple code candidates from the same
           prompt via different generation strategies. We provide and analyze three different approaches in our study.
        2. Coverage-guided differential analysis (Section 3.3): D IFF C ODE G EN instruments and fuzzes a selected
           reference solution to collect valid inputs. With the inputs, D IFF C ODE G EN executes all generated code can-
           didates and records their dynamic behavior.
        3. Response selection by distance-based clustering (Section 3.4): D IFF C ODE G EN clusters the generated code
           candidates based on their dynamic behavior into two clusters. Our hypothesis is that the larger one with
           behavior consensus is more likely to contain correct solutions. D IFF C ODE G EN selects the center of the
           larger cluster as its final output.

3.2     Differential generation

Many approaches exist for obtaining diverse responses from LLMs with the same prompt. Over the years, researchers
have developed various stochastic sampling, decoding, and prompting strategies to diversify the outputs of LLMs,
aiming to improve the quality of generated content [32, 39, 48]. In D IFF C ODE G EN, we integrate and investigate three
different approaches to generate diverse code candidates from the same prompt: stochastic sampling (with temperature
and nucleus sampling), beam-search decoding, and prompt perturbations.

3.2.1    Differential sampling
The core principle behind differential sampling is to exploit the stochastic nature of LLM decoding (Section 2.2) to
generate semantically diverse candidates from the same prompt. For code generation tasks, the same natural language
prompt describes the semantics of the desired program. No matter how sampling diversifies the implementation
details, all candidates should produce the same execution behavior on valid inputs. In D IFF C ODE G EN, we control
the randomness with both temperature and nucleus sampling to generate diverse code candidates. We follow previous
work [9, 49] to set temperature to 0.7 and use nucleus sampling with p = 0.95. We repeat the sampling process n
times for each input prompt to obtain n code candidates.

3.2.2    Differential decoding
Beam search [50] is a best-first search decoding strategy. Different from Section 3.2.1 where we repeat the sampling
process n times to obtain n diverse outputs, beam search keeps n best partial sequences at each decoding step, naturally
producing n complete sequences at the end of decoding in a single pass. At the end of the decoding forward pass,
instead of choosing the single best sequence as the output, we use all n sequences as our code candidates.

3.2.3    Differential prompting
LLMs are highly sensitive to prompt variations [43–45]. Some may view this as a weakness or drawback of generative
models and try to avoid it [15], but in D IFF C ODE G EN, we view it as a feature to elevate the chance of generating
a better solution. Previous work [51] also used small changes in the natural language instructions as augmentation
techniques to improve the performances of NLP models. To enable differential generation via prompting, we designed
18 semantic-preserving prompt perturbations to introduce variations to the original prompt. As shown in Table 1, none
of the perturbations change the core semantics of the original prompt. With these perturbations, we generate 18 code
candidates from the same prompt by applying each perturbation once.


                                                            5
                                     Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


           Table 1: Summary of 18 prompt perturbation methods used for differential testing, organized by category.

Category                   Name                       Description
                           Synonym Replacement        Replace common words with synonyms (e.g., “write”→“compose”)
Lexical [51, 52]           Formalize                  Convert to formal tone (e.g., “you”→“one”, “please”→“kindly”)
                           Informalize                Convert to casual tone with “Hey,” and “You gotta nail it!”
                           Shorten                    Remove common adjectives (e.g., “efficient”, “optimized”)
                           Reverse Sentences          Reverse the order of sentences in the prompt
Structural [53]
                           Shuffle Sentences          Randomly shuffle the order of sentences
                           Paraphrase                 Prepend “In other words,” to reword the prompt
Informational [52]         Add Constraint             Append efficiency and edge case handling requirements
                           Expand Details             Append scalability and documentation requirements
                           Add Ambiguity              Append text suggesting multiple interpretations
                           Add Greeting               Prepend a random greeting (e.g., “Hello!”, “Hi there!”)
Stylistic                  Add Farewell               Append a random farewell (e.g., “Cheers!”, “Best regards!”)
                           Add Humor                  Append a humorous warning or note
                           Add Irrelevant Prefix      Prepend an unrelated sentence (e.g., about weather)
Noise [54, 55]             Add Irrelevant Suffix      Append an unrelated sentence (e.g., “I love ice cream”)
                           Add Distracting Context    Append distracting background information
Error [56]                 Introduce Errors           Remove punctuation (commas, semicolons) to simulate typos


3.3        Fuzzing for dynamic behavior modeling

After obtaining N solution candidates from differential generation, D IFF C ODE G EN applies coverage-guided differen-
tial fuzzing to collect their dynamic behavior.

3.3.1       Coverage-guided fuzzing
Using coverage-guided fuzzing as described in Section 2.1.2, D IFF C ODE G EN collects inputs that explore the dynamic
behavior of generated code candidates. We first select one of the generated code candidates as the reference solution to
be fuzzed. For repeated stochastic sampling, we randomly pick one of the candidates; for beam search, we select the
top-1 beam as the reference; and for prompt perturbations, we select the candidate generated from the original prompt
without changes.
In real-world code generation scenarios, users may instruct the model to implement stand-alone executable programs
or library functions. To accommodate both scenarios, D IFF C ODE G EN supports two modes: script-based and library
fuzzing. Script-based programs are command-line applications that read input from standard input, processing the
input as a byte stream. In script-based fuzzing, the reference solution is treated as a complete program that can
be executed directly. The fuzzer generates inputs that are fed to the program via standard input. D IFF C ODE G EN
utilizes AFL++ [22] for script-based programs. For Python programs, we follow Zhao et al. [57] to use py-afl1 .
D IFF C ODE G EN uses the saved seed queue from AFL++ for the next step.
Library functions, on the other hand, are not directly executable and require specific function arguments as inputs.
Therefore, fuzzer drivers are used for fuzzing library functions. These fuzz drivers take random bytes from the fuzzer,
subsequently convert these bytes into well-structured arguments for API calls, and use the parsed arguments to execute
the function under test. D IFF C ODE G EN uses libFuzzer [58] as the engine for library function fuzzing. For Python
functions, we use Atheris2 as the fuzzing framework. However, unlike script-based fuzzing where we can directly
execute the program, fuzz drivers do not exist for newly LLM-generated library functions. To this end, D IFF C ODE G EN
utilizes an LLM-based approach to generate the fuzz driver, which is a simplified version of P ROMPT F UZZ [59].
Specifically, D IFF C ODE G EN packages the generated library function, the instruction to generate the fuzz driver, and
the documentation of how to parse inputs for the function as a prompt to an LLM. D IFF C ODE G EN generates the fuzz
driver with a single pass. If the generated driver fails to compile or run, D IFF C ODE G EN uses the selected reference
      1
          https://github.com/jwilk/python-afl
      2
          https://github.com/google/atheris


                                                              6
                                  Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


Algorithm 1 Response Selection by Distance-Based Clustering
Require: Code candidates P = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pN }, dynamic behaviors {Bpi }N
                                                                              i=1
 1: if N = 1 then
 2:     return p1
 3: for i ← 1 to N do                                           ▷ Compute pairwise distance matrix D (Section 3.4.3)
 4:     for j ← i + 1 to N do
 5:         Iij ← Ipi ∩ Ipj                                                                  ▷ Common valid inputs
 6:         if Iij = ∅ then
 7:              Dij ← 1.0
 8:         else
 9:              Dij ← d(pi , pj )                                            ▷ Dynamic behavior distance Equation 2
10:         Dji ← Dij
11: {C0 , C1 } ← AGGLOMERATIVE C LUSTERING(D, k=2, linkage=average)
12: C ∗ ← arg maxC∈{C0 ,C1 } |C|                                                           ▷ Select consensus cluster
13: p∗ ← arg minpi ∈C ∗ pj ∈C ∗ ,j̸=i Dij
                          P
                                                                      ▷ Find medoid in consensus cluster (Equation 4)
14: return p∗


solution as the final output. We follow FuzzAug [30] to instrument the entry block of functions under test to record
inputs that trigger new code coverage during fuzzing.
Definition 3.1 (Program dynamic behavior). Given a program p and an input set Ip = {i1 , i2 , . . . , im }, the dynamic
behavior of p on Ip is defined as a set of 3-tuples
                           Bp = {(ini , outi , erri )|ini ∈ Ip , (outi , erri ) := Exec(p, ini )},
where outi and erri are the output and error code of executing p with input ini , respectively [57].

3.3.2    Differential analysis
After fuzzing, we obtain a set of inputs that explore the dynamic behavior of the reference solution. D IFF C ODE G EN
then executes all generated code candidates with the collected inputs. For all code candidates generated from the
same prompt, D IFF C ODE G EN ensures the same set of inputs is used for execution. We collect the outputs, errors,
and exit codes of each execution as dynamic behavior of the program as described in Definition 3.1. For script-based
programs, we capture the standard output and standard error streams; for library functions, we directly record the
returned values and capture any exceptions raised during execution. For a given programming task, D IFF C ODE G EN
obtains {(pi , Bpi )|i ∈ 1..N } to choose a final solution, where pi is the i-th generated code candidate.

3.4     Response selection by clustering

Instead of relying on an LLM to pick the best solution as in previous work [9, 60, 61], which is expensive and
inefficient, D IFF C ODE G EN selects its final output by distance-based clustering on the dynamic behavior of all gener-
ated code candidates. D IFF C ODE G EN adopts hierarchical agglomerative clustering with average-linkage [62, 63] to
discover behavior consensus among generated code candidates. The overview of D IFF C ODE G EN’s clustering-based
selection is illustrated in Algorithm 1, and we describe the details in the following paragraphs.

3.4.1    Normalization of dynamic behavior
Before comparing dynamic behaviors across code candidates, D IFF C ODE G EN normalizes execution outputs to ac-
count for superficial differences that do not affect semantic correctness. The normalization process handles several
common variations: 1. line ending differences (\r\n and \r are converted to \n); 2. trailing whitespace is stripped
from outputs; 3. non-string outputs are converted to their string representations. This normalization ensures that two
programs producing semantically equivalent outputs are not incorrectly classified as different due to platform-specific
or formatting variations.
When comparing two execution results, D IFF C ODE G EN first checks whether the exit codes match. If the exit codes dif-
fer, the results are considered different regardless of their outputs. For matching exit codes, D IFF C ODE G EN compares
the normalized standard outputs. Standard error streams are selectively included in the comparison: for successful
executions (exit code 0), stderr is typically ignored since warning messages may vary across implementations; for
failed executions, stderr is included to distinguish between different failure modes.


                                                             7
                                  Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


3.4.2   Distance metric
To quantify the behavioral similarity between two code candidates, D IFF C ODE G EN defines a distance metric based
on their dynamic behavior. Given two programs pi and pj with their dynamic behaviors Bpi and Bpj collected from
differential analysis, the distance between them is defined as the fraction of inputs on which they produce different
outputs:
                                               |{in ∈ Iij | Exec(pi , in) ̸= Exec(pj , in)}|
                                 d(pi , pj ) =                                                                     (2)
                                                                  |Iij |
where Iij = Ipi ∩ Ipj is the set of common inputs on which both programs produce valid execution results, and Ip
denotes the input set of program p as defined in Definition 3.1. Two execution results are considered equivalent if
they have the same exit code and produce identical standard output after normalization. If no common inputs exist
between two programs (i.e., Iij = ∅), D IFF C ODE G EN assigns a maximum distance of 1.0. This pairwise comparison
strategy ensures that a single crashing program does not disproportionately affect the distance calculations for other
program pairs. S ∗ [9] uses a similar pair-wise comparison approach using an LLM to compare two programs, whereas
D IFF C ODE G EN’s approach is purely computational, making it much more efficient and scalable.

3.4.3   Clustering algorithm
With the pairwise distance matrix D ∈ RN ×N where Dij = d(pi , pj ), D IFF C ODE G EN applies hierarchical agglomer-
ative clustering [62] to partition the N code candidates into two clusters. The algorithm starts with each program as its
own singleton cluster and iteratively merges the two closest clusters until only two clusters remain. D IFF C ODE G EN
uses average-linkage (UPGMA) [63] to measure inter-cluster distance, which computes the average distance between
all pairs of programs across two clusters:
                                                            1        X X
                                     Davg (Ca , Cb ) =                       d(pi , pj )                             (3)
                                                       |Ca | · |Cb |
                                                                   pi ∈Ca pj ∈Cb

Average-linkage is chosen for its robustness to outliers compared to single-linkage, and its tendency to produce more
balanced clusters compared to complete-linkage [63].

3.4.4   Selection strategy
After clustering, D IFF C ODE G EN identifies the larger cluster as the consensus cluster, hypothesizing that programs
with consistent behavior are more likely to be correct implementations. From the consensus cluster C ∗ , D IFF C ODE -
G EN selects the medoid, which is the program with the minimum total behavioral distance to all other programs within
the same cluster:                                             X
                                            p∗ = arg min             d(pi , pj )                                    (4)
                                                  pi ∈C ∗
                                                            pj ∈C ∗ ,j̸=i

The medoid represents the most central program in the behavioral space of the consensus cluster, making it a robust
choice that best represents the cluster’s collective behavior. If the two clusters have equal sizes, D IFF C ODE G EN
arbitrarily selects one as the consensus cluster. If only one program is generated or all programs exhibit identical
behavior, D IFF C ODE G EN chooses that program directly.

4   Evaluation
We evaluate the performance of D IFF C ODE G EN from three aspects: the performance gain from different differen-
tial methods, the comparison with state-of-the-art LLM-based test-time scaling methods, and the cost and overhead
analysis.
Experimental setup. For improvement analysis, we evaluate on recent state-of-the-art foundation models, includ-
ing GPT-4.1, GPT-4o, GPT-5, and coding specific model Qwen2.5CoderInstruct [64]. For comparison with test-time
scaling methods, we follow S ∗ [9] to select Qwen2.5Coder [64] and GPT-4o-mini to keep a fair comparison on the
same benchmark L IVE C ODE B ENCH [15].
Implementation details.      We use vLLM [65] to serve open-weight models, and use the official APIs for closed-
weight models. We implement D IFF C ODE G EN in four stages as described in Section 3: generation, fuzz, differential,
and clustering. Each stage except clustering is parallelized: • Generation and differential analysis are IO-bound stages
implemented as asynchronous coroutines. For repeated sampling, we directly use the API parameter n if it is supported
by the model API. Otherwise, we run N asynchronous requests with the same prompt. For differential prompting


                                                              8
                                  Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling



Table 2: Performance gain from D IFF C ODE G EN with different differential generation methods. Rep-N: repeated
sampling (Section 3.2.1); Beam search: beam search sampling (Section 3.2.2), ‘-’: not supported by API-access;
PromptPerturb: differential prompting (Section 3.2.3). Improvements are shown in absolute percentage gain.
                   Model             Size Baseline           Rep-N        Beam search PromptPerturb
                                              LiveCodeBench release-v2
                                       nano      47.4    54.4 (+7.0%)               -          53.6 (+6.2%)
                   GPT-4.1
                                       mini      64.6    73.2 (+8.6%)               -          73.2 (+8.6%)
                   GPT-5               nano      88.5    91.2 (+2.7%)               -          91.4 (+2.9%)
                   GPT-4o              mini      40.9   54.4 (+13.5%)               -          46.4 (+5.5%)
                                       7B        29.4        38.9 (+9.5%)     36.6 (+7.2%)     36.8 (+7.4%)
           Qwen-2.5-Coder-Instruct
                                       14B       44.8        47.9 (+3.1%)     46.6 (+1.8%)     49.1 (+4.3%)
                                              LiveCodeBench release-v5
                                       nano      44.6    46.1 (+1.5%)               -          45.1 (+0.5%)
                   GPT-4.1
                                       mini      59.8    65.5 (+5.7%)               -          65.1 (+5.3%)
                    GPT-5              nano      82.5    87.1 (+4.6%)               -          85.7 (+3.2%)


(Section 3.2.3), we use batched prompting, sending all prompts together to vLLM. • We implement the fuzzing stage
using multiprocessing to fully utilize CPU resources. We fuzz each candidate program in a separate process for one
minute following previous work [30, 57, 66]. We run Qwen2.5-Coder-32B on 2 NVIDIA H100-80G GPUs with tensor
parallelism, and all other models on a single NVIDIA A100-80G GPU. We run all CPU-tasks (fuzzing, differential
analysis, and clustering) on a machine with 2 AMD EPYC 9354 32-Core CPUs (128 threads in total), 1.48TB RAM,
and Ubuntu 22.04 OS. As with S ∗ , all experiments are conducted once.

4.1     Performance gain from different differential methods

We present the performance gain from D IFF C ODE G EN in Table 2. In this experiment, we set the number of sam-
ples N = 18 for all differential methods. We conduct our experiments on two non-overlapping versions of L IVE -
C ODE B ENCH, release-v2 and release-v5, to avoid potential overfitting to a single benchmark. The results indicate that
D IFF C ODE G EN consistently improves the base models’ performance across all evaluated models and all differential
methods. The improvements range from +0.5% to +13.5% absolute gain, with models at lower baselines generally
showing larger improvements due to ceiling effects. While accuracy gains vary across settings, the key advantage of
D IFF C ODE G EN lies in its efficiency: it achieves these improvements at a fraction of the cost of LLM-based selec-
tion methods (see Figure 2 and Figure 3). Beam search is only available for open-weight models served locally, as
closed-weight APIs do not expose decoding-level control. Despite this limitation, beam search still provides consistent
improvements over the baseline, although not as pronounced as repeated sampling. We include all differential methods
in D IFF C ODE G EN for completeness, allowing practitioners to choose based on their deployment constraints.

4.1.1    Multi-round evaluation

To further demonstrate the stability of D IFF C ODE G EN
for evaluation rigor, we run the experiments on L IVE -          Table 3: Multi-round evaluation of D IFF C ODE G EN.
C ODE B ENCH release-v5 three times independently. We
present the results in Table 3. Across all configurations,         Model    Size    Round    Rep-N    PromptPerturb
the results exhibit low variance across runs, with a co-
                                                                                        1    46.14        45.11
efficient of variation (CV) below 1.5% in every case.                       nano        2    46.14        44.43
Specifically, repeated sampling yields a maximum stan-                                  3    46.70        44.65
dard deviation of 0.46 and a maximum range of 0.91                GPT-4.1
percentage points across three runs, while differential                                 1    65.45        65.11
prompting shows a maximum standard deviation of 0.95                        mini        2    65.80        63.41
                                                                                        3    64.89        63.52
and a maximum range of 1.70 percentage points. Re-
peated sampling is consistently more stable than dif-                                   1    87.05        85.68
ferential prompting (mean CV 0.58% vs. 0.92%) and                 GPT-5     nano        2    86.48        85.57
also consistently achieves higher accuracy, outperform-                                 3    86.70        86.36
ing differential prompting by 0.9–1.6 percentage points
in mean PASS@1 across all configurations.


                                                             9
                                   Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling



Table 4: Comparison with existing LLM-based test-time scaling methods. The best results are in bold, and the second
best are underlined.
                                                   Qwen-2.5-Coder-Instruct              4o-mini
                     Method                  0.5B    1.5B         3B    7B     14B    32B
                     Zero-shot                1.2      7.0     7.0      29.4   44.8   47.4     40.9
                     Majority Vote            2.5     11.0    25.9      37.5   50.8   45.5     46.6
                     SkyCoder                 2.9     12.5    22.6     35.6    46.1   44.2     47.7
                     DiffCodeGen (Rep-N)      5.1     13.5    26.2     38.94   47.9   54.0     54.4


4.2     Comparing with test-time scaling methods

4.2.1    Baselines

We evaluate D IFF C ODE G EN against two state-of-the-art LLM-based test-time scaling methods: majority voting [60,
61] and SkyCoder [9]. Majority voting first generates N samples via explicit repeated sampling, then uses an LLM
to generate test cases for each candidate program, and selects the program with the maximum agreement score on
the generated test cases. SkyCoder is a variant of S ∗ with the requirement of using existing public tests removed.
SkyCoder utilizes adaptive input synthesis to select the best program among N candidates. The selection is based on
pairwise agreement scoring: for each pair of candidates, SkyCoder compares their outputs on each generated test case,
and increments both candidates’ scores if their outputs match. The candidate with the highest total agreement score is
selected as the final output. We directly adopt the implementation from the official S ∗ release [67].

4.2.2    Comparison results

For comparison evaluation, we set all hyperparameters to 18 parallel samples (N = 18) and disable access to public
tests for all methods to ensure a fair comparison. For majority voting and SkyCoder, we use the same model for
their selection stage as their generation stage. We present the comparison results in Table 4. We emphasize that the
primary contribution of D IFF C ODE G EN is its efficiency, not maximizing accuracy over all baselines. Nevertheless,
D IFF C ODE G EN outperforms the base model and SkyCoder across all models, and achieves competitive or superior
accuracy compared to majority voting. Notably, all hyperparameters (e.g., temperature, fuzzing time, number of
clusters) are adopted directly from prior work [9, 30, 49, 57, 66] without any specific tuning, suggesting that further
gains may be achievable with dedicated optimization.

4.3     Token cost and overhead analysis

To demonstrate where D IFF C ODE G EN really shines, we analyze its cost and overhead compared to existing LLM-
based test-time scaling methods. We evaluate this from two end-to-end aspects: total token usage and total execution
time. We select two representative models, Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct with vLLM and GPT-4o-mini with OpenAI
API, to cover both the self-hosted compute-limited scenario and the API-based scenario. We conduct experiments on
the same machine with one NVIDIA A100-80G GPU and two AMD EPYC 9354 CPUs.

4.3.1    Execution time analysis

The execution time comparison is presented in Figure 2. Compared to majority voting and SkyCoder, D IFF C ODE G EN
significantly reduces total execution time across both deployment scenarios. All variants of D IFF C ODE G EN take
only one-fifth of the total execution time of majority voting on locally-served models (47m for Rep-N vs. 2.7h for
majority voting), and achieve approximately 5% of the time compared to SkyCoder on API-based models (22m vs.
9.9h). Examining the time breakdown reveals where D IFF C ODE G EN’s efficiency originates. For D IFF C ODE G EN
variants, fuzzing dominates the runtime, while generation, differential analysis, and clustering contribute minimally.
Notably, clustering overhead is negligible, barely visible in the figure. This confirms that our distance-based clustering
approach (Section 3.4) adds virtually no computational cost compared to LLM-based selection methods. Among
D IFF C ODE G EN variants, beam search is marginally faster than repeated sampling on the local model. However, beam
search is not available for API-based models, limiting its applicability and our potential for further analysis. Prompt
perturbation takes slightly longer (1.0h on vLLM, 30m on API) due to the overhead of processing 18 distinct prompts,
though it remains substantially faster than the baselines.


                                                             10
                                                                    Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


                                                     Qwen2.5-Coder-7B (vLLM)                                                    GPT-4o-mini (API)
                                                                                                                                9.9h                          Baselines
                           600
                                                                                                                                                              Generation
                                                                                                                                                              Fuzzing
                           500                                                                                                                                Differential
                                                                                                                                                              Clustering




Execution Time (minutes)
                           400

                                                     5.3h
                           300



                           200
                                       2.7h
                                                                                                                  2.5h


                           100
                                                                                                 1.0h
                                                                   47m           45m
                                                                                                                                              22m              30m

                             0
                                   MajorityVote    SkyCoder       Rep-N         Beam         PromptPerturb    MajorityVote    SkyCoder       Rep-N        PromptPerturb


                                                 Figure 2: Execution time comparison among different test-time scaling methods.

                                 1e7                Qwen2.5-Coder-7B (vLLM)                                                     GPT-4o-mini (API)

                                                  27.2M
                                                                                                                                                   Generation Prompt
                                                                                                                                                   Generation Completion
                           2.5                                                                                                                     Fuzz Driver Prompt
                                                                                                                             22.6M                 Fuzz Driver Completion


                           2.0




Token Usage
                           1.5



                           1.0
                                   6.9M                                                        6.9M            6.5M                                          6.7M

                           0.5
                                                                                                                      3.3M
                                          2.8M            2.4M                                                                                                      2.4M
                                                                                                      2.1M                           2.3M          2.2M
                                                                        1.8M          1.8M
                                                                 1.1M          1.1M                                                         1.1M

                           0.0
                                  MajorityVote    SkyCoder        Rep-N         Beam         PromptPerturb    MajorityVote   SkyCoder         Rep-N        PromptPerturb


Figure 3: Token usage comparison among different test-time scaling methods. ‘Prompt‘ uses input tokens, and ‘com-
pletion‘ uses output tokens.


4.3.2                            Token usage analysis
The token usage comparison is presented in Figure 3. The primary advantage of D IFF C ODE G EN stems from the dra-
matic reduction in input tokens consumed during the input generation phase and selection phase. Majority voting and
SkyCoder both require feeding generated code candidates back into the LLM for test synthesis and pairwise compari-
son, resulting in 6.9M and 27.2M input tokens respectively on Qwen2.5-Coder-7B. In contrast, D IFF C ODE G EN with
repeated sampling consumes only 1.1M input tokens, approximately 4% of SkyCoder’s consumption, since it performs
selection via differential analysis rather than additional LLM inference. For D IFF C ODE G EN variants, prompt pertur-
bation uses the highest token cost (6.9M input tokens on Qwen, 6.7M on GPT-4o-mini), which is at the same level as
majority voting. This is expected since each of the 18 perturbations produces a distinct prompt that must be processed
separately, whereas repeated sampling and beam search reuse the same prompt and benefit from prefix caching in
modern LLM serving frameworks [65]. With prefix caching, the shared prompt is processed once and reused across
all N samples, resulting in only 1.1M input tokens.
D IFF C ODE G EN requires a small additional token cost to generate a fuzz driver in library function mode (Section 3.3.1).
As shown in Figure 3, the fuzz driver prompt and completion tokens (visible as small segments in the D IFF C ODE -
G EN bars) contribute minimally to the total: approximately 0.3M tokens combined. This cost is shared across all
candidates and is negligible compared to the selection overhead of LLM-based methods. For output tokens, D IF -


                                                                                                         11
                                  Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


F C ODE G EN with repeated sampling saves approximately 0.6M tokens on Qwen and 0.1M tokens on GPT-4o-mini
compared to SkyCoder, and 1M tokens on Qwen and 1.1M tokens on GPT-4o-mini compared to majority voting.
Overall, D IFF C ODE G EN’s cost profile makes it particularly attractive for API-based deployment, where token usage
directly translates to monetary cost, and for resource-constrained scenarios where inference budget is the bottleneck.
By performing selection without any additional LLM inference, D IFF C ODE G EN achieves competitive or superior
Pass@1 performance (Section 4.2) while consuming a fraction of the resources.

4.4     Ablation studies

In this section, we analyze the key design choices of D IFF C ODE G EN through ablation studies. We use GPT-4.1-nano
for all experiments in this section since it is the fastest and most affordable model among all evaluated models, while
providing an official API for repeated sampling.

4.4.1    Choosing the number of samples
In Section 4.1, we set the number of samples N = 18 for all differential methods since we included 18 prompt
perturbations in differential prompting. We keep the same number to study the performance gain from different
differential methods. In this section, we vary N for the repeated sampling method to study how D IFF C ODE G EN
scales with the number of samples. We evaluate N from {1, 4, 8, 18}.
Our results are shown in Figure 4. We observe that D IF -
F C ODE G EN consistently improves PASS@1 as N in-
                                                                             56
creases, demonstrating effective test-time scaling. The
improvement is most pronounced when increasing from
                                                                             54
N = 1 (47.36%) to N = 4 (51.9%), yielding a gain
of 4.54% absolute increase. Further increases show di-
                                                                             52

                                                                    PASS@1
minishing returns: N = 8 achieves 53.8% (+1.9% over
N = 4), and N = 18 reaches 54.4% (+0.6% over
N = 8). This diminishing returns pattern is expected, as                     50
additional samples are more likely to produce redundant
solutions rather than exploring new regions of the solu-                     48
tion space. Nevertheless, even modest increases in N
provide meaningful improvements, making D IFF C ODE -                        46
G EN a practical choice for scenarios where additional                            1         4       8                 18
compute budget is available. We did not further scale
N beyond 18 due to the already existing diminishing re-                                         Number of samples N
turns. Larger N is also typically not recommended by
                                                                   Figure 4: Performance scaling with number of samples.
model providers due to potential degradation in sam-
ple quality (for example, Gemini only supports up to
N = 8 [68]).

4.4.2    Choosing the number of clusters
We follow the common practice to cluster the candidate programs for each task into two clusters [9] in Section 4.1 and
Section 4.2. However, instead of choosing two clusters ad hoc, we investigate the impact of varying the number of
clusters on the performance of D IFF C ODE G EN both empirically and analytically. To conduct this study, we vary the
number of clusters from 1 to 5, with all the other hyperparameters kept the same as in Section 4.2. With one cluster, all
candidate programs are grouped together, and Section 3.4.3 degrades to a pure distance-based selection, i.e., selecting
the medoid among all candidates.
Silhouette. A key question in clustering is whether the partition reflects the genuine structure in the data or merely
imposes unreasonable groupings. The silhouette coefficient [69] is a principled measurement of clustering quality. It
compares each object’s cohesion within its assigned cluster to its separation from the nearest neighboring cluster, i.e.,
the mean intra-cluster distance versus the mean nearest-cluster distance. Recall from Equation 2, the distance d(pi , pj )
between two programs pi and pj is the fraction of inputs on which they disagree. Formally, for each object i assigned
to cluster A, let a(i) denote the average dissimilarity of i to all other objects in A:
                                                       1           X
                                           a(i) =                            d(pi , pj ).
                                                    |A| − 1
                                                              j∈A, j̸=i


                                                              12
                                  Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling



Table 5: Analysis on the number of clusters. Silhouette: clustering quality score [69]; Largest Ratio: mean ± std of
the largest cluster ratio across tasks; Conf: confidence level.
         # Cluster PASS@1 Silhouette Largest Ratio (%) High Conf (≥90%) Low Conf (<60%)
             1         53.43          -         100.00 ± 0.00                 511                      0
             2         54.40       0.5786        86.66 ± 11.86                293                     22
             3         53.03       0.4379        76.52 ± 14.72                 0                      84
             4         53.42       0.3757        69.19 ± 15.24                 0                     145
             5         53.62       0.3174        63.04 ± 15.01                 0                     205


Let b(i) denote the smallest average dissimilarity of i to any other cluster C:
                                                                          1 X
                              b(i) = min ¯d(i, C), where ¯   d(i, C) =          d(pi , pj ).
                                     C̸=A                                |C|
                                                                             j∈C
 ¯
d(i, C) is the average distance from i to all members of cluster C. a(i) is the mean within-cluster distance, and b(i) is
the mean nearest-cluster distance. The silhouette coefficient of object i is:
                                                           b(i) − a(i)
                                                s(i) =                   ,                                             (5)
                                                         max{a(i), b(i)}
which is bounded by −1 ≤ s(i) ≤ 1. A value close to +1 indicates that i is well within its cluster and far from the
nearest alternative; a value near 0 means i lies on the boundary between two clusters; and a value close to −1 suggests
i may be misclassified.
Largest cluster ratio and confidence.        While the silhouette coefficient measures geometric separation quality, it
does not directly capture the degree of behavioral consensus among candidates, which is the signal our selection
method (Algorithm 1) exploits. Therefore, we introduce two complementary metrics. The largest cluster ratio quan-
tifies how dominant the majority behavior is. For a task whose N candidates are grouped into clusters C1 , . . . , Ck , its
largest cluster ratio is
                                                      max1≤j≤k |Cj |
                                                 r=                    .
                                                             N
A value of r close to 1 indicates that most candidates exhibit similar behavioral patterns, suggesting strong agreement
on the solution. We report the mean and standard deviation of r across all tasks. We further categorize tasks by
confidence: high confidence tasks have r ≥ 0.9 (at least 90% of candidates in the largest cluster), while low confidence
tasks have r < 0.6 (less than 60% in the largest cluster). These thresholds provide an interpretable summary of the
distribution of consensus levels across the benchmark.
We present our cluster analysis results in Table 5. Our analysis supports k = 2 as the optimal choice from two
perspectives. • Empirically, k = 2 yields the highest PASS@1 (54.40%), outperforming both the pure-distance baseline
(k = 1, 53.43%) and all finer-grained partitions (k ≥ 3). The improvement of +0.97% over k = 1 confirms that
distinguishing majority from minority behaviors adds value beyond pure medoid selection, while further increasing
k degrades selection quality. • Analytically, two complementary metrics corroborate this finding. The silhouette
score peaks at k = 2 (0.5786) and decreases monotonically as k increases, indicating that two clusters best reflect
the natural structure of candidate behaviors, whereas smaller partitions over-segment the solution space. The largest
cluster ratio further confirms strong behavioral consensus at k = 2. Out of 511 tasks, 293 are high-confidence and
only 22 tasks are low-confidence. For k ≥ 3, no task reaches the high-confidence threshold and low-confidence tasks
grow rapidly. These findings validate our choice of two clusters as not merely a convenient default, but an empirically
and analytically justified decision for our setting.

4.4.3   Model-based selectors over the differential signal
The differential I/O pairs produced by fuzzing and differential testing can also feed selectors other than distance-based
clustering. We replace the clustering step with three off-the-shelf model-based selectors and measure their accuracy
and cost. We evaluate pointwise scoring (each candidate rated 1–10 by an LLM judge), pairwise judging with posi-
tional debiasing (3N sampled pairs per task, each queried twice with swapped order, aggregated by win-rate counting
with 0.5 credit for ties or disagreements), and a public reward model (Skywork-Reward-V2-Llama-3.1-8B [70],
argmax selection). For both LLM-based selectors we use gpt-4.1-mini as the judge across all three generation
models; all other settings (N = 18, fuzzing time, candidate pool, prompts) match Section 4.1.1. We report mean
PASS@1 on LiveCodeBench release v5 over two independent runs.


                                                            13
                                 Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


Table 6 shows that no model-based selector beats clus- Table 6: PASS@1 of three model-based selectors ap-
tering on every model. On the two stronger generation plied within the D IFF C ODE G EN differential pipeline on
models, all three selectors fall within roughly 1 percent- LiveCodeBench v5, compared against D IFF C ODE G EN’s
age point of clustering (65.35 and 86.59 respectively), distance-based clustering (mean over 2 runs) Cost rows
within run-to-run variance. Only on GPT-4.1-nano does report per-evaluation total tokens (prompt + completion)
pointwise scoring exceed clustering by more than a point and wall-clock time; ∗ reward model uses A100 GPU time
(50.85 vs. 46.42, +4.4 pp); pairwise and the reward rather than API tokens.
model still trail clustering on at least one model each.
Selector costs, however, differ by an order of magni-       Model           Clustering Pointwise Pairwise Reward
tude. Pointwise adds roughly 13M prompt and 1.3M            GPT-4.1-nano      46.42       50.85     49.09     45.57
completion tokens plus ∼ 6.5 minutes of judge latency       GPT-4.1-mini      65.35       65.35     66.19     63.70
per evaluation. Pairwise scales to ∼ 100M prompt to-        GPT-5-nano        86.59       86.54     85.29     85.40
kens (∼ 7.6× pointwise) and 14–16 minutes of latency        Tokens (M)         n/a         14.3      100        –
even with sparse sampling. The reward model avoids          Time (min)         <1           6.5       15       20∗
API cost but uses ∼ 20 minutes of A100 GPU time and
gives the lowest PASS@1 of the three on every genera-
tion model. The differential I/O pairs already carry enough signal to separate candidates, so we do not need a second
LRM call or a large reward model for selection; distance-based clustering over the same signal matches these selectors
at near-zero cost.

4.4.4    Analysis on fuzz driver generation
D IFF C ODE G EN uses LLM-generated fuzz drivers for library         Table 7: Fuzz driver generation success rate.
functions (Section 3.3.1). We use gpt-4.1-nano to gener-
ate the fuzz driver for all tasks, since it is the fastest and     Ver (total)   Method         Model      Succ (%)
most affordable model available. Because it is not stronger
                                                                                                4.1-nano     94.5
than other evaluated models, the performance gain from D IF -
                                                                                 Rep-N          4.1-mini     96.6
F C ODE G EN cannot be attributed to extra model capacity. Ta-
                                                                                                4o-mini      93.5
ble 7 reports the success rate across our two benchmarks, six      v2 (235)
models, and all differential methods. The success rate ranges                                   Qwen-14B     93.6
                                                                                 Beam
from 91.9% to 96.6%, with an average of 94.5%, indicating                                       Qwen-7B      91.9
that modern LLMs can reliably generate compilable and exe-                                      4.1-mini     95.3
                                                                                 Perturbation
cutable fuzz drivers for the function signatures encountered in                                 4o-mini      94.5
competitive programming benchmarks. For the small fraction                                      4.1-nano     95.5
of cases where the driver fails to compile or execute (3.4%–                     Rep-N          4.1-mini     94.8
8.1%), D IFF C ODE G EN gracefully falls back to returning the     v5 (381)                     5-nano       96.1
reference solution directly, ensuring the system always pro-
                                                                                                4.1-nano     92.9
duces an output with minimal impact on overall performance.                      Perturbation
                                                                                                4.1-mini     94.8

5     Discussions
5.1     Threats to validity

Internal validity. Our evaluation involves several design choices that may affect results. We set hyperparameters
following established practices in the literature (Section 3.2.1, Section 3.3.1). One minute of coverage-guided fuzzing
is sufficient for the fuzzer to explore meaningful program paths and collect enough diverse inputs to characterize a
program’s dynamic behavior, especially considering that the candidate programs have limited code size. This choice
balances effectiveness and efficiency, keeping the overall pipeline practical, where fuzzing remains the dominant but
manageable cost in the end-to-end execution time (Figure 2). For the number of candidates N , we conduct ablation
studies to analyze its impact on performance. The selection of the reference solution for fuzzing could influence the
quality of generated inputs. We mitigate this by using principled selection strategies (random for sampling, top-1 for
beam search, original prompt for perturbations). Moreover, since all candidates are generated from the same natural
language specification, implementations should express identical semantics, so the choice of reference should not have
a significant impact.
External validity.     We evaluate D IFF C ODE G EN on two non-overlapping versions of L IVE C ODE B ENCH (v2 and
v5), which cover distinct time periods of competitive programming problems and reduce the risk of benchmark-specific
overfitting. The benchmark includes both script-based problems (requiring complete programs with I/O handling)
and library function-based problems (requiring standalone functions), covering different code generation paradigms.


                                                          14
                                 Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


While L IVE C ODE B ENCH provides diverse algorithmic problems, it may not fully represent real-world code generation
scenarios involving complex dependencies, external APIs, or domain-specific libraries. We evaluate across a range of
LLMs from different families and scales, but results may differ for models with substantially different architectures or
training paradigms.

5.2   Limitations and future work

Supported programming languages. D IFF C ODE G EN currently supports Python through py-afl and Atheris.
We select Python because it is the most studied language in LLM-based code generation [9, 29, 49]. Extending to other
languages is straightforward since coverage-guided fuzzing infrastructure is well-established for many languages,
including C/C++ (AFL++, libFuzzer), Rust (cargo-fuzz), Go (go-fuzz), and Java (Jazzer). Prior work has demonstrated
the integration of coverage-guided fuzzing with code understanding and generation tasks for languages like Java,
C/C++, and Rust [30, 57], suggesting the extensibility of D IFF C ODE G EN to additional languages.
Complex input types. Coverage-guided fuzzing excels at generating primitive types and simple data structures, but
struggles with complex inputs such as custom objects with invariants, file handles, network connections, or database
cursors. For functions requiring such inputs, the LLM-generated fuzz driver may fail to produce meaningful test cases,
causing D IFF C ODE G EN to fall back to the reference solution without differential analysis. Future work could explore
property-based testing [71], which uses generators to produce well-formed instances of complex data types. Property-
based fuzzing and differential testing are often used in practical software testing [72], offering a promising direction
for extending D IFF C ODE G EN to handle such inputs. LLMC ODE C HOICE [73] is a notable work in this direction;
however, it relies on external human-written oracles and iterative LLM inference.
Non-deterministic programs. Programs with inherent non-determinism (e.g., involving randomness, timestamps,
or concurrency) may produce different outputs across executions, even when functionally correct. D IFF C ODE G EN’s
distance metric treats such variations as behavioral differences, potentially misclassifying correct implementations
as outliers. In this case, deterministic program analysis techniques are unlikely to help, whereas embedding-based
techniques with dynamic behaviors [57, 66] may provide a viable alternative.
Failure of the majority assumption.        D IFF C ODE G EN relies on the hypothesis that the largest behavioral cluster
contains correct solutions. This assumption may fail when: 1. most candidates share a common misconception; 2. the
natural language specification is ambiguous, leading to multiple valid interpretations. In such cases, D IFF C ODE G EN
may confidently select an incorrect solution. However, we have shown empirically that this assumption holds for the
vast majority of programming tasks. Much research has applied differential testing with such assumptions to complex
software systems like compilers and databases [13, 16, 19, 25],

6     Related work
6.1   Code generation models

Large language models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in writing programs. The text-to-code generation
task involves LLMs producing code snippets based on natural language descriptions or specifications [74]. Early work
such as Codex [3] and AlphaCode [60] demonstrated that LLMs fine-tuned on code can solve programming problems
described in natural language. Subsequent models have continued to advance the state of the art, including open-
weight models such as Qwen-Coder [64, 75] and reasoning-augmented models like DeepSeek-R1 [76]. Generative
code models have deeply influenced software development practices, including resolving issues [77], automating code
reviews [78], and repairing programs [79]. Modern coding agents can accomplish complex software engineering tasks
based on the high-level natural language instructions of users [40]. Recent work also applied LLMs to aid software
testing and analysis [30, 59, 80–82].

6.2   Test-time scaling for code generation

Test-time scaling (TTS) has emerged as a promising direction for improving LLM performance by allocating addi-
tional compute at inference time [7, 83]. TTS techniques have two directions: 1. workflow-based approaches that
utilize task-specific tailored multi-step prompting to enhance the output [84, 85], 2. post-training approaches to train
the model to reason at test time by themselves [5, 6, 86]. Workflow-based approaches such as chain-of-thought
prompting [84] and self-consistency [61] improve performance by generating multiple reasoning paths and aggre-
gating their outputs. These methods can be applied to LLMs in a plug-and-play manner without additional training.
Self-improvement techniques [87–91] use iterative refinement loops to let the LLM find better solutions based on


                                                          15
                                      Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


its own feedback. DeepSeek-R1 [5] and s1 [6] demonstrate that scaling test-time compute through extended reason-
ing learned from reinforcement learning can further incentivize the model to explore the solution space and find the
higher-quality final output.
TTS has also been explored for code generation very recently [92–95]. S ∗ [9] is a workflow-based TTS method that
uses existing public test cases to iteratively debug generated code, then synthesizes additional inputs via LLMs to
select the best candidate with pair-wise comparison. While effective, this approach assumes access to public tests
that are often unavailable in practice, and requires significant additional LLM inference for input synthesis. Further-
more, this selection method is highly inefficient with respect to time and computational resources. Self-debugging
with self-generated tests [10] is another recent approach to mitigate the test-available assumption by generating tests
using LLMs themselves; however, it still relies on multiple rounds of LLM inference for both test generation and
candidate selection. ACECODER [8] uses reinforcement learning with automated test-case synthesis to improve code
generation, requiring extensive post-training. In contrast, D IFF C ODE G EN operates without requiring existing tests,
additional LLM inference, or training, performing selection through program analysis instead of additional model
calls.

6.3       Program analysis for large language models

Program analysis techniques have been increasingly applied to enhance LLM-based code understanding and genera-
tion. Zhao et al. [57] and Huang et al. [66] demonstrate that augmenting LLMs with program execution information
obtained through fuzzing-generated test cases improves code understanding tasks. FuzzAug [30] uses coverage-guided
fuzzing to generate diverse test inputs for augmenting neural test generation training data. These approaches share our
insight that program execution provides semantic information complementary to LLMs.

7         Conclusion
In this paper, we presented D IFF C ODE G EN, a novel test-time scaling approach for code generation. By integrating
coverage-guided differential analysis, D IFF C ODE G EN effectively and efficiently selects high-quality solutions from
multiple candidates generated by LLMs. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that D IFF C ODE G EN consistently
improves performance across 4 LLMs, achieving competitive or superior results compared to state-of-the-art test-
time scaling methods. The key advantage of D IFF C ODE G EN lies in its efficiency: by eliminating the additional
LLM inference that prior test-time scaling methods require for candidate selection, D IFF C ODE G EN requires only a
small fraction of the execution time compared to existing methods, whether using locally-served or API-accessed
models, while consuming less than 4% of the total tokens compared to existing methods. D IFF C ODE G EN is model-
agnostic, fully asynchronous, and can be combined with reasoning models to further boost performance, making it
a practical solution for real-world code generation and LLM-based software engineering tasks. We will open-source
our implementation to facilitate future research on leveraging software testing and analysis techniques for AI-based
software engineering.

Data availability
Our artifacts and source code to reproduce the data are available on public anonymous digital repository Zenodo [96].
We our source code publicly on GitHub at https://github.com/SecurityLab-UCD/DiffCodeGen to facilitate
future research on software analysis to improve LLM-based code generation.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by UC Noyce Initiative.

References
    [1]    Inbal Shani and GitHub Staff. Survey reveals AI’s impact on the developer experience. 2024. URL: https://github.
           blog/news-insights/research/survey-reveals-ais-impact-on-the-developer-experience/.
    [2]    Kyle Daigle and GitHub Staff. Survey: The AI wave continues to grow on software development teams. 2024. URL: https:
           //github.blog/news-insights/research/survey-ai-wave-grows/.
    [3]    Mark Chen et al. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code. 2021. arXiv: 2107.03374 [cs.LG]. URL: https:
           //arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.


                                                                16
                                    Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


 [4]   Xueying Du et al. “Evaluating Large Language Models in Class-Level Code Generation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM
       46th International Conference on Software Engineering. ICSE ’24. Lisbon, Portugal: Association for Computing Machinery,
       2024. ISBN: 9798400702174. DOI: 10 . 1145 / 3597503 . 3639219. URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3597503 .
       3639219.
 [5]   DeepSeek-AI et al. DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement Learning. 2025. arXiv:
       2501.12948 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12948.
 [6]   Niklas Muennighoff et al. “s1: Simple test-time scaling”. In: Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods
       in Natural Language Processing. Suzhou, China: Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2025, pp. 20275–20321.
       ISBN : 979-8-89176-332-6. DOI : 10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-main.1025. URL : https://aclanthology.org/2025.
       emnlp-main.1025/.
 [7]   Charlie Victor Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Aviral Kumar. “Scaling LLM Test-Time Compute Optimally Can be
       More Effective than Scaling Parameters for Reasoning”. In: The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Repre-
       sentations. 2025. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=4FWAwZtd2n.
 [8]   Huaye Zeng et al. “ACECODER: Acing Coder RL via Automated Test-Case Synthesis”. In: Proceedings of the 63rd Annual
       Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Vienna, Austria: Association for Com-
       putational Linguistics, July 2025, pp. 12023–12040. ISBN: 979-8-89176-251-0. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.587.
       URL : https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.587/.
 [9]   Dacheng Li et al. “S*: Test Time Scaling for Code Generation”. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
       guistics: EMNLP 2025. Suzhou, China: Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2025, pp. 15964–15978. ISBN:
       979-8-89176-335-7. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings- emnlp.865. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2025.
       findings-emnlp.865/.
[10]   Xiancai Chen et al. “Revisit Self-Debugging with Self-Generated Tests for Code Generation”. In: Proceedings of the 63rd
       Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Vienna, Austria: Association
       for Computational Linguistics, July 2025, pp. 18003–18023. ISBN: 979-8-89176-251-0. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-
       long.881. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.881/.
[11]   William M. McKeeman. “Differential Testing for Software”. In: Digit. Tech. J. 10 (1998), pp. 100–107. URL: https :
       //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14018070.
[12]   Robert B. Evans and Alberto Savoia. “Differential testing: a new approach to change detection”. In: The 6th Joint Meeting
       on European Software Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engi-
       neering: Companion Papers. ESEC-FSE companion ’07. Dubrovnik, Croatia: Association for Computing Machinery, 2007,
       pp. 549–552. ISBN: 9781595938121. DOI: 10.1145/1295014.1295038. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/1295014.
       1295038.
[13]   Yibiao Yang et al. “Hunting for bugs in code coverage tools via randomized differential testing”. In: Proceedings of the 41st
       International Conference on Software Engineering. ICSE ’19. Montreal, Quebec, Canada: IEEE Press, 2019, pp. 488–499.
       DOI : 10.1109/ICSE.2019.00061. URL : https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00061.
[14]   Shaohua Li and Zhendong Su. “Finding Unstable Code via Compiler-Driven Differential Testing”. In: Proceedings of
       the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
       Volume 3. ASPLOS 2023. Vancouver, BC, Canada: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, pp. 238–251. ISBN:
       9781450399180. DOI: 10.1145/3582016.3582053. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3582016.3582053.
[15]   Naman Jain et al. “LiveCodeBench: Holistic and Contamination Free Evaluation of Large Language Models for Code”. In:
       The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations. 2025. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?
       id=chfJJYC3iL.
[16]   Xuejun Yang, Yang Chen, Eric Eide, and John Regehr. “Finding and understanding bugs in C compilers”. In: SIGPLAN
       Not. 46.6 (June 2011), pp. 283–294. ISSN: 0362-1340. DOI: 10.1145/1993316.1993532. URL: https://doi.org/10.
       1145/1993316.1993532.
[17]   Vu Le, Mehrdad Afshari, and Zhendong Su. “Compiler validation via equivalence modulo inputs”. In: SIGPLAN Not. 49.6
       (June 2014), pp. 216–226. ISSN: 0362-1340. DOI: 10.1145/2666356.2594334. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
       2666356.2594334.
[18]   Chengnian Sun, Vu Le, and Zhendong Su. “Finding compiler bugs via live code mutation”. In: SIGPLAN Not. 51.10 (Oct.
       2016), pp. 849–863. ISSN: 0362-1340. DOI: 10.1145/3022671.2984038. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3022671.
       2984038.
[19]   Manuel Rigger and Zhendong Su. “Testing Database Engines via Pivoted Query Synthesis”. In: Proc. ACM Program. Lang.
       4.OOPSLA (Nov. 2020). DOI: 10.1145/3428279. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3428279.
[20]   Yifeng He, Luning Yang, Christopher Castro Gaw Gonzalo, and Hao Chen. “Evaluating Program Semantics Reasoning
       with Type Inference in System $F$”. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
       Datasets and Benchmarks Track. 2025. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=IA9RmaP0aw.
[21]   Marcel Böhme, Van-Thuan Pham, and Abhik Roychoudhury. “Coverage-based Greybox Fuzzing as Markov Chain”. In:
       Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. CCS ’16. Vienna, Austria:
       Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, pp. 1032–1043. ISBN: 9781450341394. DOI: 10.1145/2976749.2978428.
       URL : https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978428.




                                                                17
                                    Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


[22]   Andrea Fioraldi, Dominik Maier, Heiko Eißfeldt, and Marc Heuse. “AFL++ : Combining Incremental Steps of Fuzzing
       Research”. In: 14th USENIX Workshop on Offensive Technologies (WOOT 20). USENIX Association, Aug. 2020. URL:
       https://www.usenix.org/conference/woot20/presentation/fioraldi.
[23]   Andreas Zeller, Rahul Gopinath, Marcel Böhme, Gordon Fraser, and Christian Holler. “The Fuzzing Book”. In: (Jan. 2019).
       DOI : 10.60882/cispa.24614928.v1. URL : https://publications.cispa.de/articles/book/The_Fuzzing_
       Book/24614928.
[24]   Peng Chen, Jianzhong Liu, and Hao Chen. “Matryoshka: Fuzzing Deeply Nested Branches”. In: Proceedings of the 2019
       ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. CCS ’19. London, United Kingdom: Association
       for Computing Machinery, 2019, pp. 499–513. ISBN: 9781450367479. DOI: 10.1145/3319535.3363225. URL: https:
       //doi.org/10.1145/3319535.3363225.
[25]   Yuting Chen, Ting Su, Chengnian Sun, Zhendong Su, and Jianjun Zhao. “Coverage-directed differential testing of JVM
       implementations”. In: SIGPLAN Not. 51.6 (June 2016), pp. 85–99. ISSN: 0362-1340. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
       2980983.2908095.
[26]   Theofilos Petsios, Adrian Tang, Salvatore Stolfo, Angelos D. Keromytis, and Suman Jana. “NEZHA: Efficient Domain-
       Independent Differential Testing”. In: Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. SP ’17. San
       Jose, CA, USA: IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 615–632. ISBN: 9781509049318. DOI: 10 . 1109 / SP . 2017 . 27. URL: https :
       //doi.org/10.1109/SP.2017.27.
[27]   Shirin Nilizadeh, Yannic Noller, and Corina S. Păsăreanu. “DifFuzz: differential fuzzing for side-channel analysis”. In:
       Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software Engineering. ICSE ’19. Montreal, Quebec, Canada: IEEE
       Press, 2019, pp. 176–187. ISBN: 9781728108698. DOI: 10.1109/ICSE.2019.00122. URL: https://doi.org/10.
       1109/ICSE.2019.00122.
[28]   Junjie Chen et al. “An empirical comparison of compiler testing techniques”. In: Proceedings of the 38th International
       Conference on Software Engineering. ICSE ’16. Austin, Texas: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, pp. 180–190.
       ISBN : 9781450342056. DOI : 10.1145/2884781.2884878. URL : https://doi.org/10.1145/2884781.2884878.
[29]   Bei Chen et al. “CodeT: Code Generation with Generated Tests”. In: The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
       Representations. 2023. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=ktrw68Cmu9c.
[30]   Yifeng He, Jicheng Wang, Yuyang Rong, and Hao Chen. “FuzzAug: Data Augmentation by Coverage-guided Fuzzing for
       Neural Test Generation”. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025. Suzhou, China:
       Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2025, pp. 15642–15655. ISBN: 979-8-89176-335-7. DOI: 10.18653/v1/
       2025.findings-emnlp.847. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-emnlp.847/.
[31]   Ari Holtzman et al. “Learning to Write with Cooperative Discriminators”. In: Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the
       Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Melbourne, Australia: Association for Computational
       Linguistics, July 2018, pp. 1638–1649. DOI: 10.18653/v1/P18-1152. URL: https://aclanthology.org/P18-1152/.
[32]   Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. “The Curious Case of Neural Text Degeneration”. In:
       International Conference on Learning Representations. 2020. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=rygGQyrFvH.
[33]   Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. “Hierarchical Neural Story Generation”. In: Proceedings of the 56th Annual
       Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Melbourne, Australia: Association for
       Computational Linguistics, July 2018, pp. 889–898. DOI: 10.18653/v1/P18- 1082. URL: https://aclanthology.
       org/P18-1082/.
[34]   Alec Radford et al. “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners”. In: OpenAI blog 1.8 (2019), p. 9.
[35]   Hongxiang Zhang, Hao Chen, Muhao Chen, and Tianyi Zhang. “Active Layer-Contrastive Decoding Reduces Hallucination
       in Large Language Model Generation”. In: Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
       Processing. Suzhou, China: Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2025, pp. 3028–3046. ISBN: 979-8-89176-332-
       6. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-main.150. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2025.emnlp-main.150/.
[36]   David H Ackley, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Terrence J Sejnowski. “A learning algorithm for Boltzmann machines”. In: Cog-
       nitive science 9.1 (1985), pp. 147–169.
[37]   Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network. 2015. arXiv: 1503.02531
       [stat.ML]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531.
[38]   Jessica Ficler and Yoav Goldberg. “Controlling Linguistic Style Aspects in Neural Language Generation”. In: Proceedings
       of the Workshop on Stylistic Variation. Copenhagen, Denmark: Association for Computational Linguistics, Sept. 2017,
       pp. 94–104. DOI: 10.18653/v1/W17-4912. URL: https://aclanthology.org/W17-4912/.
[39]   Matthew Renze. “The Effect of Sampling Temperature on Problem Solving in Large Language Models”. In: Findings of the
       Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024. Miami, Florida, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics,
       Nov. 2024, pp. 7346–7356. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings- emnlp.432. URL: https://aclanthology.org/
       2024.findings-emnlp.432/.
[40]   Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. “Demystifying LLM-Based Software Engineering
       Agents”. In: Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. 2.FSE (June 2025). DOI: 10.1145/3715754. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
       3715754.
[41]   Aston Zhang, Zachary C. Lipton, Mu Li, and Alexander J. Smola. Dive into Deep Learning. https://D2L.ai. Cambridge
       University Press, 2023.



                                                              18
                                   Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


[42]   Percy Liang et al. “Holistic Evaluation of Language Models”. In: Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2023).
       Featured Certification, Expert Certification, Outstanding Certification. ISSN: 2835-8856. URL: https : / / openreview .
       net/forum?id=iO4LZibEqW.
[43]   Melanie Sclar, Yejin Choi, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Alane Suhr. “Quantifying Language Models’Sensitivity to Spurious Fea-
       tures in Prompt Design or: How I learned to start worrying about prompt formatting”. In: International Conference on
       Representation Learning. Vol. 2024. 2024, pp. 25055–25083. URL: https://proceedings.iclr.cc/paper_files/
       paper/2024/file/6c0e99d736da621403018ca7b32b1a4d-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[44]   Jingming Zhuo et al. “ProSA: Assessing and Understanding the Prompt Sensitivity of LLMs”. In: Findings of the Association
       for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024. Miami, Florida, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2024,
       pp. 1950–1976. DOI: 10 . 18653 / v1 / 2024 . findings - emnlp . 108. URL: https : / / aclanthology . org / 2024 .
       findings-emnlp.108/.
[45]   “What Did I Do Wrong? Quantifying LLMs’ Sensitivity and Consistency to Prompt Engineering”. In: Proceedings of
       the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
       Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers). Albuquerque, New Mexico: Association for Computational Linguistics,
       Apr. 2025, pp. 1543–1558. ISBN: 979-8-89176-189-6. DOI: 10 . 18653 / v1 / 2025 . naacl - long . 73. URL: https :
       //aclanthology.org/2025.naacl-long.73/.
[46]   Catherine Tony, Nicolás E. Dı́az Ferreyra, Markus Mutas, Salem Dhif, and Riccardo Scandariato. “Prompting Techniques
       for Secure Code Generation: A Systematic Investigation”. In: ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 34.8 (Oct. 2025). ISSN:
       1049-331X. DOI: 10.1145/3722108. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3722108.
[47]   Sydney Nguyen et al. “How Beginning Programmers and Code LLMs (Mis)read Each Other”. In: Proceedings of the 2024
       CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’24. Honolulu, HI, USA: Association for Computing Ma-
       chinery, 2024. ISBN: 9798400703300. DOI: 10.1145/3613904.3642706. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.
       3642706.
[48]   Shuhan Liu et al. “CREME: Robustness Enhancement of Code LLMs via Layer-Aware Model Editing”. In: Proceedings of
       the IEEE/ACM 48th International Conference on Software Engineering. ICSE ’26. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Association for
       Computing Machinery, 2026. DOI: 3744916.3773111. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.16407v3.
[49]   Ben Shi, Michael Tang, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. “Can Language Models Solve Olympiad Programming?”
       In: First Conference on Language Modeling. 2024. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=kGa4fMtP9l.
[50]   Markus Freitag and Yaser Al-Onaizan. “Beam Search Strategies for Neural Machine Translation”. In: Proceedings of the
       First Workshop on Neural Machine Translation. Vancouver: Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2017, pp. 56–
       60. DOI: 10.18653/v1/W17-3207. URL: https://aclanthology.org/W17-3207/.
[51]   Kaustubh Dhole et al. “NL-Augmenter: A Framework for Task-Sensitive Natural Language Augmentation”. In: Northern
       European Journal of Language Technology 9 (2023). DOI: 10 . 3384 / nejlt . 2000 - 1533 . 2023 . 4725. URL: https :
       //aclanthology.org/2023.nejlt-1.5/.
[52]   Yao Qiang et al. “Prompt Perturbation Consistency Learning for Robust Language Models”. In: Findings of the Association
       for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2024. St. Julian’s, Malta: Association for Computational Linguistics, Mar. 2024,
       pp. 1357–1370. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-eacl.91/.
[53]   Zhanke Zhou et al. “Can Language Models Perform Robust Reasoning in Chain-of-thought Prompting with Noisy Ra-
       tionales?” In: The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2024. URL: https : / /
       openreview.net/forum?id=FbuODM02ra.
[54]   Lalchand Pandia and Allyson Ettinger. “Sorting through the noise: Testing robustness of information processing in pre-
       trained language models”. In: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
       Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic: Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2021, pp. 1583–1596. DOI:
       10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.119. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.119/.
[55]   Feiteng Fang et al. “Enhancing Noise Robustness of Retrieval-Augmented Language Models with Adaptive Adversarial
       Training”. In: Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
       Papers). Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2024, pp. 10028–10039. DOI: 10.18653/
       v1/2024.acl-long.540. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.540/.
[56]   Barbara Rychalska, Dominika Basaj, Alicja Gosiewska, and Przemysław Biecek. “Models in the Wild: On Corruption
       Robustness of Neural NLP Systems”. In: Neural Information Processing. Ed. by Tom Gedeon, Kok Wai Wong, and Minho
       Lee. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 235–247. ISBN: 978-3-030-36718-3.
[57]   Jianyu Zhao, Yuyang Rong, Yiwen Guo, Yifeng He, and Hao Chen. “Understanding Programs by Exploiting (Fuzzing)
       Test Cases”. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023. Toronto, Canada: Association for
       Computational Linguistics, July 2023, pp. 10667–10679. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.678. URL: https:
       //aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.678/.
[58]   Kosta Serebryany. “Continuous Fuzzing with libFuzzer and AddressSanitizer”. In: 2016 IEEE Cybersecurity Development
       (SecDev). 2016, pp. 157–157. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/SecDev.2016.043.
[59]   Yunlong Lyu, Yuxuan Xie, Peng Chen, and Hao Chen. “Prompt Fuzzing for Fuzz Driver Generation”. In: Proceedings of
       the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. CCS ’24. Salt Lake City, UT, USA:
       Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, pp. 3793–3807. ISBN: 9798400706363. DOI: 10.1145/3658644.3670396.
       URL : https://doi.org/10.1145/3658644.3670396.




                                                              19
                                    Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


[60]   Yujia Li et al. “Competition-level code generation with AlphaCode”. In: Science 378.6624 (2022), pp. 1092–1097. DOI:
       10.1126/science.abq1158. eprint: https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.abq1158. URL:
       https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.abq1158.
[61]   Xuezhi Wang et al. “Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language Models”. In: The Eleventh
       International Conference on Learning Representations. 2023. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw.
[62]   Vincent Cohen-addad, Varun Kanade, Frederik Mallmann-trenn, and Claire Mathieu. “Hierarchical Clustering: Objective
       Functions and Algorithms”. In: J. ACM 66.4 (June 2019). ISSN: 0004-5411. DOI: 10 . 1145 / 3321386. URL: https :
       //doi.org/10.1145/3321386.
[63]   Eric K. Tokuda, Cesar H. Comin, and Luciano da F. Costa. “Revisiting agglomerative clustering”. In: Physica A: Statistical
       Mechanics and its Applications 585 (2022), p. 126433. ISSN: 0378-4371. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.
       2021.126433. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378437121007068.
[64]   Binyuan Hui et al. Qwen2.5Coder Technical Report. 2024. arXiv: 2409.12186 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/
       abs/2409.12186.
[65]   Woosuk Kwon et al. “Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention”. In: Pro-
       ceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles. SOSP ’23. Koblenz, Germany: Association for Comput-
       ing Machinery, 2023, pp. 611–626. ISBN: 9798400702297. DOI: 10.1145/3600006.3613165. URL: https://doi.org/
       10.1145/3600006.3613165.
[66]   Jiabo Huang et al. “Code Representation Pre-training with Complements from Program Executions”. In: Proceedings of the
       2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track (EMNLP). Miami, Florida, US:
       Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2024, pp. 267–278. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp- industry.21.
       URL : https://aclanthology.org/2024.emnlp-industry.21/.
[67]   Dacheng Li et al. S*: Test Time Scaling for Code Generation (Source code). 2025. URL: https://github.com/NovaSky-
       AI/SkyThought/tree/0d190f11fd8e885bbe113aeccacba5ccde5b1102/skythought/test-time-scaling.
[68]   Google. Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite. URL: https : / / docs . cloud . google . com / vertex - ai / generative - ai / docs /
       models/gemini/2-5-flash-lite.
[69]   Peter Rousseeuw. “Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis”. In: J. Comput.
       Appl. Math. 20.1 (Nov. 1987), pp. 53–65. ISSN: 0377-0427. DOI: 10 . 1016 / 0377 - 0427(87 ) 90125 - 7. URL: https :
       //doi.org/10.1016/0377-0427(87)90125-7.
[70]   Chris Yuhao Liu et al. Skywork-Reward-V2: Scaling Preference Data Curation via Human-AI Synergy. 2026. arXiv: 2507.
       01352 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.01352.
[71]   Koen Claessen and John Hughes. “QuickCheck: A Lightweight Tool for Random Testing of Haskell Programs”. In: Pro-
       ceedings of the Fifth ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming. ICFP ’00. New York, NY,
       USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2000, pp. 268–279. ISBN: 1581132026. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
       351240.351266.
[72]   Harrison Goldstein, Joseph W. Cutler, Daniel Dickstein, Benjamin C. Pierce, and Andrew Head. “Property-Based Testing
       in Practice”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering. ICSE ’24. Lisbon,
       Portugal: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. ISBN: 9798400702174. URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 /
       3597503.3639581.
[73]   Zhiyu Fan, Haifeng Ruan, Sergey Mechtaev, and Abhik Roychoudhury. “Oracle-Guided Program Selection from Large
       Language Models”. In: Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis.
       ISSTA 2024. Vienna, Austria: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, pp. 628–640. ISBN: 9798400706127. DOI:
       10.1145/3650212.3680308. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3650212.3680308.
[74]   Juyong Jiang, Fan Wang, Jiasi Shen, Sungju Kim, and Sunghun Kim. “A Survey on Large Language Models for Code
       Generation”. In: ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 35.2 (Jan. 2026). ISSN: 1049-331X. DOI: 10.1145/3747588. URL:
       https://doi.org/10.1145/3747588.
[75]   An Yang et al. Qwen3 Technical Report. 2025. arXiv: 2505.09388 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.
       09388.
[76]   Daya Guo et al. “DeepSeekR1 incentivizes reasoning in LLMs through reinforcement learning”. In: Nature 645.8081 (Sept.
       2025), pp. 633–638. ISSN: 1476-4687. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-025-09422-z. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
       s41586-025-09422-z.
[77]   Carlos E Jimenez et al. “SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-world Github Issues?” In: The Twelfth Interna-
       tional Conference on Learning Representations. 2024. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
[78]   Qi Guo et al. “Exploring the Potential of ChatGPT in Automated Code Refinement: An Empirical Study”. In: Proceedings
       of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering. ICSE ’24. Lisbon, Portugal: Association for
       Computing Machinery, 2024. ISBN: 9798400702174. DOI: 10.1145/3597503.3623306. URL: https://doi.org/10.
       1145/3597503.3623306.
[79]   Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuxiang Wei, and Lingming Zhang. “Automated Program Repair in the Era of Large Pre-trained
       Language Models”. In: 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). 2023, pp. 1482–
       1494. DOI: 10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00129.




                                                              20
                                    Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling


[80]   Yifeng He et al. “UniTSyn: A Large-Scale Dataset Capable of Enhancing the Prowess of Large Language Models for
       Program Testing”. In: Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis.
       ISSTA 2024. Vienna, Austria: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, pp. 1061–1072. ISBN: 9798400706127. DOI:
       10.1145/3650212.3680342. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3650212.3680342.
[81]   Weimin Xiong, Yiwen Guo, and Hao Chen. “The Program Testing Ability of Large Language Models for Code”. In: Pro-
       ceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track. Miami, Florida,
       US: Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2024, pp. 23–34. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp- industry.3.
       URL : https://aclanthology.org/2024.emnlp-industry.3/.
[82]   Hongxiang Zhang, Yuyang Rong, Yifeng He, and Hao Chen. “LLAMAFUZZ: Large Language Model Enhanced Greybox
       Fuzzing”. In: ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automation of Software Test (AST). 2026. URL: https://arxiv.
       org/abs/2406.07714.
[83]   Jon Saad-Falcon et al. “An Architecture Search Framework for Inference-Time Techniques”. In: Forty-second International
       Conference on Machine Learning. 2025. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=EGrSMMj37o.
[84]   Jason Wei et al. “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models”. In: Proceedings of the 36th
       International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. NIPS ’22. New Orleans, LA, USA: Curran Associates
       Inc., 2022. ISBN: 9781713871088.
[85]   Hongxiang Zhang, Yuan Tian, and Tianyi Zhang. Self-Anchor: Large Language Model Reasoning via Step-by-step Attention
       Alignment. 2025. arXiv: 2510.03223 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.03223.
[86]   Dacheng Li et al. “Language Models Can Easily Learn to Reason from Demonstrations”. In: Findings of the Associa-
       tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025. Suzhou, China: Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2025,
       pp. 15979–15997. ISBN: 979-8-89176-335-7. DOI: 10 . 18653 / v1 / 2025 . findings - emnlp . 866. URL: https : / /
       aclanthology.org/2025.findings-emnlp.866/.
[87]   Aman Madaan et al. “Self-Refine: Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
       Systems. Ed. by A. Oh et al. Vol. 36. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023, pp. 46534–46594. URL: https://proceedings.
       neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/file/91edff07232fb1b55a505a9e9f6c0ff3-Paper-Conference.pdf.
[88]   Shunyu Yao et al. “ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models”. In: The Eleventh International Con-
       ference on Learning Representations. 2023. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X.
[89]   Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. “Reflexion: language agents
       with verbal reinforcement learning”. In: Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2023. URL:
       https://openreview.net/forum?id=vAElhFcKW6.
[90]   Jiaxin Huang et al. “Large Language Models Can Self-Improve”. In: Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical
       Methods in Natural Language Processing. Ed. by Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali. Singapore: Association
       for Computational Linguistics, Dec. 2023, pp. 1051–1068. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp- main.67. URL: https:
       //aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.67/.
[91]   Yifei Wang, Yuyang Wu, Zeming Wei, Stefanie Jegelka, and Yisen Wang. “A Theoretical Understanding of Self-Correction
       through In-context Alignment”. In: The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2024.
       URL : https://openreview.net/forum?id=OtvNLTWYww.
[92]   Tal Ridnik, Dedy Kredo, and Itamar Friedman. Code Generation with AlphaCodium: From Prompt Engineering to Flow
       Engineering. 2024. arXiv: 2401.08500 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.08500.
[93]   Baizhou Huang, Shuai Lu, Xiaojun Wan, and Nan Duan. “Enhancing Large Language Models in Coding Through Multi-
       Perspective Self-Consistency”. In: Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
       (Volume 1: Long Papers). Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2024, pp. 1429–1450. DOI:
       10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.78. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.78/.
[94]   Jicheng Wang, Yifeng He, and Hao Chen. RepoGenReflex: Enhancing Repository-Level Code Completion with Verbal Re-
       inforcement and Retrieval-Augmented Generation. 2024. arXiv: 2409.13122 [cs.SE]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
       2409.13122.
[95]   Qingyao Li et al. “RethinkMCTS: Refining Erroneous Thoughts in Monte Carlo Tree Search for Code Generation”. In: Pro-
       ceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Ed. by Christos Christodoulopou-
       los, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Carolyn Rose, and Violet Peng. Suzhou, China: Association for Computational Linguistics,
       Nov. 2025, pp. 8092–8110. ISBN: 979-8-89176-332-6. DOI: 10 . 18653 / v1 / 2025 . emnlp - main . 410. URL: https :
       //aclanthology.org/2025.emnlp-main.410/.
[96]   Anonymous. Artifacts for “Code Generation by Differential Test Time Scaling”. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.18426367. URL:
       https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18426367.




                                                              21
