                                                     IdleSpec: Exploiting Idle Time via Speculative
                                                               Planning for LLM Agents


                                                       Daewon Choi1 Kyunghyun Park1 Woomin Song1 Saket Dingliwal3†
                                                            Sai Muralidhar Jayanthi2 Jinwoo Shin1 Aram Galstyan2
                                                                        1              2                    3
                                                                            KAIST          Amazon AGI           Together AI




arXiv:2605.22154v1 [cs.AI] 21 May 2026
                                                                                             Abstract
                                                      Large language model (LLM)-based agents solve complex tasks by leveraging
                                                      multi-step reasoning with iterative tool calls and environment interactions, which
                                                      incur idle time while waiting for observations. Despite the prevalence of idle time
                                                      in most agentic scenarios, existing works treat it as an unavoidable overhead or
                                                      propose restricted solutions that overlook varying computational budgets across
                                                      different tool calls and future observation uncertainty, thereby leading to subopti-
                                                      mal utilization of idle time. In this paper, we introduce IdleSpec, a scalable and
                                                      generic inference approach that leverages idle-time computation to improve agent
                                                      performance while minimizing latency overhead. Specifically, IdleSpec iteratively
                                                      generates plan candidates during idle periods and, once observations become avail-
                                                      able, aggregates them to guide the next reasoning step. For effective plan generation
                                                      under observation uncertainty, IdleSpec samples between complementary drafting
                                                      strategies (i.e., progressive and recovery) from a learned distribution that is updated
                                                      via posterior feedback. Our experiments demonstrate that IdleSpec significantly
                                                      improves agent performance in various agentic scenarios by effectively utilizing
                                                      idle time. In particular, on the GAIA and FRAMES, IdleSpec achieves 55.6%
                                                      average accuracy with Gemini-2.5-Flash, surpassing the vanilla baseline without
                                                      idle-time usage by 5.1%. Furthermore, for MLE-Bench, which involves substantial
                                                      delay from code executions, IdleSpec achieves performance gains of up to 9.1% on
                                                      the Any Medal rate, highlighting its generalizability to long-horizon tasks.


                                         1    Introduction
                                         Large language model (LLM)-based agents [1, 2] have shown remarkable progress across diverse
                                         domains, including general problem solving [3, 4], web navigation [5, 6], code generation [7, 8], and
                                         scientific research [9], by actively leveraging external tools such as web search, code interpreters [10],
                                         and even other agents [11, 12]. Such agents commonly follow a multi-step reasoning loop [1] in which
                                         the agent iteratively reasons, invokes tools, and incorporates the resulting observations, incurring
                                         frequent waiting time at each step, referred to as idle time. Despite its prevalence in agent execution,
                                         the potential of idle time for scaling performance remains largely underexplored, as existing works
                                         mainly target efficiency (e.g., asynchronously invoking independent tool calls [13]). Lin et al. [14]
                                         first treat idle periods as an opportunity for additional computation that produces auxiliary context,
                                         but their design targets LLM–user interactions and remains suboptimal for agentic settings: it ignores
                                         variation in tool-call durations, utilizing only 13.7% of the total idle time on GAIA (see Figure 4),
                                         and relies on the assumption of predictable future queries, which rarely holds when tool observations
                                         are inherently uncertain, often degrading performance (see Sleep-time Compute in Table 1).
                                             † Work done at Amazon.




                                         Preprint.
                                                           Waiting Observation ..
                                                 (e.g., Tool Call / Sub-Agent / Code Execution..)



                                 LLM Agent                               in   g !”                    Observation
                                                                     raft
                                                                  p D
     Drafting during Idle Time (Section 3.1)                 “Sto                                   Draft Aggregation at Test Time (Section 3.2)




       Select Strategy from a Distribution                              …
                                                                                                               Plan Aggregation
                                                                                                               & Action Generation
                                                            Plan Candidate Set



       Progressive          Recovery                                                                                    or
                                               Strategy Sampling with Posterior Updates
                                                                                                                    Forecast
                                                                 (Section 3.3)                               (Progressive or Recovery?)
               Plan Generation



Figure 1: Overview of IdleSpec. (a) Idle-Time Drafting: during tool execution, the agent iteratively
drafts plan candidates by sampling between Progressive and Recovery strategies, and terminates
drafting once the observation arrives. (b) Draft Aggregation: the agent aggregates the candidates
with the observation into a refined action and forecasts whether the trajectory is on track or requires
recovery. (c) Posterior Update: the forecast signal updates the strategy distribution, biasing future
drafts toward strategies effective in the current context.

This raises a key question: How can we develop a robust, generalizable solution for exploiting
idle time arising from agentic interactions to improve agent performance on complex tasks? This
naturally leads us to analyze idle time across diverse agentic scenarios and explore effective strategies
for leveraging it. Our analysis yields the following key observations:

       • Reasoning budgets for idle time are substantial but highly variable across tool calls. We
         observe that the available reasoning budget during idle time is sufficiently large across diverse
         benchmarks—including tool-augmented reasoning (GAIA), multi-hop search (FRAMES),
         and execution-heavy environments (MLE-Bench)—providing additional computation to
         improve performance. However, the amount of available budget varies significantly across
         individual tool calls.
       • Planning is more effective than other agent strategies during idle time. Among representative
         agent strategies, i.e., summarization, reflection, and planning, we find that planning yields
         the most consistent performance improvements when generated during idle time.

Motivated by these findings, we propose IdleSpec (Exploiting Idle Time via Speculative Planning),
a scalable inference framework that exploits idle time via speculative planning; see the overview
in Figure 1. Specifically, we adopt a simple yet effective two-phase strategy: (a) during idle time,
the agent iteratively generates candidate plans; (b) once observations arrive, these candidates are
aggregated and conditioned to guide subsequent reasoning. For higher utilization of idle time, the
agent iteratively drafts candidates until an observation becomes available and terminates immediately
upon observation arrival, thereby enabling higher utilization of idle time.
The key challenge of planning during idle time lies in handling observation uncertainty. Since
observations are not yet available during idle periods, generated plans may become invalid or
suboptimal once the observation becomes available. To mitigate this uncertainty, we design a
drafting strategy distribution that dynamically samples between two complementary strategies:
Progressive, which assumes favorable observations and emphasizes exploitation, and Recovery,
which explores alternative solution paths assuming potential failure from observation. By generating
both forward-progressing and recovery-oriented drafts through sampling, the agent improves coverage
over plausible future observations. Furthermore, this strategy distribution is updated via posterior
feedback, whereby the agent evaluates its current progress and forecasts the most suitable drafting
strategy for subsequent idle periods. This adaptive update enables the drafting behavior to be adjusted
during inference, resulting in robust performance across diverse execution contexts.


                                                                        2
To validate the effectiveness and generality of IdleSpec, we conduct extensive experiments across
three diverse agentic benchmarks: tool-augmented reasoning, multi-hop search, and long-horizon
interactive tasks. We first evaluate IdleSpec on the GAIA benchmark [3], which requires diverse
capabilities including web search, file inspection, and code execution, and on FRAMES [15], which
requires multi-hop search via repeated agent-as-tool invocations. We show that IdleSpec consistently
improves performance across various LLM backbones, e.g., surpassing the vanilla baseline by 4.6%
and 6.8% in average accuracy on Gemma4-E4B and Qwen3.5-4B, respectively. The performance
gains are also more consistent than those of prior idle-time approaches [14], which exhibit lower
utilization of total idle time and, in some cases, even degrade baseline performance. Next, we verify
the generality of IdleSpec on MLE-Bench [8], a benchmark that involves substantial idle time due
to code execution for machine learning engineering scripts. In this setting, IdleSpec significantly
outperforms all baselines, highlighting its applicability to complex, long-horizon interactive tasks.
Contributions. Our contributions are as follows:

       • We conduct a systematic analysis of idle time in LLM-based agents across diverse agentic
         scenarios, showing that idle periods are substantial but vary significantly across tool calls.
         We further establish that planning yields more effective use of idle-time computation than
         other agentic strategies such as summarization and reflection.
       • We propose IdleSpec, a scalable inference-time framework that exploits idle time in agentic
         interactions via speculative planning. IdleSpec iteratively and adaptively generates candidate
         plans by sampling from a strategy distribution, and aggregates them once the observations
         for the next step become available.
       • We validate IdleSpec across three diverse agentic benchmarks, i.e., GAIA, FRAMES,
         and MLE-Bench, spanning tool-augmented reasoning, multi-hop search, and long-horizon
         interactive tasks, and demonstrate consistent performance gains over existing baselines.

2   Related Works
LLM Agents. Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong reasoning capabilities
through multi-step reasoning paradigms such as Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [16], enabling them to solve
increasingly complex tasks. Building on this, existing works [1, 2, 17, 10] have considered LLMs as
sequential decision-making policies, referred to as agents, that interact with external environments.
These approaches formalize agent execution as an iterative reason–act–observe loop, where the agent
reasons about the next action, invokes external tools, and conditions on the resulting observations to
guide subsequent steps. Several studies [18, 19, 10] have further shown that LLMs can be augmented
to invoke external tools such as web search, code execution, and databases, thereby extending their
capabilities beyond training knowledge. More recently, the definition of tools has been generalized to
include other agents, enabling task decomposition [20, 21], and intermediate result verification [22].
For example, recent works [11, 12] treat agents themselves as callable tools, allowing LLM agents
to coordinate with specialized sub-agents on a per-task basis. Despite these advances in tool usage
within agentic workflows, most existing approaches treat the time spent waiting for observations
as an unavoidable delay. In this work, we view this waiting period as an opportunity for additional
computation to improve performance and propose a novel inference-time method called IdleSpec.
Idle Time in LLM Agents. As LLM agents interact with tools and external environments, execution
time is often dominated not by LLM inference itself, but by tool execution and environment response
delays. To leverage this delay, most existing works [13, 23, 24] focus on improving system efficiency
by overlapping independent computations or through system-level execution management. For
instance, Gim et al. [13] and Biswas et al. [24] explore asynchronous and non-blocking function-
calling mechanisms that allow LLM inference to proceed without waiting for tool execution to
complete, while Li et al. [23] observes that frequent tool invocations incur significant overhead due to
cache eviction and rescheduling between turns, and proposes cache-aware scheduling. A parallel line
of work targets latency reduction through speculation: Ye et al. [25] and Nichols et al. [26] introduce
predict-and-verify paradigms in which a fast speculator executes likely-correct actions or tool calls
that a slower target model verifies, while Hua et al. [27] applies the same two-model speculation
pattern to multi-step planning. These methods can be viewed as single-mode speculation: they assume
the current trajectory will succeed and commit to a single speculative continuation along that path. In
contrast, IdleSpec models the inherent uncertainty of future observations through complementary


                                                   3
                           Reasoning (%)      Idle (%)                                           Mean reasoning (7.0s)                             Vanilla   +Summ.       +Refl.    +Plan.

                 95                                                              60




                                                          Number of tool calls
                                                                                                                                             60



Time share (%)
                       81.0%         89.7%      92.6%



                                                                                                                              Accuracy (%)
                 85
                                                                                 40                                                          40
                 15
                       19.00%
                                                                                 20                                                          20
                  5                 10.27%      7.40%
                                                                                  0                                                           0    Level1    Level2    Level3      Avg
                        GAIA        FRAMES    MLE-Bench                               0     20           40       60     80
                                  Benchmark                                                 Tool execution time (s)                                          GAIA Difficulty
                 (a) Idle vs. Reasoning Share                                         (b) Tool Execution Time                                     (c) Idle-Time Strategies
   Figure 2: How Can We Leverage Idle Time in LLM Agents? (a) Reasoning time vs. tool execution
   time (i.e., idle time) across benchmarks. (b) Histogram of per-call tool execution times. (c) Accuracy
   of three idle-time strategies (Summarization, Reflection, Planning) vs. vanilla.


  progressive and recovery drafts, and exploits idle time to improve task performance rather than to
  amortize already-required computation. Recent work on Sleep-Time Compute [14] partially addresses
  this performance gap by treating idle periods as opportunities for pre-computation that generates
  auxiliary context. However, it does not explicitly account for the highly variable idle-time budgets in
  agent executions and relies on the restrictive assumption that future query patterns are predictable,
  which rarely holds in agentic scenarios where tool-call observations are inherently uncertain. In this
  paper, we propose a robust solution that effectively exploits idle time to improve agent performance
  and can be seamlessly applied across diverse, realistic agentic scenarios.

   3                  How Can We Leverage Idle Time in LLM Agents?
  In this section, we investigate the following key questions: how much reasoning budget is available
  during idle time, and which strategies are effective for utilizing it. To this end, we conduct experiments
  on three benchmarks: (i) GAIA, in which agents invoke diverse external tools such as web search,
  file readers, and multimodal parsers; (ii) FRAMES, which contains multi-hop questions requiring
  long chain of sequential search-based tool calls; and (iii) MLE-Bench, which involves ML workloads
  (model training, evaluation) that produce substantial environment response delays.

   3.1                Source of Idle Time

  To quantify the reasoning budget available during idle time, we visualize the ratio of tool execution
  to reasoning time. As shown in Figure 2a, tool execution dominates the total execution time (e.g., it
  is more than 12.5x larger than reasoning time in MLE-Bench), leaving a substantial reasoning budget
  unused. Beyond this aggregate gap, the per-call statistics in Figure 2b reveal that idle durations are
  highly heterogeneous within a single trajectory, ranging from shorter than a single reasoning step (the
  dashed line) to more than 10x longer. The long tail of this distribution accounts for the majority of
  total idle time and is large enough to support multiple rounds of speculative computation, making it
  the opportunity for idle-time exploitation.

   3.2                Strategies for Idle Time

  To identify effective idle-time strategies, we compare three representatives against a vanilla baseline
  without idle-time computation: (i) summarization, which compresses the interaction history; (ii)
  reflection, which evaluates the current action based on past trajectories; and (iii) planning, which
  generates candidate plans conditioned on plausible future observations. As shown in Figure 2c,
  only planning consistently matches or exceeds the baseline across all difficulty levels, achieving
  the highest average accuracy, while summarization and reflection fail to deliver consistent gains
  and even degrade performance (e.g., a notable accuracy drop for reflection on GAIA Level 3).
  We attribute this to differences in how each method handles observation uncertainty during idle
  time. Summarization and reflection must commit to an incomplete interpretation of the trajectory
  before future observations arrive (e.g., reflection misjudging a valid action as erroneous), which then
  propagates into subsequent decisions. Planning avoids this by admitting a conditional formulation
  over possible future observations (e.g., if A holds, execute X; otherwise Y), making idle-time compute
  resilient to this uncertainty.


                                                                                                     4
4     IdleSpec: Exploiting Idle Time via Speculative Planning for LLM Agents

In this section, we propose IdleSpec, a novel inference framework that exploits idle time in LLM
agents via speculative planning. We design a two-phase strategy: it drafts two complementary types
(i.e., progressive and recovery) of plan candidates during idle periods (Section 4.1), and aggregates
them once observations arrive and uses them for subsequent reasoning (Section 4.2). To ensure
effective drafting under observation uncertainty, we propose adaptive drafting strategy sampling with
posterior updates (Section 4.3). The overall framework is illustrated in Figure 1.

4.1     Drafting during Idle Time

Progressive Drafting. The agent assumes that the forthcoming observation will be successfully
obtained and will contribute to task success. Under this assumption, the agent proactively drafts the
next plan to be executed once the observation becomes available, focusing on forward progress.

      Progressive Drafting Prompt

      You are an expert AI assistant tasked with generating the most effective and efficient NEXT ACTION
      STEP to take after the current action step completes and its observation becomes available.
      The current action step is running in parallel. You will not see the observation yet; assume it will arrive
      and will be used to decide the next step.


Recovery Drafting. The agent prepares for the case in which the forthcoming observation shows
no progress (e.g., the tool returns an empty or off-target result). Under this assumption, the agent
drafts an alternative plan that pursues the same sub-goal from a different angle.

      Recovery Drafting Prompt

      You are an expert AI assistant tasked with generating a RECOVERY strategy while the current action
      step is executing.
      Assume that the current action step fails to make progress or gets stuck. Propose EXACTLY one distinct
      recovery plan that takes a different approach from what has already been tried.


Idle-aware Iterative Drafting. As shown in Figure 2a, idle time varies across tools and envi-
ronments, making the appropriate number of plan candidates highly variable. To address this, we
design drafting as an iterative procedure that runs concurrently with tool execution and terminates
immediately once the tool response becomes available. While waiting for the observation, the agent
repeatedly generates plan candidates at each iteration. These drafts are accumulated over time and
fed back into the prompt at each iteration, allowing the model to condition on previously generated
plans. This design enables the agent to generate diverse plan candidates, while reducing unnecessary
drafting cost. Once the tool execution completes, drafting halts and the accumulated candidates are
finalized. As a result, the final candidate set Dfinal is given by:
                                               Dfinal = Dprog ∪ Drec ,                                              (1)
where Dprog is the candidate set from progressive drafting and Drec is from recovery drafting.

4.2     Draft Aggregation at Test Time

Once the observation becomes available, the agent proceeds to the next reasoning step by aggregating
the candidate set Dfinal for guidance.
Aggregation. Given the plan candidate set Dfinal , the agent aggregates the generated drafts by
conditioning its next reasoning step on the entire set. Importantly, the agent is not required to strictly
follow any individual candidate; the plans are treated as reference points that may guide the next
reasoning step. This careful design is crucial because drafts generated during idle time are produced
under observation uncertainty; we observe that directly forcing such raw plans can lead to suboptimal
performance (see Table 6b in Section 5.2).


                                                          5
      Aggregation Prompt

      The following are candidate plans generated for the next step:
      Plan 1: {candidate plan 1}
      Plan 2: {candidate plan 2}
      ..
       .
       Plan N: {candidate plan N}
       Based on the observation, you may use these plans as starting points, but you are free to synthesize a
       different or improved next step if none of them fit well.


4.3     Strategy Sampling with Posterior Updates

We now describe how the agent decides which drafting strategy (i.e., progressive and recovery) to
use at each idle-time iteration. Effective drafting under observation uncertainty requires covering a
diverse set of plausible future situations, while still concentrating computation on the strategy most
likely to be useful for the current trajectory. To balance these two objectives, we propose a simple
yet effective strategy-selection mechanism based on Thompson sampling [28]: we derive a forecast
signal from each observation and use posterior sampling to adaptively select the strategies.

Forecast. At the end of each step, once the observation is available, the agent produces a forecast
for the subsequent idle period. The forecast outputs a binary signal ℓ ∈ {P ROG, R EC}, indicating
which drafting strategy is more promising: progressive (continuing along the current trajectory)
or recovery (mitigating potential future failures). The forecast prompt is provided in Appendix C
(Figure 7).

Probabilistic Model. Let p ∈ [0, 1] denote the probability that the forecast favors the progressive
strategy,
                                     p = Pr(ℓ = P ROG),                                         (2)
and place a Beta prior over p,
                                                p ∼ Beta(α, β),                                                 (3)
where α and β count past forecast signals corresponding to P ROG and R EC, respectively. We initialize
α = β = 1 to reflect a uniform prior in the absence of any forecast feedback. After each forecast
signal ℓ, we update the posterior by incrementing the count corresponding to ℓ:
                                         
                                           (α + 1, β), if ℓ = P ROG,
                               (α, β) ←                                                            (4)
                                           (α, β + 1), if ℓ = R EC.

Adaptive Strategy Sampling. At each drafting iteration, we draw a preference value p̂ ∼
Beta(α, β) and select the drafting strategy as s = P ROG if p̂ > 0.5 and s = R EC otherwise.
The posterior is held fixed throughout the upcoming idle period and updated again once the next
observation arrives. This procedure naturally allocates more idle-time computation to the strategy
that the forecast favors, while retaining stochastic exploration to handle uncertainty and preference
shifts during execution.

5     Experiments

We design experiments to answer the following questions:

• RQ1: Does IdleSpec improve task performance on general agentic benchmarks (GAIA, FRAMES)
  across diverse LLM backbones? (Table 1 in Section 5.1)
• RQ2: Does IdleSpec generalize to execution-heavy environments with substantial tool-execution
  times (MLE-Bench)? (Table 2 in Section 5.1)
• RQ3: How efficiently does IdleSpec utilize idle time, is it compatible with other test-time scaling
  methods, and which design choices matter? (Figure 3 and Tables 3, 4, 5, 6 in Section 5.2)


                                                        6
Table 1: Results on General Agent Benchmarks. We report accuracy (%) on GAIA and FRAMES.
Bold and underline indicate best and runner-up results, respectively.

      Method                  Use idle?    GAIA Level1      GAIA Level2      GAIA Level3       FRAMES        Average
                                                     Gemma4-E4B
      Vanilla                     ✗          36.5±3.6          25.6±0.9           11.5±0.0     50.0±5.3          30.9
      +Sequential Revision        ✗          39.6±1.5          26.4±1.5            9.0±4.8     53.3±7.0          32.1
      +Sleep-time Compute         ✓          41.5±4.1          23.6±3.8            9.0±4.8     50.0±5.3          31.0
      + IdleSpec (Ours)           ✓          43.4±2.7          28.3±2.1           14.1±3.5     56.0±3.5          35.5
                                                       Qwen3.5-4B
      Vanilla                       ✗        37.7±7.6          26.4±2.7           11.5±7.7     57.3±6.4          33.2
      +Sequential Revision        ✗          41.5±5.0          27.9±3.1           11.5±7.7     56.0±4.0          34.2
      +Sleep-time Compute         ✓          36.5±2.9          21.3±4.7            9.0±4.4     50.7±1.2          29.4
      + IdleSpec (Ours)           ✓          40.9±3.9          31.8±3.6           21.8±5.9     65.3±4.2          40.0
                                                    Gemini-2.5-Flash
      Vanilla                       ✗        62.3±2.0          39.9±3.6           25.6±9.7     74.0±2.0          50.5
      +Sequential Revision        ✗          61.6±3.9          42.3±1.8           21.8±4.4     76.7±1.2          50.6
      +Sleep-time Compute         ✓          62.9±2.9          44.2±2.0           20.5±5.9     72.7±1.2          50.1
      + IdleSpec (Ours)           ✓          66.0±3.8          46.5±4.2           32.1±4.4     78.0±4.0          55.6


Table 2: Results on MLE-Bench Lite. We report the percentage of tasks that yield a submission,
a valid submission, an above-median score, and each Kaggle medal tier (Bronze/Silver/Gold). All
methods are evaluated under the standard 24-hour wall-clock budget per task, using Gemini-2.5-Flash
as the backbone. Bold and underline indicate best and runner-up results, respectively.

                                            Made           Valid          Above               Any Medal (%)
  Method                     Use idle?    Submission     Submission       Median
                                             (%)            (%)            (%)       Bronze    Silver     Gold     Total
  Vanilla                       ✗            86.4           77.3           40.1        9.1      9.1       18.2     36.4
  +Sequential Revision          ✗            90.1           81.8           50.0       13.6      9.1       18.2     40.9
  +Sleep-time Compute           ✓            90.1           81.8           59.1       13.6      9.1       13.6     36.4
  + IdleSpec (Ours)             ✓            95.5           86.4           59.1       13.6      13.6      18.2     45.5



Datasets. We evaluate IdleSpec on three benchmarks: GAIA [3] (general agent, full 165-task valida-
tion split), FRAMES [15] (multi-hop QA, 50 samples), and MLE-Bench Lite [8] (ML engineering,
24-hour budget per task).
Models. Our experiments primarily use the proprietary model Gemini-2.5-Flash. In addition, we
consider Gemma4-E4B and Qwen3.5-4B to validate IdleSpec with recent small open-source models.
Baselines. To evaluate the effect of idle-time utilization, we include a vanilla baseline that performs
no additional computation during idle time. Additionally, we include Sequential Revision [29], which
performs revision step after each new observation. To compare against approaches that utilize idle
time, we consider Sleep-Time Compute [14], which generates auxiliary contexts during idle periods
via naive prompting and reuses them at test time.1

5.1     Main Results

Results on General Agent Benchmarks. We evaluate IdleSpec on the GAIA and FRAMES
benchmarks, which involve a diverse tool suite (e.g., text and audio processing, search agents) to
solve complex multi-hop reasoning problems. As shown in Table 1, IdleSpec consistently improves
task success rates over all baselines across both benchmarks and across all three GAIA difficulty
levels. IdleSpec achieves the highest average accuracy on every backbone, improving over Vanilla by
  1 More details including implementation details, evaluation protocols are provided in Appendix A.




                                                           7
                               Better
               32
                                                                Table 3: Idle-Time vs. Test-Time Token Usage. Accu-
                                                                racy (%) and output token usage during idle time and


Accuracy (%)
               28                                               test time on GAIA Level 2 using Qwen3.5-4B.
                                         Vanilla
               24                        +Sleep-Time Compute     Method                 Accuracy   Tokens (Idle / Test)
                                         +Sequential Revision
                                         +Planning               Vanilla                  26.4          (- / 7126)
               20                        +IdleSpec (Ours)
                                                                 +Sequential Revision     27.9         (- / 11354)
                       1.00x            1.25x           1.50x    +Planning                32.2         (- / 12234)
                      Relative Latency (vs. Vanilla)             +Sleep-time Compute      21.3       (3393 / 7048)
Figure 3: Latency–Accuracy Trade-off.                            + IdleSpec (Ours)        31.8       (5284 / 5966)
All measurements were performed on
vLLM using an NVIDIA A6000 GPU.


4.6% on Gemma4-E4B (30.9 → 35.5), 6.8% on Qwen3.5-4B (33.2 → 40.0), and 5.1% on Gemini-
2.5-Flash (50.5 → 55.6). The gains are most pronounced on the harder Levels 2 and 3, suggesting
that idle-time speculation is most beneficial when the underlying reasoning task is difficult. In
contrast, Sleep-Time Compute exhibits limited or inconsistent improvements and, in some cases, even
degrades performance. In particular, this degradation is especially pronounced with smaller open-
source models such as Qwen3.5-4B: because Sleep-Time Compute freely pre-generates auxiliary
context based on assumed future queries, hallucinations introduced at this stage mislead subsequent
reasoning. IdleSpec avoids this failure mode through dual drafting that covers both progressive and
recovery scenarios, guiding the agent toward correct trajectories. We provide qualitative examples of
both behaviors in Appendix B.6.
Results on MLE-Bench. We further evaluate IdleSpec on MLE-Bench, which features long-horizon
interactions and execution-heavy steps involving repeated code execution and model training. As
shown in Table 2, Sleep-Time Compute matches IdleSpec on the Above-Median metric but lowers
the Gold-medal rate relative to Vanilla (13.6% vs. 18.2%) and yields no improvement in total medals
— consistent with our earlier observation that naively pre-generated context can mislead reasoning
under observation uncertainty. In contrast, IdleSpec achieves the best results across nearly all metrics,
raising the submission rate from 86.4% to 95.5%, the valid submission rate from 77.3% to 86.4%,
and the overall medal rate from 36.4% to 45.5%, with consistent gains across Bronze, Silver, and
Gold tiers. Because MLE-Bench involves long-running tool calls such as model training, a non-trivial
portion of the 24-hour wall-clock budget is otherwise spent waiting. IdleSpec converts this wasted
idle time into useful LLM computation, generating diverse solution paths that translate into more
valid submissions and more medal-tier solutions within the same time budget, highlighting that
IdleSpec generalizes to execution-heavy agentic workloads.

5.2                 More Analysis

Efficiency Analysis. We analyze the efficiency of IdleSpec by comparing it against the original
baselines (Sequential Revision and Sleep-Time Compute) and an additional test-time scaling baseline,
Planning, which generates a new plan after each tool-call observation before the next step. As shown
in Figure 3, Sequential Revision and Planning improve accuracy by spending more tokens at test
time, but this directly inflates end-to-end latency: Sequential Revision and Planning are about 1.30×
and 1.33× slower than Vanilla, respectively. IdleSpec, in contrast, achieves a Pareto improvement: it
outperforms Sequential Revision and matches Planning’s accuracy while keeping latency close to
Vanilla, as most of its additional token computation is carried out during idle periods (Table 3).
Compatibility with Test-Time Scaling. We investigate whether IdleSpec is complementary to
existing test-time scaling methods, under the hypothesis that the two operate along orthogonal axes
and can be seamlessly combined: IdleSpec scales computation along the idle-time axis, while existing
test-time scaling methods scale along the test-time axis. Since IdleSpec leaves the test-time procedure
itself untouched, it can be layered on top of any such method without modification. To verify this,
we combine IdleSpec with the two test-time scaling baselines introduced above Sequential Revision
and Planning, while leaving each baseline’s test-time procedure unchanged. As shown in Table 4,


                                                                    8
Table 4: Compatibility with Test-Time Scal-                 Table 5: Effect of Idle-Time Length on Ac-
ing. Accuracy (%) on GAIA Level 2 with                      curacy (%). GAIA samples are binned by
Qwen3.5-4B. IdleSpec yields consistent gains                their ultra-short ratio (the fraction of tool calls
when combined with existing test-time scal-                 shorter than the reasoning step) with Gemini-
ing methods.                                                2.5-Flash. Idle-time availability increases
                                                            from High to Low.
    Method                  Use Idle? Accuracy
    Sequential Revision        ✗         27.9                      Method       High Medium Low
    + IdleSpec                 ✓         32.2
                                                                   Vanilla       50.0       39.0        39.0
    Planning                   ✗         32.2                      + IdleSpec    50.0       45.0        46.0
    + IdleSpec                 ✓         35.3


Table 6: Ablation Studies. Accuracy (%) on GAIA and FRAMES when selectively ablating
individual components of IdleSpec. (a) Drafting strategy on GAIA Level 1–3 using Gemini-2.5-Flash;
(b, c) aggregation and selection strategies on FRAMES using Qwen3.5-4B.
                 (a) Drafting Strategy                  (b) Aggregation                 (c) Selection

        Prog. Rec.     L1      L2   L3    Avg.      Method          Acc.        Method                  Acc.
         ✓       ✗    62.9 44.2 26.9 44.7           Best-of-N   59.3            Random          63.3
         ✗       ✓    60.4 43.4 28.2 44.0           Mandatory 57.3              Forecast-Direct 60.7
         ✓       ✓    66.0 46.5 32.1 48.2           Ref. (Ours) 65.3            Adapt. (Ours) 65.3



IdleSpec yields consistent gains on top of both baselines, improving Sequential Revision from 27.9%
to 32.2% and Planning from 32.2% to 35.3%. This gain likely arises because the progressive and
recovery drafts generated during idle periods pre-expand the search space available at test time, which
the test-time scaling method leverages to produce better-informed revisions and plan updates.
Effect of Idle-Time Length. We analyze how the available idle time per step affects IdleSpec. We
define the ultra-short ratio of a sample as the fraction of its tool calls whose execution time is shorter
than a single LLM reasoning step. On GAIA, this ratio averages 25–27% across the three difficulty
levels (Appendix B.2, Table 7), indicating that most tool calls leave enough idle time for speculative
drafting. Binning GAIA samples by ultra-short ratio into High (>0.75, least idle time), Medium
(0.25–0.75), and Low (<0.25, most idle time) groups (Table 5), we find that IdleSpec matches the
vanilla baseline on the High group, where little usable idle time is available, but delivers gains of 6.0
% and 7.0 % on the Medium and Low groups, respectively.
Ablation Study. We ablate the three key design choices of IdleSpec — drafting strategy, aggregation
scheme, and selection rule. First, Table 6a shows that using only progressive or only recovery drafts
underperforms, with recovery-only being especially harmful as the agent keeps switching plans
without sufficient forward progress; sampling between the two yields the best results by balancing
exploitation and exploration. Second, Table 6b shows that simple aggregation schemes such as
Best-of-N (selecting a single plan) and Mandatory Selection (enforcing all drafted plans) yield limited
gains, whereas treating draft candidates as references rather than strict constraints significantly
improves accuracy. Third, Table 6c shows that other selection rules (Random and Forecast-Direct)
underperform, while the proposed adaptive selection achieves the highest accuracy.

6    Conclusion
In this work, we explore idle time, arising naturally from tool calls, as an underexploited computational
resource to improve agent performance with minimal latency overhead. Specifically, we introduce
IdleSpec, which employs two complementary drafting strategies during tool execution. By adaptively
selecting between these strategies and aggregating drafts once observations arrive, IdleSpec effectively
utilizes idle time under observation uncertainty. Extensive experiments across diverse agentic
benchmarks demonstrate that IdleSpec generalizes to a wide range of tool-augmented scenarios. We
hope this work draws attention to idle-time utilization as a promising direction for building more
capable LLM agents with minimal latency overhead.


                                                    9
References
 [1] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and
     Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh
     International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
 [2] Vishnu Sarukkai, Zhiqiang Xie, and Kayvon Fatahalian. Self-generated in-context examples
     improve LLM agents for sequential decision-making tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.00234,
     2025.
 [3] Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom.
     GAIA: a benchmark for general AI assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2024.
 [4] Long Phan, Alice Gatti, Ziwen Han, Nathaniel Li, Josephina Hu, Hugh Zhang, Chen Bo Calvin
     Zhang, Mohamed Shaaban, John Ling, Sean Shi, et al. Humanity’s last exam. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2501.14249, 2025.
 [5] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
     Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al. WebArena: A realistic web environment for
     building autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023.
 [6] Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Sam Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and
     Yu Su. Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 36:28091–28114, 2023.
 [7] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
     Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world GitHub issues? arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2310.06770, 2023.
 [8] Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays, Giulio
     Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, et al. MLE-bench: Evaluating machine
     learning agents on machine learning engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07095, 2024.
 [9] Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The
     AI scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2408.06292, 2024.
[10] Kechi Zhang, Jia Li, Ge Li, Xianjie Shi, and Zhi Jin. CodeAgent: Enhancing code generation
     with tool-integrated agent systems for real-world repo-level coding challenges. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2401.07339, 2024.
[11] Yanfei Zhang. Agent-as-Tool: A study on the hierarchical decision making with reinforcement
     learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01489, 2025.
[12] Pengcheng Jiang, Jiacheng Lin, Zhiyi Shi, Zifeng Wang, Luxi He, Yichen Wu, Ming Zhong,
     Peiyang Song, Qizheng Zhang, Heng Wang, et al. Adaptation of agentic AI: A survey of
     post-training, memory, and skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16301, 2025.
[13] In Gim, Seung-seob Lee, and Lin Zhong. Asynchronous LLM function calling. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2412.07017, 2024.
[14] Kevin Lin, Charlie Snell, Yu Wang, Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E.
     Gonzalez. Sleep-time compute: Beyond inference scaling at test-time, 2025. URL https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2504.13171.
[15] Satyapriya Krishna, Kalpesh Krishna, Anhad Mohananey, Steven Schwarcz, Adam Stambler,
     Shyam Upadhyay, and Manaal Faruqui. Fact, fetch, and reason: A unified evaluation of
     retrieval-augmented generation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.12941.
[16] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le,
     Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
     Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.


                                                10
[17] Mrinal Rawat, Ambuje Gupta, Rushil Goomer, Alessandro Di Bari, Neha Gupta, and Roberto
     Pieraccini. Pre-Act: Multi-step planning and reasoning improves acting in LLM agents. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2505.09970, 2025.

[18] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro,
     Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models
     can teach themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:
     68539–68551, 2023.

[19] Changle Qu, Sunhao Dai, Xiaochi Wei, Hengyi Cai, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, Jun Xu,
     and Ji-Rong Wen. Tool learning with large language models: A survey. Frontiers of Computer
     Science, 19(8):198343, 2025.

[20] Adam Fourney, Gagan Bansal, Hussein Mozannar, Cheng Tan, Eduardo Salinas, Friederike
     Niedtner, Grace Proebsting, Griffin Bassman, Jack Gerrits, Jacob Alber, et al. Magentic-One:
     A generalist multi-agent system for solving complex tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04468,
     2024.

[21] Wentao Zhang, Ce Cui, Yilei Zhao, Yang Liu, and Bo An. AgentOrchestra: A hierarchical
     multi-agent framework for general-purpose task solving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12508,
     2025.

[22] Shalev Lifshitz, Sheila A McIlraith, and Yilun Du. Multi-agent verification: Scaling test-time
     compute with multiple verifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20379, 2025.

[23] Hanchen Li, Runyuan He, Qiuyang Mang, Qizheng Zhang, Huanzhi Mao, Xiaokun Chen,
     Hangrui Zhou, Alvin Cheung, Joseph Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Continuum: Efficient and robust
     multi-turn LLM agent scheduling with KV cache time-to-live. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02230,
     2025.

[24] Anish Biswas, Kanishk Goel, Jayashree Mohan, Alind Khare, Anjaly Parayil, Ramachandran
     Ramjee, and Chetan Bansal. Sutradhara: An intelligent orchestrator-engine co-design for
     tool-based agentic inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.12967, 2026.

[25] Naimeng Ye, Arnav Ahuja, Georgios Liargkovas, Yunan Lu, Kostis Kaffes, and Tianyi Peng.
     Speculative actions: A lossless framework for faster AI agents. In The Fourteenth International
     Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
     id=P0GOk5wslg.

[26] Daniel Nichols, Prajwal Singhania, Charles Jekel, Abhinav Bhatele, and Harshitha Menon.
     Optimizing agentic language model inference via speculative tool calls. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2512.15834, 2025.

[27] Wenyue Hua, Mengting Wan, Jagannath Shashank Subramanya Sai Vadrevu, Ryan Nadel,
     Yongfeng Zhang, and Chi Wang. Interactive speculative planning: Enhance agent efficiency
     through co-design of system and user interface. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=BwR8t91yqh.

[28] Shipra Agrawal and Navin Goyal. Analysis of thompson sampling for the multi-armed bandit
     problem. In Shie Mannor, Nathan Srebro, and Robert C. Williamson, editors, Proceedings
     of the 25th Annual Conference on Learning Theory, volume 23 of Proceedings of Machine
     Learning Research, pages 39.1–39.26, Edinburgh, Scotland, 25–27 Jun 2012. PMLR. URL
     https://proceedings.mlr.press/v23/agrawal12.html.

[29] King Zhu, Hanhao Li, Siwei Wu, Tianshun Xing, Dehua Ma, Xiangru Tang, Minghao Liu, Jian
     Yang, Jiaheng Liu, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, et al. Scaling test-time compute for LLM agents.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12928, 2025.

[30] He Zhu, Tianrui Qin, King Zhu, Heyuan Huang, Yeyi Guan, Jinxiang Xia, Yi Yao, Hanhao Li,
     Ningning Wang, Pai Liu, et al. OAgents: An empirical study of building effective agents. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2506.15741, 2025.


                                                11
[31] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi
     Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang
     Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin,
     Robert Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. OpenHands: An open platform for
     AI software developers as generalist agents. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=OJd3ayDDoF.




                                              12
A     Additional Experimental Details
A.1    Datasets

We use three benchmarks that span complementary types of agentic execution: tool-using question
answering (GAIA), multi-hop search (FRAMES), and machine-learning engineering (MLE-Bench).
Below we describe the protocol for each.

GAIA and FRAMES. For GAIA, we evaluate on the full validation split across Levels 1–3,
comprising 53, 86, and 26 tasks for Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3, respectively (165 tasks in total). For
FRAMES [15], a multi-hop question answering benchmark in which agents are repeatedly invoked
as tools to perform sequential search-based reasoning, we use the first 50 samples for evaluation; this
setup induces non-trivial idle periods on the orchestrator side. We use the same agent stack and tool
budgets across all methods. For open-source models (Qwen3.5-4B and Gemma4-E4B), inference
is served through 16 vLLM replicas on NVIDIA A6000 GPUs behind a load-balancing proxy; for
Gemini-2.5-Flash, we use the official Vertex AI API.

MLE-Bench. We evaluate on MLE-Bench Lite [8], i.e., the benchmark’s Low-complexity split,
which consists of 22 competitions. We follow the standard MLE-Bench Lite protocol with a 24-hour
wall-clock budget per task for all methods. Each run starts from the same initial task state and
follows the benchmark’s standard interaction protocol. For every task, we report (i) whether the agent
produces a submission (Made Submission), (ii) whether the submission is accepted as valid by the
benchmark (Valid Submission), and (iii) the achieved leaderboard tier (Above Median, Bronze, Silver,
Gold, and Any Medal), computed using MLE-Bench’s evaluation rules. All methods use Gemini-2.5-
Flash as the agent backbone (via the Vertex AI API), the same budget and stopping criteria, and an
identical software stack: a single GPU (NVIDIA RTX 3090) and 4 CPUs are provisioned to the agent
for code execution and local tool use, with dependency versions held fixed across methods.

A.2    Architectures

Across all experiments, we consider Gemini-2.5-Flash2 , Qwen3.5-4B3 , or Gemma4-E4B4 . For agent
frameworks, we use OAgents [30] for GAIA and FRAMES, which provides a standard tool suite
including text and audio processing, web browsing, and specialized sub-agents such as a dedicated
web agent. For MLE-Bench, we use OpenHands [31], which supports code generation and execution
in interactive environments.

A.3    Evaluation Protocol

By default, we use standard decoding with temperature 0.6 and top-p 1.0. For Gemma4-E4B, we
instead follow the recommended configuration on its official model card: temperature 1.0, top-p 0.95,
and top-k 64. For GAIA and FRAMES, we report the mean across three random seeds for every
(method, model) configuration. For MLE-Bench, we report results from a single seed since each run
already spans the standard 24-hour budget per task, which provides sufficient stability.

A.4    Implementation Details

IdleSpec. We cap the number of candidate plans retained per idle window at K=5 across all
experiments to prevent context-window overflow and keep the aggregation cost bounded; When
a tool call returns before a draft finishes generating, the in-flight generation is interrupted and the
partial draft is discarded. IdleSpec uses four prompts: a progressive drafting prompt (Figure 5); a
recovery drafting prompt (Figure 6); a forecast prompt (Figure 7); an aggregation prompt (Figure 8).
All prompt templates are collected in Appendix C.

Baselines. We compare IdleSpec against two baselines: Sequential Revision (Figure 9), which
reflects on the latest observation to propose the next step, and Sleep-Time Compute (Figure 10), which
    2 https://docs.cloud.google.com/vertex-ai/generative-ai/docs/models/gemini/2-5-flash
    3 https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3.5-4B
    4 https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-4-E4B




                                                   13
performs free-form inference over a partially revealed problem during idle periods. We use the prompt
released in the original Sleep-Time Compute repository5 , adapted from its original math-oriented
template via a minimal modification: we apply the instruction “The original prompt is designed for
mathematical problem solving. Please minimally adapt it to better support {task}.”, where {task} is
replaced with “general agent problem” for GAIA and “machine learning engineering” for MLE-
Bench. This adaptation introduces only small wording changes (e.g., replacing math-specific terms
such as “calculations” with task-relevant terms like “commands” in MLE-Bench), while preserving
the overall structure of the original prompt. A sensitivity analysis confirming that this baseline is
robust to such phrasing variations is provided in Appendix B.5.

A.5   Algorithm Pseudocode

Algorithm 1 IdleSpec: Exploiting Idle Time via Speculative Planning for LLM Agents
Require: Task T , initial state s0 , language model M, candidate cap K
 1: Initialize Beta posterior (α, β) ← (1, 1)                  ▷ uniform prior over p = Pr(ℓ=P ROG)
 2: Initialize empty draft buffer D ← ∅
 3: s ← s0
 4: while task not finished do
 5:     Send (s, D) to Main API and obtain next action
 6:     Clear draft buffer D ← ∅
 7:     Execute the returned action
 8:     while action execution in progress do                           ▷ Drafting phase (in idle time)
 9:          Sample preference p̂ ∼ Beta(α, β)
10:          Select drafting strategy s∗ ← P ROG if p̂ > 0.5, else R EC
11:          if s∗ = P ROG then
12:              Generate progressive draft under observation uncertainty
13:          else
14:              Generate recovery draft conditioned on the current action step
15:          end if
16:          if |D| < K then
17:              Append generated draft to D
18:          end if
19:     end while
20:     Receive observation o
21:     Ignore any in-flight idle draft responses and finalize D                     ▷ Forecast phase
22:     Send (T , s, o) to Forecast API and obtain ℓ ∈ {P ROG, R EC}
23:     Update posterior (α, β) with ℓ using Eq. (4)
24:     s ← s ∥ (action, o)                                                ▷ append step to trajectory
25: end while



A.6   Broader Impact

IdleSpec reframes idle time during tool execution as a usable computational resource. On the positive
side, it improves the achievable accuracy of agent systems within a fixed wall-clock budget without
modifying the underlying model, which can lower the latency cost of capable agent execution and
improve accessibility for latency-sensitive deployments.
On the negative side, the accuracy gains come from additional compute spent during the idle window
(Appendix A.7). Although end-to-end latency is unchanged, the underlying hardware is not free
during idle periods, so this overhead translates into higher aggregate energy consumption and carbon
footprint per task at scale.

A.7   Limitations

While IdleSpec demonstrates consistent gains across diverse agentic scenarios, its effectiveness
depends on the presence of sufficient idle time during tool execution. When tool calls return faster
  5 https://github.com/letta-ai/sleep-time-compute




                                                  14
                  12       Sleep-Time Compute                             Table 7: Ultra-Short Idle-Time Ratio.
                                                           L3             Average fraction of tool calls per task
                           IdleSpec (Ours)
                  8                                                       whose execution time is shorter than a
                                                      L2                  single LLM reasoning step on GAIA.

      Acc. (pp)
                  4                              L1
                                                                          The reasoning-step duration used as the
                  0             L1                                        threshold is measured from Gemini-2.5-
                                      L3                                  Flash.
                  4                  L2
                  8                                                               Level   Ultra-short ratio
                       0   10          20   30         40       50
                                       ITU (%)                                     1            0.25
                                                                                   2            0.26
Figure 4: Idle-Time Utilization (ITU) vs. Accuracy Gain                            3            0.27
(∆). GAIA with Qwen3.5-4B, one point per difficulty level.


than a single LLM reasoning step, IdleSpec falls back to the vanilla baseline. In addition, although
IdleSpec adds only minimal end-to-end latency overhead, the speculative drafting consumes additional
LLM tokens during the idle window, which translates into higher per-task compute and monetary
cost when running on metered APIs. For deployments where token cost rather than latency is the
binding constraint, this trade-off should be considered explicitly.

A.8   Future Work

We identify several promising directions for future work. A particularly compelling avenue is to
decouple idle-time computation from the primary proprietary model by leveraging a small, special-
ized local model during idle periods. This setup may substantially reduce API inference cost and
energy consumption while preserving the performance gains of the proprietary model on the critical
path. More elaborate scheduling policies for idle time are also an interesting direction, including
dynamically allocating speculative budgets based on task uncertainty or difficulty. Furthermore,
extending IdleSpec beyond ReAct-style frameworks remains an open direction, including complex
multi-agent paradigms and asynchronous or parallel tool-calling settings. Even when multiple tool
calls are issued concurrently, the agent typically remains idle until the slowest call returns, and
reasoning chains with sequential dependencies—such as multi-hop retrieval in GAIA or iterative
code-debugging in MLE-Bench—can rarely be fully parallelized.

B     Additional Analysis
B.1   Idle-Time Utilization vs. Accuracy
                                                                            (k)
Definition. For a task (episode) with K tool-call steps, let tidle denote the tool execution duration
                                                               (k)            (k)
of step k (during which the agent is otherwise idle), and let tLLM-on-idle ≤ tidle denote the portion of
that interval actually spent on LLM computation (e.g., issuing requests, waiting on responses, and
consuming generated drafts). We define the per-task idle-time utilization as
                                          PK (k)
                                                 tLLM-on-idle
                                ITUtask = k=1PK (k)           ∈ [0, 1],                              (5)
                                                k=1 tidle
so that a method that performs no idle-time computation has ITUtask = 0, while perfect overlap of
LLM work with the idle interval yields ITUtask = 1. We report the average of ITUtask over all tasks
(and seeds, when applicable) for each (method, benchmark) configuration.
Figure 4 illustrates the relationship between idle-time utilization and the resulting accuracy gain over
the vanilla baseline on GAIA with Qwen3.5-4B. IdleSpec reaches 34.6% idle-time utilization on
average and turns it into consistent positive gains across all three difficulty levels (up to +10.3 points
on Level 3), whereas Sleep-Time Compute utilizes only 13.2% of the available idle time and even
degrades accuracy at every level. This indicates that performance improvements are not solely driven
by how much idle time is used but also by how it is exploited, and reflects the fact that Sleep-Time
Compute does not account for variation in tool-call durations.


                                                                     15
B.2   Ultra-Short Idle-Time Ratio

The body’s analysis of idle-time length (Section 5.2) bins GAIA samples by their ultra-short ratio:
the fraction of a sample’s tool calls whose execution time is shorter than a single LLM reasoning step.
Table 7 reports the average ultra-short ratio per GAIA difficulty level (25–27% across Levels 1–3),
confirming that most tool calls leave usable idle time for speculative drafting. The accuracy impact of
binning by this ratio is reported in the body as Table 5.

B.3   Extended Efficiency Analysis

We conduct an extended cost analysis on the full GAIA dataset with Gemini-2.5-Flash to characterize
the wall-clock and token cost of IdleSpec relative to the vanilla baseline. To obtain stable per-task
latency measurements, all numbers in this table come from a single fixed seed run in an isolated
environment (no co-located workloads, fixed concurrency, identical tool stack across methods).
Table 8 reports the results across the three GAIA difficulty levels: IdleSpec matches the vanilla
baseline in end-to-end latency at every level, while delivering consistent accuracy gains (up to +7.7
points on Level 3).
Like other test-time scaling approaches, IdleSpec spends additional computation to improve task
performance. The key distinction is where this computation is placed: by scheduling drafting onto
otherwise wasted idle periods rather than serializing it on the critical path, IdleSpec turns idle time
into accuracy gains with only minimal end-to-end latency overhead, attaining accuracy comparable
to test-time scaling methods while substantially shortening wall-clock time (Table 3).

Table 8: Extended Efficiency Analysis on the Full GAIA Dataset with Gemini-2.5-Flash (single
fixed seed, isolated environment). Per-task wall-clock latency in seconds. IdleSpec matches the
vanilla baseline in latency while consistently improving accuracy across all three difficulty levels.
                          Level     Method       Accuracy (%)    Latency (s)
                                    Vanilla            64.2          107
                          Level 1
                                    + IdleSpec         66.0           99
                                    Vanilla            41.9          191
                          Level 2
                                    + IdleSpec         46.5          196
                                    Vanilla            26.9          374
                          Level 3
                                    + IdleSpec         34.6          376



Table 9: Generalization to Other Agent Frame-            Table 10: Sensitivity Analysis of Prompt
works. Accuracy (%) on the full GAIA dataset             Design (single fixed seed). GAIA average ac-
with Gemini-2.5-Flash, when integrating IdleSpec         curacy (%) of the Sleep-Time Compute under
into SmolAgents.                                         three prompt variants on Gemini-2.5-Flash.

 Method         Level 1   Level 2   Level 3   Avg.              Prompt Variant         Average.

 SmolAgents      60.4      45.3      19.2     41.6              Version 1 (Original)     44.5
 + IdleSpec      68.0      47.8      30.8     48.9              Version 2                44.0
                                                                Version 3                44.0


B.4   Generalization to Other Agent Frameworks

To assess whether the benefits of IdleSpec extend beyond a single agent implementation, we employ
it in another agent stack, SmolAgents6 , a widely used framework designed for flexibility and min-
imalism. We re-implement the drafting, forecast, and aggregation modules within smolagents’s
execution loop without changing any prompts or hyperparameters, and evaluate the resulting agent on
the full GAIA dataset with Gemini-2.5-Flash. Table 9 shows that IdleSpec improves accuracy across
all three difficulty levels in this stack, raising average accuracy from 41.6% to 48.9% (+7.3 points)
and yielding the largest gain on Level 3 (+11.6 points). The pattern of improvement closely mirrors
  6 https://github.com/huggingface/smolagents




                                                  16
that observed on the OAgents stack, indicating that the gains arise from the general principle of over-
lapping speculative reasoning with idle time rather than from any framework-specific implementation
choice.

B.5     Sensitivity Analysis of Prompt Design

Because the Sleep-Time Compute baseline relies on a prompt adapted from a math-oriented template
(Appendix A.4), we run a sensitivity analysis to confirm that our reported numbers do not hinge
on the particular adaptation we use. We construct three prompt variants by re-running the same
minimal-adaptation procedure with different model families (Claude and Gemini) as the rewriter, and
re-evaluate the Sleep-Time Compute baseline under each. Table 10 shows that the GAIA average
stays within a 0.5-point band across the three variants (44.0–44.5%), confirming that the comparison
against Sleep-Time Compute reported in the main paper is robust to the choice of prompt adaptation.

B.6     Qualitative Analysis

We present two FRAMES tasks (Qwen3.5-4B, seed 0) on which both Vanilla and Sleep-Time
Compute fail while IdleSpec succeeds. For each task we summarize the trajectory of every method
in compact form (tool-call sketch, key observation, final answer) and highlight where Vanilla and
Sleep-Time Compute diverge from the correct chain.

Example 1: frames_3 (Compositional Sports–Temporal Reasoning). “As of August 1, 2024,
which country were holders of the FIFA World Cup the last time the UEFA Champions League
was won by a club from London?” Gold answer: France. The required chain is: (i) most recent
London-club Champions League winner → Chelsea, May 2021; (ii) FIFA World Cup holder on that
date → France, because France won the 2018 tournament and remained the reigning holder until
Argentina won in December 2022 — i.e., on Chelsea’s May 2021 victory date, the trophy was still
held by France.
      VANILLA (Pred: Argentina / GT: France)

            1. search_agent("List of UEFA Champions League winners by London clubs,
               years won, most recent victory before 2024") → “Chelsea FC . . . most recent
               victory 2021.”
            2. search_agent("Which country won the FIFA World Cup in 2021?") → “No
               country won the FIFA World Cup in 2021 . . . the 2022 winner was Argentina.”
            3. final_answer("Argentina").
      Failure Mode. Vanilla collapses “World Cup holder at the time of the 2021 Champions League final”
      into “World Cup winner of 2021” and is then misled by the search agent’s correction (“. . . the 2022
      winner was Argentina”), committing to that without re-deriving who actually held the trophy on the
      date of the Chelsea win.

      S LEEP -T IME C OMPUTE (Pred: England / GT: France)

          1-4. Four interchangeable list-the-winners queries (search_agent, web_search, wiki); all
               return empty observations.
            5. search_agent("Which London clubs have won the UEFA Champions League
               and in which years") → “Chelsea: 2012, 2021. Manchester United: 1968, 1999, 2008.”
            6. final_answer("England").
      The pre-computed inference produced by the sleep-time worker before step 6 is itself the source of the
      wrong commit:
               “Chelsea won the Champions League in 2012 and 2021 (specifically May 29, 2021).
                [. . . ] Chelsea is a club located in London, England. Therefore, the country
                associated with the winning club is England (or United Kingdom). [. . . ] The
                country is England.”
      Failure Mode. The sleep-time pre-computation reframes the task from “country that held the World
      Cup at the time of the 2021 Chelsea win” into “country in which the winning club is located,” and



                                                       17
    concludes the wrong country in advance. The executor, anchored to that pre-computed answer, never
    fires the World Cup hop and submits “England” — the failure is committed inside the sleep-time context,
    not in the executor’s tool use.


    I DLE S PEC (Pred: France / GT: France)

           1. search_agent("When did Chelsea FC last win the UEFA Champions
              League?") → “Chelsea FC last won the UEFA Champions League in 2021.”
           2. search_agent("Who won the FIFA World Cup in 2022?") → “Argentina won the
              2022 FIFA World Cup. . . December 18, 2022.”
   At this idle window (after the 2022 observation), the sleep-time worker drafted two progressive and
   three recovery candidate plans in parallel. Two recovery plans flagged the exact failure that Vanilla and
   Sleep-Time Compute fall into:
              Recovery #0. “Re-evaluate the question’s intent: determine if ‘holders of the FIFA
              World Cup’ refers to the winner of the World Cup in that specific year (which would
              be none) or the winner of the World Cup ending on or before that date (i.e.,
              the 2018 tournament). Search for the FIFA World Cup winner of the last World
              Cup prior to or on the date of the 2021 Champions League victory to see which
              interpretation yields a valid answer.”
              Recovery #2. “Search for the FIFA World Cup winner of the tournament that
              concluded prior to August 1, 2024 [. . . ] specifically identifying the 2018 winner
              (France) to confirm the correct ‘holder’ status relative to the 2021 Champions
              League victory.”
   The actual observation matches both recovery assumptions (the 2022 winner does not satisfy “holder at
   the time of the 2021 Chelsea win”), so the executor adopts that gate in its next steps:
           3. search_agent("Who is the current holder of the FIFA World Cup as of
              August 1, 2024?") → “Argentina is the reigning FIFA World Cup holder. . . ” (verifies
              that “current” holder ̸= holder at the time of the 2021 Chelsea win).
           4. search_agent("Who won the 2018 FIFA World Cup?") → “France” (executes the re-
              covery plan).
           5. final_answer("France").
   Why This Works. The injected recovery plans encode the missing semantic gate — “holder at the
   time of 2021, not winner of 2021” — and the executor’s next thought adopts the cross-check before
   committing. Vanilla collapses this gate (commits to Argentina from a 2022 hop), and Sleep-Time
   Compute never reaches the World Cup hop at all because its pre-computed inference already concluded
   the answer was the country of the club.


Example 2: frames_25 (Date Arithmetic). “What was the age difference between Mike Tyson
and Tyson Fury on the respective days on which they lost their first ever fights? Represent the figure
in years only.” Gold answer: 12 years.

   VANILLA (Pred: 12.74 / GT: 12)

        1-4. Search for both fighters’ first-loss dates and birthdates: Tyson (1966-06-30, lost 1990-02-11),
             Fury (1988-08-12, lost 2024-05-18).
        5-6. Compute fractional ages: Tyson 23.619 years, Fury 36.356 years.
           7. final_answer(round(12.736481861738536, 2)) → 12.74.
    Failure Mode. Reasoning is correct but the answer is reported as a fractional year rather than an
    integer-year difference; the question explicitly says “represent the figure in years only,” which the judge
    interprets as integer years. Vanilla never re-checks the formatting requirement before committing.


    S LEEP -T IME C OMPUTE (Pred: 11 / GT: 12)

        1-8. Tool calls retrieve Tyson’s first-loss date (Feb 11, 1990) and various candidate Fury loss dates
             from search.



                                                        18
    The pre-computed inference produced by the sleep-time worker before the final action is the source of
    the wrong answer:
             “Mike Tyson’s Birth Date: March 6, 1966. . . . Tyson Fury’s First Loss Date:
              Confirmed as March 24, 2023 (vs. Dmitry Bivol). Note: The previous search results
              mentioned May 18, 2024 (vs. Usyk), but that was the rematch or a subsequent loss.
              . . . Age: 23 years . . . Age: 34 years . . . Age_Fury (34) - Age_Tyson (23) = 11
              years.”
    Failure Mode. The sleep-time pre-computation hallucinates two facts. (i) Mike Tyson’s birthdate is
    reported as March 6, 1966 — the actual date is June 30, 1966; the correct value was returned by an
    earlier search but is silently overwritten in the sleep-time context. (ii) Tyson Fury never lost to Bivol;
    the May 18, 2024 Usyk fight was actually his first professional loss, but the sleep-time worker reasons
    it away as “a rematch or subsequent loss” to fit a fabricated 2023 Bivol date. The executor inherits both
    errors and the pre-computed final difference of 11 years, and submits 11 verbatim.


    I DLE S PEC (Pred: 12 / GT: 12)

        1-7. Tool calls retrieve and verify both first-loss dates (Tyson Feb 11, 1990; Fury May 18, 2024)
             and both birthdates (Tyson June 30, 1966; Fury August 12, 1988).
    At this idle window, the sleep-time worker drafts plans that explicitly fix the arithmetic template and the
    formatting requirement:
              Progressive #0. “Once the verification confirms May 18, 2024 as the first loss
              date, calculate the exact ages of both fighters on those respective dates using their
              verified birth dates (June 30, 1966 for Tyson; August 12, 1988 for Fury). Compute
              the difference between the two ages and provide the final answer in years only,
              ensuring the calculation accounts [for whether the birthday has passed].”
    The plan pins three things that the other two methods miss: (a) the correct Tyson birthdate (June 30, not
    the hallucinated March 6 used by Sleep-Time Compute), (b) a symmetric “compute integer age on each
    loss date” template, and (c) the explicit “in years only” formatting requirement.
           8. Final code applies the template verbatim, prints integer ages 22 and 34, and submits
              final_answer(12).
    Why This Works. The injected plan turns the failure modes of the other two methods into pinned
    constraints in the executor’s context: the pre-verified birthdates close the door on Sleep-Time Compute’s
    hallucination, and the explicit “years only” instruction closes the door on Vanilla’s float-precision
    formatting. Neither gate is created mid-step; both come from plans drafted in the prior idle window.



Example 3: GAIA 56137764 (Pivoting to a Different Retrieval Strategy). “Which contributor
to the version of OpenCV where support was added for the Mask-RCNN model has the same name
as a former Chinese head of government when the names are transliterated to the Latin alphabet?”
Gold answer: Li Peng (Premier of the PRC, 1987–1998). The required chain is: (i) identify the
OpenCV release that added Mask-RCNN → 4.0.0; (ii) retrieve the full contributor list for that release;
(iii) retrieve the list of former Chinese premiers/presidents in standard Pinyin; (iv) cross-reference the
two lists. The trap is that a casual reading of the question pulls the agent toward “find the commit
author of the Mask-RCNN PR,” which is a strict subset of the contributor list and which does not
contain the gold answer.

    VANILLA (Pred: Vadim Pisarevsky / GT: Li Peng; 16 steps)

        1-3. search_agent for “OpenCV Mask-RCNN commit author” returns “Dmitry Lychak.” The
             agent commits to the framing “find the single PR/commit author whose name matches a
             Chinese premier.”
        4-13 Eleven further search_agent calls, each a slight variant of “OpenCV Mask-RCNN commit
             author / PR / release-notes,” return mutually inconsistent names: “Sunita Nayak,” “Alexander
             Mordvintsev,” “Tim M.,” “dkurt (Dmitry Kurtaev),” “Dmitry Khitrov.” The Thought field
             repeatedly says “conflicting information . . . let me try a different approach,” but each
             “different approach” is another commit-author search.



                                                        19
  14-16. The agent gives up on the search and falls back to prior knowledge, submitting
         final_answer("Vadim Pisarevsky") — a well-known OpenCV co-founder, but never a
         Chinese premier.
Failure Mode. Vanilla locks in the wrong task framing on step 1 (“find the commit author”) and never
widens the retrieval to the full contributor set. Each of the 11 follow-up searches reuses the same
template; the conflicting answers are read as “the search agent is unreliable” rather than as a signal that
the framing itself is wrong, so the agent stays inside the same approach until step exhaustion forces a
hallucinated commit.


S LEEP -T IME C OMPUTE (Pred: Li Peng / GT: Li Peng; 9 steps)

       1. search_agent("OpenCV Mask-RCNN support added version contributor")                            →
          partial release-note information.
The pre-computed sleep-time inference at this point speculatively enumerates plausible Chinese premier
names alongside OpenCV-related names, producing a long “maybe the matching contributor is one of:
Li Peng, Li Keqiang, Zhou Enlai, . . . ” paragraph. The executor copies that enumeration directly into
the next query:
     2-8. search_agent("OpenCV Mask-RCNN contributor Li Keqiang Li Peng Zhou
          Enlai") and several variants. After enough such queries, “Li Peng” is confirmed to appear
          in the OpenCV 4.0.0 contributor list.
       9. final_answer("Li Peng").
Mode. Sleep-Time Compute happens to land on the gold answer in 2 of 3 seeds because its pre-
inference dumps a list of candidate Chinese names into context and the executor gets to verify them by
name-matching. The mechanism is search-by-guessing rather than a structured pivot: across seeds, the
same prompt sometimes lists the right names, sometimes does not (seed 2 returns “Unable to determine”
after 16 steps).


I DLE S PEC (Pred: Li Peng / GT: Li Peng; 5 steps)

       1. search_agent("OpenCV version added Mask-RCNN model support") → “Mask-
          RCNN was added in OpenCV 4.0.0.”
At the idle window during step 1’s search execution, the sleep-time worker frames the next sub-goal as
“retrieve the contributor list of that release” rather than “find the Mask-RCNN commit author” — so the
alternative framing that traps Vanilla is never even drafted. The selected plan reads:
          Progressive #0. “Once the search agent returns the specific OpenCV version
          number, the next sub-goal is to search for the list of contributors or authors
          specifically for that release version. After obtaining the contributor list, verify
          that the data includes names in a standard transliterated format (e.g., Pinyin) to
          facilitate comparison with former Chinese heads of government before proceeding
          to the cross-referencing step.”
This is the single decisive intervention of the run: it flips the retrieval scope from “the commit author”
(Vanilla’s permanent trap) to “the full contributor set,” before the executor commits to its second action.
The executor follows the plan exactly:
       2. search_agent("OpenCV 4.0.0 contributors list") → broad list including “Alexan-
          der Alekhin, Dmitry Kurtaev, Hamdi Sahloul, Maksim Shabunin, . . . , Li Peng, . . . ”
       3. search_agent("list of former Chinese prime ministers premier names
          transliterated to Latin alphabet") → Pinyin list.
At the next idle window (during step 3’s search), the selected plan closes the task with an explicit
string-match-then-commit gate, and even pre-enumerates the right candidate name:
          Progressive #3. “Perform a case-insensitive string match between these names
          and the OpenCV 4.0.0 contributor list, specifically checking names like “Li Peng”,
         “Wu Zhiwen,” “Kuang Fangjun.” If a match is found, verify it against the original
          contributor list, then use final_answer to provide the matching name.”
       4. Inline cross-reference between the two lists prints “Li Peng” as the unique match.
       5. final_answer("Li Peng").



                                                    20
Why This Works. The decisive contribution is the first idle window’s plan, which widens retrieval
scope before the second action is chosen — once the executor’s step 2 query is “contributors list of
4.0.0” instead of “commit author of the Mask-RCNN PR,” the cross-reference and commit steps follow
on a short straight path. The next two idle windows then narrow the corridor (cross-reference axis, then
commit gate) so no post-evidence loop is possible. Across all three seeds IdleSpec converges to “Li
Peng” (3/3); Sleep-Time Compute converges by guessing and is correct only 2/3, while Vanilla never
escapes the commit-author framing (0/3).




                                                  21
C    Prompt Templates

We provide here the full text of the prompts referenced in Appendix A.4. Figures 5–8 list the
four prompts used by IdleSpec (progressive drafting, recovery drafting, forecast, aggregation), and
Figures 9–10 list the prompts used by the Sequential Revision and Sleep-Time Compute baselines.


    Progressive drafting prompt

    You are an expert AI assistant tasked with generating the most effective and efficient NEXT ACTION
    STEP to take after the current action step completes and its observation becomes available.
    The current action step is running in parallel. You will not see the observation yet; assume it will arrive
    and will be used to decide the next step.
    If plan_history is non-empty, target a different sub-goal from those already proposed.
    Plan history: [{prior draft 1}, . . . , {prior draft K}]


Figure 5: Progressive drafting prompt used by IdleSpec to speculatively generate the next action
while the current tool call is in flight.




    Recovery drafting prompt

    You are an expert AI assistant tasked with generating a RECOVERY strategy while the current action
    step is executing.
    Assume that the current action step fails to make progress or gets stuck. Propose EXACTLY one distinct
    recovery plan that takes a different approach from what has already been tried.
    If plan_history is non-empty, choose a meaningfully different angle — different evidence source,
    different verification strategy, or different decomposition.
    Plan history: [{prior draft 1}, . . . , {prior draft K}]


Figure 6: Recovery drafting prompt used by IdleSpec to draft an alternative plan that diverges from
the current trajectory in case the in-flight step fails.




    Forecast prompt

    You are a forecast module that evaluates whether the agent’s current action step is making forward
    progress toward solving the Task, and decides which strategy the agent should take next.
    The goal is to assess the current progress state and output a single decision: whether the agent should
    continue with a PROGRESSIVE strategy or switch to a RECOVERY strategy.
    STRATEGY SEMANTICS:
            • PROGRESSIVE: The agent is making meaningful forward progress. Assume the current
              trajectory is valid and focus on exploitation by continuing or refining the existing plan with
              minimal deviation.
            • RECOVERY: The agent appears stalled, misguided, or unproductive. Assume the current
              trajectory may be flawed and encourage exploration by deviating from the existing plan,
              considering alternative approaches or corrective actions not previously explored.


Figure 7: Forecast prompt used by IdleSpec after the observation arrives to choose between the
progressive and recovery candidates.


                                                        22
   Aggregation prompt

   The following are candidate plans generated for the next step:
   Plan 1: {candidate plan 1}
   Plan 2: {candidate plan 2}
   ..
    .
    Plan N: {candidate plan N}
    Based on the observation, you may use these plans as starting points, but you are free to synthesize a
    different or improved next step if none of them fit well.


Figure 8: Aggregation prompt that consumes the candidate plans together with the just-arrived
observation and produces the final next step.


   Sequential Revision

   You are an expert AI assistant tasked with reflecting on the latest action’s Observation to propose the
   most effective NEXT STEP.
   You will be provided with:
           • the user’s instructions
           • the current action and its Observation
           • recent action/observation history
   Your goal is to produce a concise, actionable reflection that helps the agent decide what to do next.


Figure 9: Sequential Revision prompt. The model reflects on the executed action and its observation
to propose the next step.


   Sleep-Time Compute

   You will be given part of a complex problem or task scenario. You will receive the rest of the problem
   later.
   Make as many inferences as possible about the part of the problem you are given so as to help yourself
   resolve the full problem more quickly once it is given to you later.
   You should try to predict possible ways the rest of the scenario might go and generate insights, structural
   frameworks, or intermediate steps that could be helpful for reaching the final goal more quickly once
   the rest of the problem is given.


Figure 10: Sleep-Time Compute prompt. The model is asked to pre-compute inferences and
intermediate insights from a partially revealed problem during idle periods, which can later be
reused once the full problem becomes available.




                                                       23
