                                                  Skill Drift Is Contract Violation:
                                        Proactive Maintenance for LLM Agent Skill Libraries


                                                               Linfeng Fan1      Yuan Tian1         Ziwei Li2   Zhiwu Lu1,∗
                                                1
                                                Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
                                                  2
                                                    King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
                                             {2023200424, tianyuan2004, luzhiwu}@ruc.edu.cn, ziwei.li@kaust.edu.sa




arXiv:2605.10990v1 [cs.SE] 9 May 2026
                                                                                   ∗
                                                                                       Corresponding author.



                                                                                           Abstract
                                                    LLM agents increasingly rely on reusable skill libraries, but these skills silently
                                                    decay as the external services, packages, APIs, and configurations they reference
                                                    evolve. Existing monitors detect such changes at the wrong granularity: they
                                                    observe values, not the role those values play in a skill. A version string in a com-
                                                    ment is noise; the same string in a pinned dependency is an operational obligation.
                                                    We formulate skill drift as contract violation and introduce S KILL G UARD, which
                                                    extracts executable environment contracts from skill documents and validates only
                                                    those role-bearing assumptions against known or live conditions. This distinction
                                                    turns noisy monitoring into a precision-first maintenance signal. Contract-free CI
                                                    probes produce 40% false positives, while S KILL G UARD raises zero false alarms
                                                    over 599 no-drift and hard-negative cases (Wilson 95% CI [0, 0.6]%). In known-
                                                    drift verification, S KILL G UARD achieves 100% precision and 76% recall with
                                                    the strongest backbone; in a pre-registered study over 49 real skills, it discovers
                                                    live drift with 86% conservative precision. Violated contracts also make repair
                                                    actionable, improving one-round success from 10% without localization to 78%.
                                                    We release D RIFT B ENCH, an 880-pair benchmark for skill degradation.


                                        1    Introduction
                                        LLM agents are moving from one-off task solving [2, 22, 23, 28, 32] to long-lived skill li-
                                        braries [18, 26, 27, 30, 31, 33]: reusable procedures for deploying services, writing tests, configuring
                                        infrastructure, and interacting with external tools. This shift makes maintenance a first-order reliabil-
                                        ity problem. A skill may be correct when written, yet fail later because the environment it assumes has
                                        changed. APIs migrate, packages deprecate interfaces, URLs move, configuration defaults change,
                                        and authentication mechanisms evolve [11]. The question is therefore not only how agents acquire
                                        useful skills, but how those skills remain valid after deployment.
                                        Existing monitors are poorly matched to this problem because they observe environmental values
                                        rather than the role those values play in a skill. Package registries can report version bumps, URL
                                        probes can find redirects, and CI checks can expose broken endpoints. These signals say that the
                                        world changed; they do not say whether the change matters for a particular skill. A version string
                                        in a comment is noise; the same string in a pinned dependency is an obligation. A documentation
                                        redirect may be harmless; an API endpoint redirect may break the procedure. As Figure 1 illustrates,
                                        monitoring raw values forces a bad trade-off: alert on incidental change and create false alarms, or
                                        filter aggressively and miss drift embedded in natural-language procedures.
                                        The key observation behind this paper is that skill drift is role-dependent. Drift is not a property of an
                                        external value alone, but of the role that value plays in the skill. We formalize this view by treating

                                        Preprint.
Figure 1: Skill drift is role-dependent. Raw environmental monitoring treats every changed
URL, version, or configuration value as potentially relevant. S KILL G UARD instead distinguishes
incidental mentions from operational obligations. This granularity explains the main empirical gap:
contract-free CI probes produce 40% FPR, while S KILL G UARD raises zero false alarms over 599
no-drift and hard-negative cases.


skill drift as contract violation. A skill implicitly carries environment contracts: testable assumptions
about services, packages, APIs, configurations, schemas, and credentials that must remain valid for
the skill to execute as intended. The monitoring target is therefore not “what changed in the world?”
but “which role-bearing assumptions of this skill no longer hold?”
We introduce S KILL G UARD, a precision-first monitor that operationalizes this contract view. Given a
skill document, S KILL G UARD extracts executable environment contracts and validates only those
contract-bearing assumptions against known or live conditions. This separates operational dependen-
cies from incidental mentions before probing the environment. Failed contracts also provide localized
repair evidence: instead of asking an LLM to rewrite a stale skill from scratch, S KILL G UARD
identifies the specific assumptions that must be updated.
We evaluate this view through three claims. First, contracts suppress false alarms: CI-style probes
without contracts produce 40% false positives, whereas S KILL G UARD raises zero false alarms across
599 no-drift and hard-negative cases (Wilson 95% CI [0%, 0.6%]). Second, precision does not come
from ignoring drift: in known-drift verification, the strongest backbone achieves 100% precision and
76% recall. Third, the framing transfers beyond closed-world specifications: in a pre-registered study
over 49 real skills, S KILL G UARD discovers live drift with 86% conservative precision. Violated
contracts also make repair local rather than open-ended, improving one-round success from 10%
without localization to 78%.
Our contributions are:

      1. A contract-violation framing for skill drift. We identify the granularity mismatch in skill
         maintenance: useful monitoring must distinguish operational environment assumptions from
         incidental environmental mentions.
      2. S KILL G UARD, a contract-based maintenance monitor. S KILL G UARD extracts executable
         environment contracts from skill documents, validates them against known or live conditions,
         and uses violations to localize repair.
      3. D RIFT B ENCH and empirical evidence. We introduce an 880-pair benchmark with 174
         generated drifts, 107 real-world drifts, and 599 negative controls, and show that contract gran-
         ularity yields precision-first detection, live discovery, and targeted repair without claiming
         full skill verification.

2   Related Work
Agent skills, skill benchmarks, and skill auditing. LLM agents increasingly package procedural
knowledge as reusable skills rather than solving each task from scratch. Voyager [27] builds a
skill library through self-verification, and SkillFlow [26] discovers reusable skills from agent tra-


                                                   2
jectories. Recent work treats skills as first-class artifacts: SkillsBench evaluates whether curated
or self-generated skills improve agent performance across heterogeneous tasks [16], and system-
atization work on agentic skills studies their representation, composition, evaluation, update, and
governance [13]. A closely related security line audits whether untrusted Agent Skills are safe to
load, using role-aware evidence extraction, semantic verification, and adjudication to identify unsafe
skill packages [19]. These works establish the importance of the skill layer, but they target differ-
ent lifecycle questions: skill acquisition and usefulness, pre-load security auditing, or governance.
S KILL G UARD studies post-deployment maintenance: whether a previously valid skill has become
stale because its environment-facing assumptions no longer hold.

Reactive repair and localization. Automated program repair localizes faults and patches code
after failures are observed [4, 5, 24]. Self-refine [20] and Reflexion [25] similarly improve model
outputs through iterative feedback. These methods are reactive: they require a failed execution, test,
or trajectory before repair is attempted. S KILL G UARD instead targets proactive maintenance. It
detects violated environment contracts before relying on an execution failure, and it uses the failed
contract as a localized repair signal. Accordingly, our repair result should be read as evidence for
localization, not as a claim of dominance over stronger multi-round repair methods.

Contracts and specification mining. Executable contracts and specification mining extract assump-
tions from programs, traces, or documentation [3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 15, 21]. Our use of contracts differs in
both source and purpose. Agent skills often mix operational dependencies with comments, examples,
badges, prose, and partial configuration snippets. The main difficulty is therefore not only extracting
a predicate to check, but deciding whether an environmental value should be monitored at all. In
S KILL G UARD, a contract is a role-bearing obligation: incidental mentions are suppressed, while
pinned dependencies, API endpoints, schema fields, authentication mechanisms, and configuration
values are validated.

Dependency, API, and configuration-drift monitoring. Dependency update tools, API-evolution
analyses, and DevOps monitors track changes in structured software ecosystems [7, 11]. Recent
LLM-agent systems also study configuration drift in cloud and infrastructure-as-code settings [1].
These systems typically assume structured manifests, telemetry, IaC specifications, or executable
environments. Agent skills are less structured: environment assumptions may be embedded in
natural-language instructions, shell snippets, examples, partial configs, and documentation references.
This changes the monitoring objective. Probing every observed value creates false alarms, while
probing only declared manifests misses assumptions expressed in prose. S KILL G UARD addresses
this gap by validating role-bearing environment contracts rather than all observed values.

Agent and software-maintenance benchmarks. Agent benchmarks such as AgentBench [17],
SWE-bench [14], and SWE-Skills-Bench [12] evaluate task-solving, software engineering, and skill
quality. These benchmarks are valuable, but they do not isolate the maintenance failure studied
here: a skill that was once valid can degrade when the external environment changes. D RIFT B ENCH
complements them by pairing previously valid skills with generated drifts, LLM-free real-world drifts,
and hard negatives that change text or values without violating operational contracts. This design
tests both drift recall and false-alarm resistance, the two sides of precision-first skill maintenance.


3    D RIFT B ENCH: A Benchmark for Skill Degradation

A benchmark for skill drift must test two failure modes simultaneously: missing stale operational
assumptions and over-alerting on environmental changes that do not affect the skill. D RIFT B ENCH is
built around this distinction. It includes controlled drift pairs for recall, real-world drifts for external
validity, and no-drift and hard-negative pairs for false-alarm resistance. This design makes the
benchmark aligned with the paper’s central claim: skill drift depends on whether an environmental
change violates a role-bearing contract, not on whether a value changed at all.

Drift taxonomy. We define eight drift types from software maintenance failures and real changelogs:
URL change, version bump, configuration change, API migration, deprecation, schema change,
authentication change, and dependency update. These categories cover both direct surface changes,


                                                     3
such as moved endpoints or renamed imports, and less syntactically obvious changes, such as schema-
field updates or authentication-mechanism changes.

Controlled drift construction and validation. D RIFT B ENCH starts from 49 agent skills in SWE-
Skills-Bench [12] across seven programming domains. Qwen3.6-Plus proposes 6–8 drift scenarios
per skill, yielding 422 candidate pairs; validated candidates form a controlled evaluation split with 174
drift pairs. To reduce generator artifacts, we use cross-family validation: DeepSeek-R1 independently
judges candidate pairs, disputed cases are checked against registry-backed evidence, and adjudication
decisions are reviewed by the authors. The resulting controlled split reaches 99.6% adjudicated
validity.

LLM-free real-world split. Synthetic drift alone is not enough for a maintenance benchmark. We
therefore collect 107 naturally occurring drifts from live registries and changelogs, including PyPI,
npm, GitHub Actions, and Docker Hub. These examples are not generated by the drift model and
serve as an external-validity split for environment changes observed in real software ecosystems.

Negative controls. False alarms are a first-order benchmark target because a monitor that alerts
on every changed URL, package, or configuration value is not useful in a long-lived skill library.
We include 49 identity pairs, 300 formatting hard negatives, and 250 semantic hard negatives.
Formatting negatives change document form without changing environment assumptions. Semantic
hard negatives change actual values—for example commentary versions, alias URLs, homograph
values, or non-breaking patches—without violating the skill’s operational contract. Together, these
599 controls test whether a method monitors role-bearing obligations rather than raw values.

Human audit. To reduce dependence on
                                                     Table 1: D RIFT B ENCH evaluates both drift
model-based validation, we additionally con-
                                                     detection and false-alarm resistance. The bench-
duct a stratified random 20% human audit of
                                                     mark combines controlled drifts, LLM-free real-
D RIFT B ENCH after automatic construction and
                                                     world drifts, identity pairs, and hard negatives that
adjudication. The audit covers 176 of 880 pairs:
                                                     change text or values without violating operational
35 controlled drifts, 21 real-world drifts, 10 iden-
                                                     contracts.
tity pairs, 60 formatting hard negatives, and 50
                                                                                   Controlled Real-world
semantic hard negatives. Human auditors check
three properties: whether the drift/no-drift label     Drift pairs                    174         107
is correct, whether old and new values are cor-        Identity no-drift pairs         49          —
rectly instantiated, and whether hard negatives        Formatting hard negatives      300          —
                                                       Semantic hard negatives        250         —
preserve the skill’s operational contracts. In the
audited sample, 14/176 pairs require corrections,      Total pairs                    773         107
all involving value normalization, evidence-span       Drift types                     8           5
                                                       Source skills                   49          22
adjustment, hard-negative wording, or source           Adjudicated validity          99.6%       100%
metadata; no audited pair changes its drift/no-                                     599; zero-FP Wilson
drift label. All corrections are applied before        Negative controls
                                                                                    95% CI [0%, 0.6%]
release. We report the audit protocol and edit
categories in Section G. This audit complements cross-family LLM validation: LLM validators
provide scalable coverage, while human review directly targets benchmark artifact risk.


4   S KILL G UARD: Contract-Based Monitoring

S KILL G UARD is built around one ordering constraint: decide whether an environmental value is
role-bearing before probing whether it changed. Contract-free monitors invert this order. They extract
URLs, versions, paths, and configuration names, probe them directly, and then treat failed probes
as alerts. This creates false alarms whenever an incidental mention changes. S KILL G UARD instead
converts a skill document into operational environment contracts and validates only those contracts
against known or live conditions. Figure 2 summarizes this contract lifecycle.

Problem formulation. Let S be a skill document and let M(S) denote its environmental mentions:
spans that refer to packages, services, URLs, API paths, configuration names, credentials, schemas, or
other external assumptions. Only some mentions are operational obligations. S KILL G UARD extracts


                                                    4
Figure 2: S KILL G UARD turns skill maintenance into contract validation. The system first extracts
environmental mentions from a skill, keeps only role-bearing operational obligations, validates them
against known or live conditions, and uses failed contracts to localize repair. The key step is not
extraction alone, but separating operational assumptions from incidental mentions before probing the
environment.


an environment contract
                                   C(S) = {ci = (ti , ri , vi , ei )}ni=1 ,
where ti is the contract type, ri ∈ {OPERATIONAL, INCIDENTAL} is the role of the value in the skill,
vi is the value to validate, and ei is the evidence span in S. A known drift event is
                                          dj = (tj , oj , nj , sj ),
where tj is the drift type, oj and nj are the old and new values, and sj is the evidence source. A
violation is reported only when a drift event matches a contract with ri = OPERATIONAL; matches
to incidental mentions are suppressed. This definition is the mechanism behind S KILL G UARD’s
precision-first behavior: it changes the monitored unit from a surface value to a role-bearing obliga-
tion.

4.1   Extracting Role-Bearing Contracts

The extraction stage solves two different subproblems: finding candidate environment mentions
and deciding which of them are operational obligations. Separating these subproblems is necessary
because high-recall mention extraction alone is exactly what causes contract-free probes to over-alert.

Candidate mention extraction. A deterministic pass identifies syntactically explicit mentions
across 15 pattern families, including URLs, version constraints, imports, API paths, authentication
patterns, Docker images, GitHub Actions, environment variables, cloud regions, CLI flags, and
configuration filenames. This pass is inexpensive and improves coverage, but it does not decide
whether a mention should be monitored. Removing broad mention extraction lowers recall; in our
sensitivity study, expanding the regex families from 7 to 15 increases regex-only recall on real-world
drifts from 45% to 78% while preserving 0% FPR.

Role decision and contract formation. A semantic pass [29] converts candidate and implicit
assumptions into structured contract records. For each record, the model emits (ti , ri , vi , ei ), where
ri marks whether the value is operational or incidental. This step captures assumptions that are
difficult to express as regular expressions, such as expected response formats, tool availability,
schema fields, and configuration semantics. It is also the step that prevents extraction from becoming
noisy monitoring: without role filtering, CI-style probes produce 40% false positives, whereas
S KILL G UARD raises zero false alarms across 599 negative controls. Records from both passes are
merged and deduplicated; in our implementation, skills typically yield 15–40 contract records, with
median 22 for Qwen3.6-Plus. We audit this OPERATIONAL/INCIDENTAL decision independently
from downstream drift detection in Section H.

4.2   Validating Contracts

Validation asks whether an operational contract is invalidated by known or live environmental
evidence. It is deliberately applied after role filtering.


                                                      5
Contract–drift matching. After role filtering, S KILL G UARD matches an operational contract
ci = (ti , ri , vi , ei ) to a drift event dj = (tj , oj , nj , sj ) using a type-gated conservative predicate:

                                           ri = OPERATIONAL ∧ compatible(ti , tj )∧
                                  "                                                                    #
              match(c , d ) = I 
                       i   j
                                                                                                       ,
                                      exact(v̄i , ōj ) ∨ tok2 (v̄i , ōj ) ∨ typed1 (ti , v̄i , ōj )

where v̄i and ōj are normalized forms of the contract value and old drift value. The predicate first
checks exact or substring overlap, then requires at least two shared meaningful tokens, and finally
allows a type-compatible one-token backoff. A violation is reported only when this predicate holds for
a contract already labeled OPERATIONAL. Thus, the matcher improves recall after the role decision;
it is not a contract-free probe over all mentions in M(S).

Known-drift and live validation. In known-drift evaluation, S KILL G UARD applies match to each
contract–drift pair in C(S) × D. In live monitoring, no old-to-new drift specification is available,
so S KILL G UARD validates operational contracts against public evidence when available, such as
package registries, URL responses, and ecosystem conventions. This live mode is precision-oriented
rather than exhaustive: contracts without reliable validators, or drifts requiring schema-aware or
behavioral reasoning, may be missed.

Live-condition validation. When no old-to-new drift specification is available, S KILL G UARD
validates operational contracts against live sources when such validators exist, such as package
registries, URL responses, or ecosystem conventions. This mode enables open-world discovery, but it
is not exhaustive: contracts without reliable public validators may be missed. We therefore treat live
validation as precision-oriented discovery rather than complete environmental verification.Detailed
normalization and backoff rules are given in Section E.

4.3   Localizing and Verifying Repair

A reported violation becomes a localized repair specification. The repair input contains the original
skill, the failed contract record, its evidence span, old and new values when available, and category-
aware instructions such as import cascading, configuration replacement, or authentication-flow update.
S KILL G UARD generates two candidates at τ ∈ {0.0, 0.2} and selects the first candidate that passes
verification. Localization is necessary for repair quality: replacing it with the vague instruction “the
skill is stale” reduces one-round repair from 78% to 10%.
For value-substitution drifts, a repaired skill S ′ passes the literal verifier iff every required new value
nj appears in S ′ and the corresponding old value oj no longer appears. This verifier prevents false
repair success for literal drift updates, but it is not a proof of semantic correctness. It can reject valid
repairs that satisfy the new contract without using the exact literal value; we analyze this boundary in
Section 6.

4.4   Complexity and Scope

The deterministic pass is linear in the length of S. The semantic extraction pass runs once per
skill at ingestion or refresh time. Known-drift validation costs O(|C||D|) lightweight string/type
comparisons, and repair is invoked only for reported violations. S KILL G UARD is not a full verifier for
skill correctness. Its scope is narrower: within extraction coverage and available validators, it detects
environment-contract violations while suppressing alerts on incidental mentions. This scope matches
the deployment goal of a precision-first maintenance monitor rather than an exhaustive execution
oracle.

5     Experiments

Our evaluation asks whether treating skill drift as contract violation changes the maintenance problem
in practice. We organize the evidence around three questions. First, do role-bearing contracts suppress
false alarms without collapsing drift recall? Second, can the same contract view surface stale skills
under live conditions, where no old-to-new drift specification is provided? Third, are failed contracts


                                                        6
useful repair evidence, rather than only detection signals? Fine-grained role-label audits, extraction
sensitivity, verifier behavior, and per-type failures are analyzed in Section 6 and the appendix.

Setup. We evaluate five backbone LLMs from four families: Qwen3.6-Plus and Qwen3-235B-
A22B, DeepSeek-V3.2 and DeepSeek-R1, and GLM-5.1. Detection baselines include Grep/diff,
CI probes without contracts, Dependabot-style scanning [11], NL2Contract-style single-pass ex-
traction [15], and simulated canary execution. Repair baselines include no localization, plain drift
text, Self-refine [20] with three rounds, and rewriting with full drift specifications. We report preci-
sion, recall, false-positive rate (FPR), strict repair success, bootstrap 95% confidence intervals with
B=10,000, and Fisher exact tests for repair ablations.

5.1   Q1. Do contracts change the monitoring error profile?

The central prediction of the contract view is not merely that a monitor should find more drift. It is
that the unit of monitoring should change: alerts should be raised for violated operational obligations,
not for every changed URL, version, or configuration value. We therefore evaluate known-drift
verification together with no-drift and hard-negative controls, where many values change but the
skill’s operational contract does not.
Across all five backbones, S KILL G UARD attains
                                                    Table 2: Known-drift verification across five
100% precision in known-drift verification; the
                                                    backbones. S KILL G UARD preserves perfect pre-
strongest backbone reaches 76% recall (Table 2).
                                                    cision across evaluated backbones, while recall
The same precision behavior holds on negative
                                                    varies with extraction coverage. This pattern sup-
controls: over 599 no-drift and hard-negative
                                                    ports the intended precision-first behavior: role-
cases—49 identity pairs, 300 formatting hard
                                                    aware contracts suppress false alarms without re-
negatives, and 250 semantic hard negatives—
                                                    ducing monitoring to trivial abstention.
S KILL G UARD raises no false positives (Wilson
95% CI [0%, 0.6%]). These negatives are not            Backbone          Precision Recall    95% CI
empty controls: semantic hard negatives change         Qwen3.6-Plus        100%     76%     [62%, 88%]
actual values while preserving the operational         DeepSeek-R1         100%     62%     [55%, 70%]
contract, so passing them requires the method          DeepSeek-V3.2       100%     57%     [44%, 70%]
to distinguish incidental mentions from role-          GLM-5.1             100%     54%     [40%, 69%]
                                                       Qwen3-235B-A22B     100%     24%     [17%, 32%]
bearing obligations.
Figure 3 places this result against alter-
native monitoring strategies. Grep/diff
is precise but low-recall (30% recall).
Dependabot-style scanning reaches 11%
recall with 10% FPR, and NL2Contract-
style extraction reaches 45% recall with
0% FPR. CI probes without contracts re-
cover some drift (30% recall), but incur
40% FPR because they validate raw envi-
ronmental values, including documenta-
tion links, examples, and badges. Canary
execution reaches the ideal corner, but      Figure 3: Contracts change the monitoring error pro-
only by assuming a fully runnable envi-      file. Contract-free probes detect some drift but produce
ronment; we therefore treat it as an up-     high false-positive rates because they probe incidental
per bound rather than a deployable mon-      mentions. S KILL G UARD occupies the precision-first re-
itor. The empirical separation supports      gion: 76% recall and 0% FPR on known drifts, with zero
the main mechanism: the gain comes           false alarms over 599 no-drift and hard-negative cases. Ca-
from deciding which assumptions are          nary execution is an oracle-style upper bound that requires
operational before probing whether they      full runtime access.
changed.

5.2   Q2. Does contract monitoring transfer to live discovery?

Known-drift verification tests whether S KILL G UARD can match contracts against explicit drift
specifications. A maintenance monitor, however, should also be useful when those specifications are
unavailable. We therefore evaluate S KILL G UARD in a pre-registered open-world protocol over 49


                                                   7
real skills. Before running the monitor, we freeze skill-level drift labels; S KILL G UARD then extracts
contracts and checks them against live evidence such as registries, URL responses, and ecosystem
conventions.
At the skill level, 22 skills contain at least one confirmed drift and 27 are fresh. S KILL G UARD flags
14 skills, yielding 12 true positives, 2 false positives, 10 false negatives, and 25 true negatives. This
gives 86% conservative precision, 55% recall, and 7% FPR. The two apparent false positives were
later adjudicated as genuine drifts, but we keep the pre-adjudication numbers as the primary result.
This choice makes the conclusion deliberately narrow: S KILL G UARD can surface stale skills with
high precision under live conditions, but it is not an exhaustive substitute for execution-based checks.




Figure 4: Contract violations support live maintenance, not just offline detection. (A) In a
pre-registered scan of 49 real skills, S KILL G UARD flags 14 skills and achieves 86% conservative
precision and 55% recall; two apparent false positives were later adjudicated as genuine drift. (B)
Failed contracts localize repair: one-round repair improves from 10% without localization to 78%,
matching stronger multi-round baselines without claiming a significant advantage over them.


5.3   Q3. Do failed contracts make repair actionable?

Detection is useful only if it can guide maintenance. The contract view predicts that a violation
should localize the failed assumption: what value is stale, where it appears in the skill, and which
environmental condition invalidated it. We test this by comparing one-round contract-guided repair
with unlocalized repair prompts, plain drift text, three-round Self-refine, and rewriting with full drift
specifications. Success is measured by the strict verifier described in Section 4.
As shown in Figure 4(B), telling the model only that “the skill is stale” succeeds in 10% of cases.
Plain drift text reaches 60%, while failed contract records reach 78% in one round (p < 10−5
versus no localization). Self-refine reaches 80%, but uses three rounds; rewriting with full drift
specifications reaches 78%, but uses stronger oracle information. Contract-guided repair also uses
fewer interactions, averaging roughly 10K tokens per skill compared with about 18K tokens for
three-round Self-refine.
The supported claim is intentionally limited. S KILL G UARD does not significantly outperform Self-
refine or plain drift text in the current repair sample. Rather, the result shows that violated contracts
are actionable repair evidence: they close most of the gap between vague repair and stronger multi-
round alternatives while preserving a direct link between the detected failure and the edit request.
The remaining errors—especially authentication changes, schema changes, and cases rejected by the
literal verifier—are analyzed in Section 6.

6     Analysis
The main experiments establish the error profile of S KILL G UARD: high precision, useful but incom-
plete recall, and repair gains from localization. We now ask what parts of the system produce these
behaviors and where the current contract view reaches its limits.

6.1   What explains the precision–recall profile?

S KILL G UARD is precision-stable but not recall-complete because precision and recall are controlled
by different stages. Precision is mainly a consequence of the role gate: a changed value is monitored


                                                   8
only when it is an OPERATIONAL obligation of the skill. Recall, in contrast, is bounded by whether
the relevant obligation is extracted and whether a validator can check it.
A standalone role-label audit supports this decomposition. Two annotators label 200 environmental
mentions, and disagreements are adjudicated before evaluation. Treating OPERATIONAL as the
positive class, S KILL G UARD achieves 89.5% precision, 83.4% recall, and 86.3% F1 overall. The
split-level pattern matches the end-to-end behavior: on semantic hard negatives, role precision reaches
100.0%, indicating that the model is conservative on value-changing but contract-preserving cases;
role recall on the same split is 72.7%, indicating a source of missed operational assumptions.
Extraction sensitivity points to the other side of the trade-off. Expanding the deterministic extractor
from 7 to 15 pattern families increases regex-only recall from 13% to 33% on the controlled split
and from 45% to 78% on real-world drift, while FPR remains 0%. The added patterns cover
environmental forms common in real skills, including Docker images, GitHub Actions versions,
environment variables, cloud regions, branch names, CLI flags, and configuration filenames. Thus,
the current recall gap is not evidence that precision requires abstention: coverage can improve without
weakening the role-bearing contract filter.

6.2   What does repair evidence actually show?

The repair experiment should be read as a localization result, not as a claim that S KILL G UARD domi-
nates all repair methods. A failed contract identifies which operational assumption was invalidated,
where it appears in the skill, and what evidence triggered the violation. This converts detection into a
constrained edit request rather than an open-ended rewrite.
This localization signal is much stronger than a vague stale-skill prompt: repair success rises from
10% without localization to 78% with failed contracts in one round. However, the stronger baselines
remain competitive: plain drift text reaches 60%, and three-round Self-refine reaches 80%. The
differences between S KILL G UARD and plain drift text or Self-refine are not statistically significant
in our current sample. The supported conclusion is therefore narrower and more useful: violated
contracts are actionable repair evidence, closing most of the gap between vague repair and stronger
multi-round alternatives while using fewer interactions.

6.3   Where does the current contract view break?

Two boundaries remain. The first is a measurement boundary. Our strict verifier accepts value-
substitution repairs only when the required new value appears and the stale value disappears. This
avoids many false repair successes, but it is not a semantic proof of skill correctness. A type-aware
verifier accepts 168/174 cases, compared with 165/174 for the literal verifier, leaving a roughly 2%
conservative rejection gap. Most of this gap appears in dependency updates, where a semantically
valid edit may satisfy the new dependency constraint without preserving the exact literal form.
The second boundary is a mechanism boundary. S KILL G UARD is strongest when drift invalidates
a localizable environment assumption, such as a URL, version, API path, or configuration value.
It is weaker when the repair requires changing an interaction mechanism. In the Qwen3.6-Plus
per-type breakdown, URL changes and version bumps are detected at 100%, while configuration,
deprecation, and schema changes fall to 60–67%. Authentication drift is the hardest case in this
slice: detection reaches 67%, but repair succeeds in 0% of the three examples. These failures do not
contradict the contract framing; they mark the point where surface contracts should be complemented
by schema-aware validators, execution-backed checks, or richer repair plans.


7     Conclusion

Long-lived agent skills do not fail merely because the environment changes; they fail when those
changes invalidate assumptions the skill operationally depends on. This paper framed skill drift as
contract violation and introduced S KILL G UARD, which extracts environment contracts, validates
only role-bearing assumptions, and uses failed contracts to localize repair. This granularity changes
the monitoring error profile: contract-free CI probes incur 40% FPR, whereas S KILL G UARD raises
zero false alarms over 599 no-drift and hard-negative cases; in open-world discovery, it surfaces live
drift with 86% conservative precision. The same violations make repair local, improving one-round


                                                   9
repair from 10% without localization to 78%. Together with D RIFT B ENCH, these results make skill
degradation measurable as a maintenance problem, while leaving exhaustive semantic verification to
complementary execution-based methods.

References
 [1] Sami Abuzakuk, Lucas Crijns, Anne-Marie Kermarrec, Rafael Pires, and Martijn de Vos.
     Riva: Leveraging llm agents for reliable configuration drift detection. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2603.02345, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2603.02345.

 [2] Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas
     Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, et al. Graph
     of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. In Proceedings of the
     AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 38, pages 17682–17690, 2024.

 [3] Varun Pratap Bhardwaj. Agent behavioral contracts: Formal specification and runtime enforce-
     ment for reliable autonomous ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.22302, 2026.

 [4] Islem Bouzenia, Premkumar Devanbu, and Michael Pradel. Repairagent: An autonomous,
     llm-based agent for program repair. In 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on
     Software Engineering (ICSE), pages 2188–2200. IEEE, 2025.

 [5] Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Teaching large language
     models to self-debug. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128, 2023.

 [6] Zaoyu Chen, Jianbo Dai, Boyu Zhu, Jingdong Wang, Huiming Wang, Xin Xu, Haoyang
     Yuan, Zhijiang Guo, and Xiao-Ming Wu. Codespecbench: Benchmarking llms for executable
     behavioral specification generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.12268, 2026.

 [7] Danny Dig and Ralph Johnson. How do apis evolve? a story of refactoring. Journal of software
     maintenance and evolution: Research and Practice, 18(2):83–107, 2006.

 [8] Yi Dong, Ronghui Mu, Gaojie Jin, Yi Qi, Jinwei Hu, Xingyu Zhao, Jie Meng, Wenjie
     Ruan, and Xiaowei Huang. Building guardrails for large language models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2402.01822, 2024.

 [9] Aarya Doshi, Yining Hong, Congying Xu, Eunsuk Kang, Alexandros Kapravelos, and Christian
     Kästner. Towards verifiably safe tool use for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.08012,
     2026.

[10] Michael D Ernst, Jeff H Perkins, Philip J Guo, Stephen McCamant, Carlos Pacheco, Matthew S
     Tschantz, and Chen Xiao. The daikon system for dynamic detection of likely invariants. Science
     of computer programming, 69(1-3):35–45, 2007.

[11] Lukas Fruntke and Jens Krinke. Automatically fixing dependency breaking changes. Proceed-
     ings of the ACM on Software Engineering, 2(FSE):2146–2168, 2025.

[12] Tingxu Han, Yi Zhang, Wei Song, Chunrong Fang, Zhenyu Chen, Youcheng Sun, and Lijie
     Hu. Swe-skills-bench: Do agent skills actually help in real-world software engineering? arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2603.15401, 2026.

[13] Yanna Jiang, Delong Li, Haiyu Deng, Baihe Ma, Xu Wang, Qin Wang, and Guangsheng Yu.
     Sok: Agentic skills – beyond tool use in llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.20867, 2026.
     doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2602.20867.

[14] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
     Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2310.06770, 2023.

[15] Shuvendu K Lahiri. Intent formalization: A grand challenge for reliable coding in the age of ai
     agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.17150, 2026.


                                                10
[16] Xiangyi Li, Wenbo Chen, Yimin Liu, Shenghan Zheng, Xiaokun Chen, Yifeng He, Yubo Li,
     Bingran You, Haotian Shen, Jiankai Sun, Shuyi Wang, Binxu Li, Qunhong Zeng, Di Wang,
     Xuandong Zhao, Yuanli Wang, Roey Ben Chaim, Zonglin Di, Yipeng Gao, Junwei He, Yizhuo
     He, Liqiang Jing, Luyang Kong, Xin Lan, Jiachen Li, Songlin Li, Yijiang Li, Yueqian Lin,
     Xinyi Liu, Xuanqing Liu, Haoran Lyu, Ze Ma, Bowei Wang, Runhui Wang, Tianyu Wang,
     Wengao Ye, Yue Zhang, Hanwen Xing, Yiqi Xue, Steven Dillmann, and Han-chung Lee.
     Skillsbench: Benchmarking how well agent skills work across diverse tasks. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2602.12670, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2602.12670.
[17] Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang
     Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2308.03688, 2023.
[18] Xingyan Liu, Xiyue Luo, Linyu Li, Ganghong Huang, Jianfeng Liu, and Honglin Qiao. Skill-
     forge: Forging domain-specific, self-evolving agent skills in cloud technical support. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2604.08618, 2026.
[19] Lijia Lv, Xuehai Tang, Jie Wen, Jizhong Han, and Songlin Hu. Structured security auditing and
     robustness enhancement for untrusted agent skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.25109, 2026. doi:
     10.48550/arXiv.2604.25109.
[20] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
     Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
     with self-feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:46534–46594, 2023.
[21] Bertrand Meyer. Applying’design by contract’. Computer, 25(10):40–51, 2002.
[22] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
     Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceed-
     ings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology, pages 1–22,
     2023.
[23] Maria Abi Raad, Arun Ahuja, Catarina Barros, Frederic Besse, Andrew Bolt, Adrian Bolton,
     Bethanie Brownfield, Gavin Buttimore, Max Cant, Sarah Chakera, et al. Scaling instructable
     agents across many simulated worlds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10179, 2024.
[24] Melika Sepidband, Hamed Taherkhani, Hung Viet Pham, and Hadi Hemmati. Rgfl: Reasoning
     guided fault localization for automated program repair using large language models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2601.18044, 2026.
[25] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao.
     Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information
     processing systems, 36:8634–8652, 2023.
[26] Pagkratios Tagkopoulos, Fangzhou Li, and Ilias Tagkopoulos. Skillflow: Efficient skill and code
     transfer through communication in adapting ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.06188, 2025.
[27] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
     and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.
[28] Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-
     Peng Lim. Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by
     large language models. In Proceedings of the 61st annual meeting of the association for
     computational linguistics (volume 1: long papers), pages 2609–2634, 2023.
[29] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le,
     Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
     Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
[30] Tianle Xia, Lingxiang Hu, Yiding Sun, Ming Xu, Lan Xu, Siying Wang, Wei Xu, and Jie Jiang.
     Grasp: Graph-structured skill compositions for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.17870,
     2026.


                                                11
[31] Renjun Xu and Yang Yan. Agent skills for large language models: Architecture, acquisition,
     security, and the path forward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12430, 2026.
[32] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
     React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
     2022.
[33] Huichi Zhou, Siyuan Guo, Anjie Liu, Zhongwei Yu, Ziqin Gong, Bowen Zhao, Zhixun Chen,
     Menglong Zhang, Yihang Chen, Jinsong Li, et al. Memento-skills: Let agents design agents.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18743, 2026.


A    Appendix Overview
The appendix provides the evidence needed to audit the claims made in the main paper. Sections B to E
specify the contract representation, limitations, algorithmic ordering, and conservative matching rules
used by S KILL G UARD. Sections F and G describe the construction and validation of D RIFT B ENCH.
Sections H, J and K support the main precision and recall claims. Sections L to N give additional
evidence for live discovery, repair localization, verifier behavior, and failure modes. Section O
summarizes implementation and reproducibility details.

B    Notation and Scope

Table 3: Notation used by S KILL G UARD. The role variable ri is the key distinction: OPERATIONAL
mentions are monitored as contracts, while INCIDENTAL mentions are suppressed before validation.

                 Symbol                      Meaning
                 S                           Skill document
                 M(S)                        Environmental mentions in S
                 C(S)                        Extracted environment contract set
                 ci = (ti , ri , vi , ei )   Contract record: type, role, value, evidence span
                 ri                          Role: OPERATIONAL or INCIDENTAL
                 dj = (tj , oj , nj , sj )   Drift event: type, old value, new value, source
                 match(ci , dj )             Contract–drift matching predicate
                 V                           Reported contract violations
                 S′                          Repaired skill document


Role semantics. A mention is OPERATIONAL if the skill relies on the value for execution or
correctness, such as a pinned dependency, API endpoint, schema field, authentication mechanism,
environment variable, or configuration value. A mention is INCIDENTAL if changing it does not
alter the skill’s operational behavior, such as a comment, tutorial citation, badge, or documentation
example.

Scope. S KILL G UARD detects violations of environment-dependent assumptions. It is not a complete
semantic verifier for skill correctness, an exhaustive live drift discovery system, or a proof that a
repaired skill is correct under all executions. This scope matches the intended use of S KILL G UARD
as a precision-first maintenance monitor.

C    Limitations
S KILL G UARD is a precision-first monitor for environment-contract violations, not a complete verifier
of skill correctness. Its guarantees therefore apply only within the coverage of extracted contracts and
available validators. Assumptions that are implicit, behavioral, or observable only through execution
can be missed. The role-label audit shows that the OPERATIONAL/INCIDENTAL distinction is reliable
but imperfect; missed operational roles remain one source of false negatives. Similarly, live validators
based on package registries, URL responses, and ecosystem conventions provide useful discovery
signals, but they do not replace execution-based canaries when exhaustive coverage is required.


                                                        12
Repair has the same boundary. Failed contracts localize stale assumptions, but they do not by
themselves solve mechanism-level rewrites such as authentication flows, coupled schema changes,
or behavioral API migrations. The strict repair verifier is also an acceptance criterion for value
substitutions, not a semantic correctness proof; it can reject valid edits that satisfy the updated
contract without preserving the exact literal form. Finally, our open-world study covers 49 real skills.
Larger continuous deployments are needed to measure long-term alert fatigue, human acceptance of
suggested repairs, and how contract monitors should be combined with execution-backed checks.

D    Algorithmic Details

Algorithm 1 S KILL G UARD contract-based monitoring
Require: skill document S, optional drift events D
 1: M ← ExtractMentions(S)
 2: C ← FormContracts(S, M)
 3: V ← ∅
 4: for ci = (ti , ri , vi , ei ) ∈ C do
 5:     if ri = INCIDENTAL then
 6:          continue
 7:     end if
 8:     Di ← KnownDriftOrLiveEvidence(ci , D)
 9:     for dj ∈ Di do
10:          if match(ci , dj ) then
11:              V ← V ∪ {(ci , dj )}
12:          end if
13:     end for
14: end for
15: S ′ ← RepairWithViolations(S, V)
16: return violations V, optional verified repair S ′



Design rationale. The critical ordering in Algorithm 1 is that role filtering precedes validation.
Contract-free probes validate every extracted URL, version, path, or configuration value and therefore
over-alert on incidental mentions. S KILL G UARD first decides whether the mention is an operational
obligation, and only then validates it against known drift specifications or live evidence. This ordering
is the algorithmic form of the paper’s central claim: skill drift is a role-bearing contract violation, not
a raw value change.

E    Matcher Normalization and Backoff Rules
Normalization. Before matching, S KILL G UARD normalizes contract values and drift values by
lowercasing package and API identifiers, stripping surrounding punctuation, normalizing URL
slashes, splitting common separators (/, -, _, .), and removing tokens such as protocol prefixes or
file extensions when they do not determine the contract type. Normalization is type-aware: version
strings, package names, API paths, environment variables, and URLs use separate tokenization rules.

Why not use a stronger semantic matcher? The matcher is intentionally conservative because
S KILL G UARD is designed as a precision-first monitor. More aggressive semantic normalization could
recover schema renames, authentication-flow migrations, or API behavior changes, but it could also
create near-collisions among incidental examples. We therefore use conservative surface matching in
the main system and treat schema-aware or execution-backed validators as complementary extensions
for contract types with weak surface evidence.

F    D RIFT B ENCH Construction and Validation
Controlled drift generation. The controlled split starts from 49 agent skills and covers eight drift
categories: URL change, version bump, configuration change, API migration, deprecation, schema
change, authentication change, and dependency update. Qwen3.6-Plus proposes 6–8 drift scenarios


                                                        13
Table 4: Conservative matching after role filtering. The matcher can improve recall only after
the role gate has removed incidental mentions; otherwise the same normalization would create false
alarms on comments, badges, and examples.

          Level         Rule                       Purpose
          Role gate     ri = OPERATIONAL           Suppress comments, badges, tutorials, and
                                                   documentation-only mentions before validation.
          Type gate     compatible(ti , tj )       Prevent near-collisions across unrelated contract
                                                   types.
          Exact         exact(v̄i , ōj )          Capture literal substitutions and normalized sub-
                                                   string matches.
          Token-2       tok2 (v̄i , ōj )          Recover drift when formatting or path separators
                                                   change.
          Typed-1       typed1 (ti , v̄i , ōj )   Allow conservative one-token backoff only within
                                                   compatible contract types.
          Reject        otherwise                  Avoid alerting on raw environmental values without
                                                   operational role support.

Table 5: D RIFT B ENCH evaluates both drift recall and false-alarm resistance. The benchmark
combines controlled drifts, LLM-free real-world drifts, identity pairs, and hard negatives that change
text or values without violating operational contracts.

                                                    Controlled                   Real-world
                    Drift pairs                           174                           107
                    Identity no-drift pairs                49                            —
                    Formatting hard negatives             300                            —
                    Semantic hard negatives               250                            —
                    Total pairs                            773                        107
                    Drift types                              8                          5
                    Source skills                           49                         22
                    Adjudicated validity                99.6%                       100%
                    Negative controls               599; zero-FP Wilson 95% CI [0%, 0.6%]



per skill, yielding 422 candidate pairs. Validated candidates form the 174-pair controlled drift split
used in the main evaluation.

Cross-family validation and adjudication. To reduce generator artifacts, candidate pairs are
checked using cross-family validation and registry-backed adjudication. DeepSeek-R1 independently
judges candidate validity. Disputed cases are checked against registry or changelog evidence and
then reviewed by the authors. The final adjudicated validity is 99.6% for the controlled split.

LLM-free real-world split. The real-world split contains 107 naturally occurring drifts collected
from live registries and changelogs, including package registries, repository metadata, and ecosystem
documentation. No LLM is used to generate these drift instances. This split is intended to test
whether contract monitoring transfers beyond model-generated drift pairs.

G    Human Audit of D RIFT B ENCH

Purpose. The human audit tests benchmark validity independently of the model-based construction
and adjudication pipeline. It targets three possible artifact sources: incorrect drift/no-drift labels,
incorrect old/new value instantiation, and hard negatives that accidentally violate an operational
contract.

Sampling. We use stratified random sampling over the five benchmark splits. The audit covers 176
of 880 pairs (20%): 35 controlled drift pairs, 21 real-world drift pairs, 10 identity no-drift pairs, 60
formatting hard negatives, and 50 semantic hard negatives. Stratification ensures that the audit covers
both positive drift examples and the negative controls that support the false-alarm claim.


                                                        14
Table 6: Random 20% human audit of D RIFT B ENCH. Corrections affect value rendering, spans,
wording, or metadata; no audited example changes its drift/no-drift label.

                  Split                        Total     Audited    Corrected     Label flips
                  Controlled drift pairs        174           35           4                 0
                  Real-world drift pairs        107           21           2                 0
                  Identity no-drift pairs        49           10           0                 0
                  Formatting hard negatives     300           60           3                 0
                  Semantic hard negatives       250           50           5                 0
                  Total                         880          176          14                 0

Table 7: Human-audit correction categories. The audit improves released pair quality without
changing any sampled drift/no-drift label.

     Correction type              Count    Description
     Value normalization               5   Standardize package names, version strings, endpoint format-
                                           ting, or old/new value rendering.
     Evidence-span adjustment          4   Move the evidence span to the exact line or snippet supporting
                                           the contract or drift.
     Hard-negative wording             3   Clarify transformations so that they change surface form or
                                           incidental values without violating an operational contract.
     Source metadata                   2   Update registry, changelog, or URL metadata without chang-
                                           ing the pair label.
     Total                            14   —


Interpretation. The audit supports D RIFT B ENCH as a benchmark for skill degradation rather than
raw text change detection. All corrected cases are retained after editing, and no audited pair changes
its drift/no-drift label. The audit is distinct from the role-label audit in Section H: this section verifies
the benchmark pairs, while the next section evaluates the OPERATIONAL/INCIDENTAL decision
used by S KILL G UARD.

H    Standalone Role-Label Audit
Purpose. The OPERATIONAL/INCIDENTAL decision is the central intermediate variable in
S KILL G UARD. The end-to-end false-positive result shows that this decision is useful for monitoring,
but it does not by itself measure role-label accuracy. We therefore perform a standalone audit of role
classification on human-labeled environmental mentions.

Protocol. Two annotators independently label 200 environmental mentions drawn from controlled
skills, semantic hard negatives, and open-world skills. Annotators mark a mention as OPERATIONAL if
the skill relies on it for execution or correctness, and INCIDENTAL otherwise. Disagreements are adju-
dicated before evaluation. We treat OPERATIONAL as the positive class and compare S KILL G UARD’s
role predictions against the adjudicated human labels.

Table 8: Standalone role-label audit. Positive denotes OPERATIONAL. This audit evaluates
the OPERATIONAL/INCIDENTAL decision independently from end-to-end drift detection using
adjudicated human labels.

                   Split                       Mentions      Precision   Recall         F1
                   Controlled skills                    43     81.2%     89.7%      85.2%
                   Semantic hard negatives              44    100.0%     72.7%      84.2%
                   Open-world skills                   113     88.6%     86.7%      87.6%
                   All                                 200     89.5%     83.4%      86.3%


Interpretation. The audit supports the mechanism behind S KILL G UARD’s precision-first behav-
ior. High role precision means that predicted operational mentions are usually true operational


                                                       15
assumptions. This is especially important on semantic hard negatives, where values change but
contracts should remain valid. Lower recall on the same split indicates a source of missed operational
assumptions, which matches the main paper’s conclusion that recall is bounded by extraction and
role-label coverage. The audit therefore strengthens the central claim without implying exhaustive
drift detection.




                                                 16
I   Additional Detection Results

Table 9: Model-level known-drift verification. Precision is stable across evaluated backbones,
while recall varies with extraction and model behavior.
                   Model                  Family               Precision   Recall     95% CI
                   Qwen3.6-Plus           Qwen                    100%       76%    [62%,88%]
                   DeepSeek-R1            DeepSeek                100%       62%    [55%,70%]
                   DeepSeek-V3.2          DeepSeek                100%       57%    [44%,70%]
                   GLM-5.1                GLM                     100%       54%    [40%,69%]
                   Qwen3-235B-A22B        Qwen MoE                100%       24%    [17%,32%]


Interpretation. We use model-level results to characterize the precision–recall profile of S KILL -
G UARD, not to rank backbone capability. The stable precision across models supports the role-filtering
mechanism, while recall variation indicates coverage and extraction sensitivity.

J   Negative Controls and Statistical Bounds
Formatting hard negatives. The 300 formatting hard negatives apply deterministic surface edits
such as section reordering, whitespace changes, markdown normalization, and harmless structural
edits. They test whether a detector overreacts to document changes that do not alter environment
assumptions.

Semantic hard negatives. The 250 semantic hard negatives change actual values while preserving
operational contracts. Examples include commentary versions that are not dependencies, alias URLs,
homograph values, and non-breaking patches. These cases directly test the core role distinction: a
value can change without becoming a skill-relevant violation.

Table 10: False-positive bounds on no-drift and hard-negative cases. The combined 599 negative
controls provide the statistical support for the paper’s false-alarm claim.

          Negative split                 FP     Total     Wilson 95% CI       Clopper–Pearson 95% CI
          Identity no-drift               0        49      [0.0%, 7.3%]             [0.0%, 7.3%]
          Formatting hard negatives       0       300      [0.0%, 1.3%]             [0.0%, 1.2%]
          Semantic hard negatives         0       250      [0.0%, 1.5%]             [0.0%, 1.5%]
          All negatives                   0       599      [0.0%, 0.6%]             [0.0%, 0.6%]



K    Detection Baselines and Extraction Sensitivity

Table 11: Detection baselines. Contract-free probes can detect some drift but incur false alarms
because they validate raw values rather than role-bearing obligations.

          Method                              Precision    Recall      FPR    Requirement
          Grep/diff                              100%           30%     0%    old+new text
          CI probes without contracts             60%           30%    40%    live environment
          Dependabot-style scanning               80%           11%    10%    version database
          NL2Contract-style extraction           100%           45%     0%    single LLM pass
          Static config checker                    0%            0%     0%    rule library
          S KILL G UARD                          100%           76%     0%    contracts + drift evidence
          Canary execution                       100%          100%     0%    full runtime


Additional pattern families. The expanded extractor adds Docker image versions, npm @version
patterns, GitHub Actions versions, environment variables, cloud regions, git branch names, CLI flags,
and configuration filenames. These patterns explain much of the recall gain on real-world drift.


                                                          17
Table 12: Extraction sensitivity. Expanding deterministic mention coverage improves recall while
preserving zero-FPR behavior, suggesting that recall is coverage-limited rather than precision-limited.

               Metric                          7-family regex    15-family regex       Change
               Controlled-split regex recall              13%                 33%       +20 pp
               Real-world regex recall                    45%                 78%       +33 pp
               Mean contracts per skill                    3.4                11.7        +8.3
               FPR                                         0%                  0%    no change



External untailored set. On a small external set outside the original categories, the original pipeline
detects 0/7 drifts, while the improved pipeline detects 7/7 drifts with 0 false positives. We treat this
as supportive evidence for improved coverage, not as a decisive generalization claim because the set
is small.

L    Open-World Discovery Details

Table 13: Open-world discovery at the skill level. We report conservative pre-adjudication values
as primary, even though the two apparent false positives were later judged genuine drift.

                                  Quantity                            Value
                                  Skills scanned                        49
                                  Skills with confirmed drift           22
                                  Fresh skills                          27
                                  Skills flagged by S KILL G UARD       14
                                  True positives                        12
                                  False positives, pre-adjudication      2
                                  False negatives                       10
                                  True negatives                        25
                                  Conservative precision              86%
                                  Recall                              55%
                                  FPR                                  7%


Flagged skills. The 14 flagged skills are analyze-ci, bazel-build-optimization,
changelog-automation,      dbt-transformation-patterns,    distributed-tracing,
gitops-workflow, llm-evaluation, nx-workspace-patterns, python-packaging,
rag-implementation,         security-review,        similarity-search-patterns,
spark-optimization, and vector-index-tuning.

Blinded adjudication. The two apparent false positives were re-evaluated after the primary protocol.
A dbt documentation redirect returned a 301 and was judged genuine drift with high confidence.
A broken MLflow URL returned a 404 and was judged genuine drift with medium confidence.
We nevertheless report the pre-adjudication precision in the main paper to avoid overstating live-
monitoring performance.

Live-monitoring simulation. A separate live-monitoring simulation over 49 skills detects 8 of 11
drifted skills, with 0 false positives among 38 fresh skills. The repair stage succeeds on 3 detected
skills, giving 38% conditional repair and 27% end-to-end success. We include this as deployment-
oriented evidence but do not use it as the primary open-world result because the pre-registered
discovery study is the cleaner evaluation.

M     Repair Ablations, Cost, and Verifier Behavior
Interpretation. The repair evidence supports a localization claim, not a dominance claim. Failed
contracts are much better than vague repair instructions, but the current sample does not show a
statistically significant advantage over plain drift text or Self-refine. The verifier analysis also explains


                                                     18
Table 14: Repair guidance ablation. Failed contracts substantially improve over no localization,
but do not significantly outperform plain drift text or three-round Self-refine in the current sample.

           Repair signal                        Success     n     Rounds   p vs. S KILL G UARD
           No localization                   2/20 = 10%    20          1   p < 10−5
           Plain drift text                 12/20 = 60%    20          1   p = 0.213
           Self-refine                      16/20 = 80%    20          3   p = 1.000
           S KILL G UARD failed contracts   25/32 = 78%    32          1   —
           Rewrite with full drift spec     25/32 = 78%    32          3   p = 1.000

Table 15: Repair cost. Contract-guided repair reaches comparable success to multi-round alternatives
with fewer rounds and lower token use.
              Method                           Tokens per skill   Rounds    Repair success
              S KILL G UARD failed contracts              ∼10K         1               78%
              Self-refine                                 ∼18K         3               80%
              Rewrite with full drift spec                ∼12K         3               78%


why repair scores should be read conservatively: literal checking avoids false repair success but is not
a semantic correctness proof.




                                                   19
Table 16: Literal versus type-aware repair verification. The literal verifier is conservative: it
rejects a small number of repairs that a type-aware verifier accepts, mainly for dependency updates.

                  Drift type                   Literal pass   Type-aware pass        Gap
                  API migration                     100%                  100%      0 pp
                  Authentication change              79%                   79%      0 pp
                  Configuration change               96%                   96%      0 pp
                  Dependency update                  82%                  100%    +18 pp
                  Deprecation                       100%                  100%      0 pp
                  Schema change                      95%                   95%      0 pp
                  URL change                        100%                  100%      0 pp
                  Version bump                      100%                  100%      0 pp
                  Overall                  165/174 = 95%       168/174 = 97%       +2 pp


N    Per-Type Failure Taxonomy

Table 17: Per-drift-type detection and repair for Qwen3.6-Plus. Small per-type counts make
these results diagnostic rather than definitive; they identify where richer validators and repair plans
are needed.
                  Drift type               n    Detection     SG repair    Rewrite repair
                  URL change               4        100%         100%               75%
                  Version bump             4        100%         100%              100%
                  API migration            6         83%          83%              100%
                  Dependency update        5         80%          40%               80%
                  Configuration change     9         67%          56%               89%
                  Deprecation              6         67%          50%               67%
                  Authentication change    3         67%           0%                0%
                  Schema change            5         60%          40%               80%


Failure modes. Authentication drift often requires replacing an interaction mechanism rather than
substituting a value. Schema changes are frequently embedded in prose or example outputs, making
extraction harder. Behavioral coupling arises when multiple dependent fields must change together.
These failures reflect limits in extraction and repair localization, not evidence that role-bearing
validation itself causes false alarms.

O    Implementation and Reproducibility Details
Extraction. The deterministic pass uses 15 regex families to identify explicit environmental men-
tions. The semantic pass performs role classification and emits contract records (ti , ri , vi , ei ). The
two passes are merged and deduplicated before validation.

Validation. Known-drift validation uses exact substring matching, token-overlap matching, and
type-compatible backoff matching. Live validation uses available public evidence such as package
registries, URL responses, and ecosystem conventions. Contracts without reliable validators may be
missed, which is why live monitoring is treated as precision-oriented discovery rather than exhaustive
verification.

Repair. For each reported violation, the repair prompt includes the original skill, the failed contract,
the evidence span, old and new values when available, and category-aware repair instructions. The
system generates candidates at temperatures τ ∈ {0.0, 0.2} and accepts the first candidate that passes
verification.

Statistical protocol. Detection confidence intervals are bootstrap 95% intervals with B = 10,000
resamples unless otherwise specified. Zero-false-positive claims are reported with Wilson and
Clopper–Pearson intervals. Repair ablation significance uses Fisher exact tests. We report non-
significant comparisons explicitly rather than converting them into positive claims.


                                                   20
Reproducibility boundary. All reported numbers are derived from JSON result files generated
by the experiment scripts. We use model-level results to characterize the precision–recall profile of
S KILL G UARD across backbone families, and report implementation details, prompts, and statistical
protocols to support reproducibility.

Reproducibility package. The anonymized supplementary package contains the bench-
mark pairs, processed contract records, result JSON files, prompts used for extrac-
tion/validation/repair, and scripts for reproducing the tables and figures in the paper. In particu-
lar, scripts/build_driftbench.py constructs D RIFT B ENCH from the released source skills
and drift specifications, scripts/run_detection.py reproduces the known-drift and negative-
control evaluations, scripts/run_openworld.py reproduces the live-discovery protocol, and
scripts/run_repair.py reproduces the repair ablations. The exact API model names, decoding
temperatures, and statistical-test scripts are included in the supplementary material. Closed-source
hosted models are accessed through their public APIs; reproducing model-dependent numbers
therefore requires access to the corresponding model endpoints.

P    Broader Impacts and Safeguards
Positive impacts. Long-lived agent skill libraries are increasingly used to automate software
maintenance, testing, deployment, and tool interaction. A precision-first drift monitor can reduce
stale automation, lower alert fatigue, and make maintenance failures easier to diagnose by localizing
violated environment assumptions.

Risks and mitigations. The same capability could make agent systems more robust in settings
where the underlying tasks are undesirable, or surface stale dependencies that reveal maintenance
weaknesses. We mitigate these risks by releasing a benchmark of skill degradation rather than
credentials, exploits, or private infrastructure states; by excluding secrets and private user data from
the benchmark; and by framing S KILL G UARD as a maintenance monitor rather than an autonomous
deployment or exploitation system. Repair suggestions should be reviewed before being applied in
production, especially for authentication, schema, or behaviorally coupled changes.

Q    Assets and Licensing
Third-party assets and hosted services. Table 18 summarizes the external assets, hosted model
APIs, public metadata sources, and newly introduced artifacts used in this work. For hosted LLMs, we
use provider APIs only and do not redistribute model weights, provider code, or proprietary service
artifacts. API access is therefore governed by the corresponding provider terms rather than by an
open-source model license. For public registry and platform metadata, we only record publicly visible
drift evidence, such as package versions, release records, repository metadata, workflow metadata,
and container metadata, together with access dates. We do not redistribute third-party package source
code, container images, private repository contents, or provider-side logs. For third-party skill and
benchmark assets, we pin the exact source version used in our experiments and preserve upstream
copyright notices and nested license files.

Release of D RIFT B ENCH. We release the artifacts introduced by this paper under a permissive
split license: benchmark data, annotations, contract labels, evaluation metadata, and documentation
are released under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0), while
evaluation code and utility scripts are released under the MIT License. This license applies only to
artifacts authored by us. Any third-party assets referenced, derived from, or bundled for reproducibility
remain subject to their original licenses or platform terms. For the anonymous submission, we provide
an anonymized reviewer-accessible artifact with the same license files, asset inventory, and pinned
versions. Upon acceptance, we will de-anonymize the repository, preserve the same license structure,
and archive a versioned release.

License files in the released artifact. The released artifact contains a top-level LICENSE file,
a NOTICE file, and an ASSET_LICENSES.md inventory. The top-level license states that, unless
otherwise noted, code is licensed under the MIT License and benchmark data, annotations, labels,


                                                   21
Table 18: Assets, licenses, and provider terms. Hosted LLMs are accessed through provider APIs;
no model weights are redistributed. Public registry and platform metadata are used only as drift
evidence and are recorded with access dates. Third-party assets remain under their original licenses
or platform terms.

 Asset / Service            Use in this work                Version / Access record        License / Terms
 SWE-Skills-Bench           Source skills and bench-        GitHub commit; accessed        Repository-level MIT
                            mark reference material         2026-05-06                     License;     upstream
                                                                                           copyright notices and
                                                                                           nested license files
                                                                                           preserved
 Qwen model APIs            Hosted LLM inference            Provider API; model iden-      Alibaba Cloud Model
                                                            tifiers, decoding settings,    Studio / DashScope
                                                            and access dates recorded      Terms of Service; no
                                                            in our run metadata            model weights redis-
                                                                                           tributed
 DeepSeek model APIs        Hosted LLM inference            Provider API; model iden-      DeepSeek Open Plat-
                                                            tifiers, decoding settings,    form Terms of Service
                                                            and access dates recorded      and DeepSeek Terms
                                                            in our run metadata            of Use; no model
                                                                                           weights redistributed
 GLM model APIs             Hosted LLM inference            Provider API; model iden-      Zhipu AI / BigModel
                                                            tifiers, decoding settings,    Open Platform User
                                                            and access dates recorded      Agreement and plat-
                                                            in our run metadata            form service terms; no
                                                                                           model weights redis-
                                                                                           tributed
 PyPI, npm, GitHub Ac-      Public drift evidence, in-      Accessed 2026-05-06; ex-       Public metadata ac-
 tions, and Docker Hub      cluding versions, releases,     act URLs, query times-         cessed under the cor-
 metadata                   workflow metadata, reposi-      tamps, and retrieved meta-     responding platform
                            tory metadata, and container    data snapshots recorded in     terms; no third-party
                            metadata                        our logs                       package source code,
                                                                                           container images, or
                                                                                           private contents redis-
                                                                                           tributed
 D RIFT B ENCH              New benchmark, annota-          Released by the authors;       CC BY 4.0 for bench-
                            tions, contract labels, eval-   anonymized reviewer arti-      mark data, labels,
                            uation metadata, documen-       fact for submission and ver-   annotations, metadata,
                            tation, and release package     sioned public release upon     and documentation;
                                                            acceptance                     MIT License for
                                                                                           evaluation code and
                                                                                           scripts


metadata, and documentation are licensed under CC BY 4.0. The asset inventory records each
third-party source, its pinned version or access date, its role in our experiments, and the corresponding
upstream license or provider terms.




                                                    22
