                                                              Attested Tool-Server Admission:
                                                               A Security Extension to the
                                                                 Model Context Protocol
                                                                                  Alfredo Metere
                                                                                  Enclawed LLC
                                                                           alfredo.metere@enclawed.com




arXiv:2605.24248v2 [cs.CR] 1 Jun 2026
                                                                                        June 2, 2026
                                                       Preprint: arXiv:2605.24248 · Archived record: doi:10.5281/zenodo.20349263



                                                                                           Abstract
                                             The Model Context Protocol (MCP) standardizes how a large-language-model (LLM) agent and
                                             an external tool server exchange messages, but not trust: a host reads a server’s self-declared
                                             tool list and dispatches calls, with no notion of which servers it may use, at what sensitivity, or
                                             which of a server’s tools are in bounds. This work grew out of a concrete need — letting the
                                             Enclawed agent use Google’s externally-operated MCP servers (Gmail, Calendar, Drive) safely,
                                             admitting the server and bounding the tools it may drive, without changing MCP or Enclawed’s
                                             own tool application-programming interface (API). The mechanism we built, mcp-attested
                                             (shipped in both the open enclawed-oss distribution and the enclaved flavor), generalizes: the
                                             gap that makes an unmediated third-party connection unsafe for one user makes a regulated
                                             deployment impossible to accredit. We close it with three additive mechanisms: (1) a small,
                                             offline-signed clearance assertion a server publishes at a well-known Uniform Resource Identifier
                                             (URI) and a host verifies against a pinned trust root before any tool dispatch; (2) a deny-by-default
                                             per-server tool allowlist, so admitting a server is not trusting its every tool; and (3) a flavor-gated
                                             enforcement mode that turns the checks from warnings into hard denials, with every decision
                                             written to a tamper-evident audit log. We give the wire format, the verification algorithm,
                                             a security analysis, and an LLM-driven adversarial evaluation; we then state the design in
                                             normative Request-for-Comments (RFC 2119) form — schema, verification rules, error registry,
                                             well-known registration, and machine-checkable conformance vectors — so it can be adopted
                                             as an MCP addendum rather than reinvented. An unextended host ignores the well-known
                                             document and behaves exactly as today.


                                        1    Introduction
                                        The Model Context Protocol (MCP) [1, 2] standardized something the agent ecosystem badly
                                        needed: a single way for an LLM-driven host to enumerate the tools, resources, and prompts that an
                                        external server offers, and to invoke them over a uniform JSON-RPC (JavaScript Object Notation
                                        remote procedure call) [10] envelope. Its adoption was rapid precisely because it is minimal. A host
                                        connects to a server over a transport (a subprocess pipe, stdio; the HyperText Transfer Protocol,
                                        HTTP; or a streaming variant), issues tools/list, receives a list of tool descriptors, and thereafter
                                        issues tools/call with a tool name and an arguments object.



                                                                                               1
Where this work began. We wanted the Enclawed agent to use Google’s externally-operated
Workspace MCP servers (Gmail, Calendar, Drive) as ordinary tools. Wiring them in the obvious
way trusts whatever tool list the server advertises and hands the model the server’s entire surface
— including, say, a “delete every message” tool — the moment it connects. We wanted instead to
admit such a server deliberately and bound the tools the agent can drive, without changing MCP
or Enclawed’s own tool API. The component built for that, mcp-attested, generalizes into the
extension this paper proposes; it ships in both the open enclawed-oss distribution and the enclaved
flavor.
    That minimalism is the security gap. MCP is silent on whether a host should talk to a given
server, what sensitivity may cross the connection, and which subset of the server’s advertised tools
the host may drive; the tool list and the server’s identity — beyond whatever its Transport Layer
Security (TLS) certificate asserts — are taken on faith. The result is a confused deputy [7]: an LLM
steered by adversarial context [13, 18] calls a tool, and nothing sits between that decision and the
network write.
    An unmediated connection is unsafe in every deployment: the operator chose the server, but
not the tool surface the model can reach, and a prompt-injected model can drive a destructive
tool — deleting a mailbox, say — on a server the operator never authorized at that granularity [5].
A lone operator on their own laptop may absorb that risk; a bank, a hospital, or a government
program putting an agent on regulated data cannot — and, with no admission record, cannot
even prove what happened. A control framework such as the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-53 [15] expects least-privilege access enforcement
(AC-3, AC-6), information-flow enforcement between sensitivity levels (AC-4), and an audit record
of access decisions (AU-2, AU-9). None of these can be satisfied if the host has no notion of which
server is which, at what level, or which tools are in bounds.

Contribution. This paper documents mcp-attested, the MCP admission layer, and generalizes
it into a standards-style proposal. The design rests on a single observation: MCP needs a trust layer,
but that layer can be added entirely above the existing protocol — one server-published document
and one host-side gate — without changing a single existing MCP message (Figure 1). Concretely
we contribute:

1. A clearance assertion format (Section 4): a tiny, offline-signed JSON document, published
   by a server at the well-known URI /.well-known/enclawed-clearance.json, that binds the
   server’s identity to a sensitivity clearance and is verifiable against a host-local trust root. We
   reuse the exact byte-canonicalization and Ed25519 [9] signing flow already used for signing
   Enclawed extension manifests, so a server operator signs a clearance assertion with the same
   offline tool they already use for code.
2. An admission algorithm (Section 5): the host verifies signature, signer authority, and clearance
   ordering before the first tool dispatch, and treats admitting a server as distinct from authorizing
   its tools by binding each admitted server to a closed, per-server tool allowlist (Section 5.3).
3. A flavor-gated enforcement model (Section 5.2): in the open flavor the checks are advisory
   (warn-but-allow, preserving drop-in compatibility); in the enclaved flavor they are hard denials.
   Every decision — allow, deny, or warn — is appended to a hash-chained audit log.
4. An adversarial evaluation (Section 7): we turn each stated property into an executable test
   driven by an LLM-generated red-team corpus (tool-name evasions and forged clearance assertions)
   and report the results — every evasion denied with zero leaked network writes and every forgery


                                                  2
                                                                                Host (LLM-driven)

                                                                     verify clearance assertion vs. the pinned
                     Host
                                                                       trust root: capability, signer, expiry,
                  (LLM-driven)
                                                                               level, signature, origin


               tool                tools/ TLS                                 per-server tool allowlist
               list                 call

                                                                       append tamper-evident audit record
                      MCP server                                                           tools/call

                                                                                    MCP server

(a) MCP today. The host trusts the server’s tool         (b) Proposed (attested admission). The host verifies a signed
list and dials any tool; only TLS sits between them —    clearance assertion against a pinned trust root, enforces a closed
    no admission, sensitivity level, or per-tool gate.      per-server tool allowlist, and audits the decision before any
                                                                tools/call — all above MCP, no message changed.

Figure 1: MCP today (a) versus the proposed attested tool-server admission (b). The extension
adds a host-side gate and one server-published document; an unextended host ignores it and behaves
as in (a).


     denied at the expected guard, across both a hand-written suite and a large model-generated
     coverage campaign.
5. A security analysis and a standardization argument (Sections 6 and 8): we state the
   properties the extension provides, the residuals it does not, its FIPS-mode compatibility, and
   why it is small and generic enough to be an MCP extension rather than a fork.

    We are explicit about scope. This is an admission and information-flow extension. It does not
by itself stop a malicious admitted server from misbehaving within its granted tools, nor does it
police the content crossing an admitted connection; those are the jobs of, respectively, skill capability
containment [12] and the egress reference monitor [11], which compose with this layer but are out
of scope here. What this layer guarantees is that the host only ever speaks to servers whose identity
and clearance it has cryptographically checked, only ever drives tools it has pre-authorized on those
servers, and records every such decision.

Availability and status. This is a report on a shipping system, not a proposal. Every mechanism
described here — the clearance assertion and its verifier, the per-server tool allowlist, flavor-gated
enforcement, and the hash-chained audit log — is implemented and runs in production in both the
open enclawed-oss distribution and the accredited enclawed-enclaved build. The only parts not
yet shipped are the items Section 11 explicitly marks as future work (per-tool clearance, per-assertion
freshness/revocation, and submission of the normative extension).


2      Background: MCP and its security posture
2.1      What MCP specifies
MCP defines a client–server protocol carried over JSON-RPC 2.0. A host embeds one or more
clients; each client maintains a session with a server that exposes some combination of tools



                                                            3
(callable functions), resources (readable content), and prompts. After an initialize handshake
that negotiates capabilities and protocol version, the standard interaction for tool use is:

• tools/list → an array of tool descriptors, each with a name, a human-readable description,
  and a JSON-Schema for its arguments;
• tools/call with { name, arguments } → a structured result.

The transport may be a local subprocess pipe (stdio) or a network channel (HTTP, optionally
with server-sent-event streaming). When the channel is network-facing, confidentiality and server
endpoint authentication are whatever the underlying TLS [20] provides; recent revisions of the spec
layer OAuth [6] on top for user authorization to a server.

2.2   What MCP does not specify
The protocol’s trust assumptions, made explicit:

1. No host-side server admission. TLS authenticates that the host reached the endpoint named
   in the Uniform Resource Locator (URL); OAuth authorizes the user to the server. Neither
   answers the host’s question: “is this server one I am permitted to use as a tool provider, and at
   what sensitivity?” A valid certificate for evil.example is still a valid certificate.
2. No sensitivity / clearance notion. There is no field in which a server declares the data
   classification it is cleared to handle, and no host-side check that a server’s level dominates the
   level of the data the agent is about to send it. Information-flow control (Bell–LaPadula [3],
   AC-4) has no hook.
3. The tool list is self-asserted and trusted wholesale. The host learns the available tools
   from the server itself, and the typical host exposes all of them to the model. Admitting a server
   is implicitly admitting every tool it advertises, now and after any future tools/list change.
4. No standard audit of admission decisions. Because there is no admission step, there is
   nothing to record. AU-2/AU-9 evidence must be reconstructed from transport logs, if at all.

These gaps are not bugs in MCP; they are out of its chosen scope. The contribution of this paper is
to fill them above the protocol, additively.

2.3   The Enclawed setting
Enclawed is a security-hardened distribution of an open agentic artificial-intelligence (AI) gateway,
shipped in two flavors. The open flavor preserves drop-in compatibility with the upstream catalog and
prefers warnings to denials. The enclaved flavor is deny-by-default and enforces Federal Information
Processing Standard (FIPS) 140-3 [14] approved cryptography; it is the flavor an operator accredits
against a control framework [5]. The same code path runs in both; a single runtime flavor value
selects advisory versus enforcing behavior. mcp-attested is the component that brings MCP
connections under this regime, in either flavor.

2.4   Running example: the Google Workspace bridge
We use one concrete deployment throughout — the one that motivated the work — and keep it
faithful to the extension’s own executable test. The Enclawed agent is to use Google’s Gmail MCP
server (endpoint gmailmcp.googleapis.com/mcp/v1) at the internal clearance level. Google


                                                   4
operates the endpoint; Enclawed does not, and it publishes no Enclawed clearance assertion. The
bundled, signed bridge extension mcp-google-workspace registers that endpoint with a closed
tool allowlist of Gmail’s read/compose tools (e.g. list_labels, search_threads, create_draft).
Three properties must hold simultaneously: (i) the connection is a deliberate, recorded admission,
not an implicit consequence of the model dialing a URL; (ii) only the allowlisted tools are reachable
— a prompt-injected request for a destructive tool such as delete_everything is refused before any
network call, whatever the server’s tools/list advertises; and (iii) none of this changes Enclawed’s
own tool API, so the user’s existing skills keep working. This is exactly the scenario the shipped
admission test (client-admission.test.ts) exercises, and it passes against the shipping code.
Section 5.2 gives the connection path for servers like Google that publish no clearance assertion of
their own; Section 5.3 the tool gate; and Sections 4 and 5 the general case of a server that does
publish one, of which the Google bridge is the no-server-side-assertion special case.


3    Threat model
Deployment. We assume the Enclawed personal-assistant trust model: one operator (or one
operating organization) per gateway instance; the host and its locally pinned trust root are part
of the trusted computing base; the LLM is not. The agent’s instruction stream is assumed to be
partially attacker-controlled through retrieved content, tool outputs, and message bodies — the
standard prompt-injection posture [13, 18].

Adversary capabilities.       We consider an adversary who can:

1. inject instructions into the model’s context that steer it toward connecting to an attacker-chosen
   MCP server or invoking an attacker-chosen tool;
2. stand up a network MCP server with a valid TLS certificate for a domain they control;
3. present a self-declared tool list and a self-declared sensitivity level of their choosing;
4. replay or tamper with a legitimately-issued clearance assertion in transit (the host–server channel
   is assumed adversary-observable unless protected by TLS).

Adversary limits. The adversary cannot forge an Ed25519 signature without a trust-root private
key; cannot mutate the pinned trust root, which is locked after startup (Section 5.1); and is not, in
the base model, a co-tenant on the host — the host and its pinned trust root are part of the trusted
computing base. Multi-tenant adversarial isolation on one shared gateway is explicitly out of scope,
consistent with the framework’s stated security model.

Goals. Against this adversary the extension must guarantee: (G1) the host never enforces a
connection as admitted to a server whose clearance assertion is missing, malformed, unsigned, signed
by a key not in the trust root, signed by an expired key, signed by a key not authorized for the
asserted level, whose asserted level is below what the call requires, or that is presented from a host
outside the assertion’s signed origin list; (G2) the host never dispatches a tool the operator did not
pre-authorize for that server, even if the server advertises it and the model requests it; (G3) every
admission decision is recorded in tamper-evident storage; and (G4) the pinned trust root cannot be
mutated at runtime to admit an otherwise-failing server.




                                                   5
Empirically demonstrated runtime exploits. The trust gap above is not theoretical. Adver-
sarial testing against unprotected multi-server MCP deployments has surfaced three exploitable
runtime behaviors that bypass standard post-invocation defenses:

1. Tool-name shadowing. An untrusted or injected server registers a tool name that collides
   with a co-loaded legitimate tool surface, causing the host to route execution calls silently to the
   malicious server.
2. Dynamic schema drift. A malicious server advertises a benign schema during the initial
   tools/list handshake to pass static filters, then mutates parameter constraints or semantic
   requirements before the subsequent tools/call invocation.
3. Registry poisoning. Direct manipulation of the host’s tool cache via downstream prompt
   injection or unvetted secondary discovery layers.

Defender-side benchmarks across these vectors [8] show that relying on the model layer to detect
them is a brittle, non-deterministic boundary: permissive personas completely fail to identify active
schema drift, while catching tool-name shadowing imposes a reasoning load that degrades rapidly
under context-window exhaustion. ATSA’s contribution is to move the security boundary from
probabilistic, post-invocation reasoning to deterministic, cryptographic admission-time gating —
preventing the prompt-injected model from ever accessing or driving an unvetted tool surface in
the first place. Vectors 1 and 3 are closed at admission and tool-authorization time (Section 8.1);
vector 2 — schema drift after a server is admitted — is structurally adjacent and is the subject of
Section 9.


4    The clearance assertion
The first new artifact is a server-published clearance assertion: a small JSON document, served at
the well-known URI [17] /.well-known/enclawed-clearance.json, that binds a server’s identity
to a declared sensitivity level and is signed offline by a key the host trusts. Its shape is deliberately
identical to the Enclawed extension manifest (enclawed.module.json), so a server operator signs
it with the same offline procedure they already use to sign extension code, and the host verifies it
with the same routines.
GET https://gmail-mcp.internal.example/.well-known/enclawed-clearance.json
-> {
      "v": 1,
      "id":           "mcp.example.gmail",
      "publisher":    "example-corp",
      "version":      "2.3.1",
      "clearance":    "restricted-plus",   // generic ladder;
                                           // US-gov alias e.g. "q-cleared"
      "capabilities": ["mcp-server"],
      "signerKeyId": "example-corp-prod-2026",
      "signature":    "<base64 Ed25519 over the canonical body>"
    }

      Listing 1: A clearance assertion served at /.well-known/enclawed-clearance.json.


Fields. clearance is a level in an ordered classification lattice (Section 4.1). capabilities must
contain the literal "mcp-server"; this is what distinguishes a clearance assertion for an MCP
endpoint from any other signed manifest using the same envelope. signerKeyId names a key the

                                                   6
host expects to find in its trust root, and signature is an Ed25519 signature over the canonical
serialization of every field except the signature itself. Two optional fields complete the envelope and
also fall under the signature: netAllowedHosts binds the assertion to specific origins (enforced in
Section 5), and verification records the producer’s verification level.
Definition 1 (Canonical body). The canonical body of an assertion comprises exactly the
fields v, id, publisher, version, clearance, capabilities, signerKeyId, verification, and
netAllowedHosts; the signature field is excluded, and an absent signerKeyId is serialized as
null. It is emitted as deterministic JSON in which every object’s keys are written in sorted
(lexicographic) order and array members are sorted. Both signer and verifier compute exactly these
bytes, so signing and verification cannot disagree on field order or whitespace.
    Using one canonicalization for extension manifests and MCP clearance assertions is a deliberate
attack-surface reduction: there is a single signing path, a single verification path, and a single place
where a canonicalization bug could live, rather than one per document type.

4.1   The classification lattice
Clearance levels are not free-form strings; they are points in a totally ordered lattice with a numeric
rank, so “does server level dominate required level” is a single integer comparison. The framework
ships five built-in schemes — default, us-government, healthcare-hipaa, financial-services,
and a generic-3-tier — and validates custom schemes loaded from JSON (ranks must be
contiguous from 0). Three of the built-ins:

                  Rank    default             us-government     healthcare-hipaa
                    0     PUBLIC              UNCLASSIFIED      PUBLIC
                    1     INTERNAL            CUI               INTERNAL
                    2     CONFIDENTIAL        CONFIDENTIAL      PHI
                    3     RESTRICTED          SECRET            SENSITIVE-PHI
                    4     RESTRICTED-PLUS     TOP SECRET        RESEARCH-EMBARGOED
                    5     SCI                 TS//SCI           —

    Each level carries aliases so an organization can speak its own dialect (SECRET for RESTRICTED,
CUI for INTERNAL) while the engine compares ranks; the regulated schemes additionally de-
fine valid compartments (MENTAL-HEALTH, GENETICS, M_AND_A, . . . ) and releasability markings
(NOFORN, BAA-COVERED, . . . ). This is what makes the same admission code sector-neutral: a
financial-services deployment ranks MNPI above CONFIDENTIAL, a hospital ranks SENSITIVE-PHI
above PHI, a government program uses the US-government ladder — the verifier is identical. (Mark-
ings above: CUI, Controlled Unclassified Information; SCI, Sensitive Compartmented Information;
PHI, Protected Health Information; MNPI, Material Non-Public Information; NOFORN, Not Releasable
to Foreign Nationals; BAA, Business Associate Agreement.)
Definition 2 (Domination). Let rank(ℓ) be the numeric rank of level ℓ in the applicable ladder
(level names are matched case-insensitively, canonical name or alias). A server at level s meets a
required level r, written s ⪰ r, iff rank(s) ≥ rank(r).


5     The admission algorithm
When the host is about to use an MCP server, it runs the verification below before treating the
connection as admitted. The fetch step is injectable (so it can run over the mutually-authenticated

                                                   7
TLS channel inside the enclave network, or be stubbed in tests); everything after it is pure and
side-effect-free except for the audit append.
verify(serverUrl, required):
  doc <- GET serverUrl + "/.well-known/enclawed-clearance.json"
          | on HTTP error or network failure: DENY("fetch failed")
  m    <- parseManifest(doc)
          | on malformed: DENY("manifest invalid")
  if "mcp-server" not in m.capabilities:        DENY("not an mcp-server manifest")
  if m.signerKeyId absent or m.signature absent: DENY("unsigned")
  signer <- trustRoot.find(m.signerKeyId)
  if signer is null:                            DENY("signer not in trust root")
  if signer.notAfter and signer.notAfter < now: DENY("signer expired")
  if m.clearance not in signer.approvedClearance: DENY("signer not approved for level")
  if not ed25519_verify(canonicalBody(m), m.signature, signer.publicKey):
                                                DENY("signature verification failed")
  if not meets(m.clearance, required):          DENY("server level below required")
  if m.netAllowedHosts nonempty and host(serverUrl) not in m.netAllowedHosts:
                                                DENY("not valid for host") // origin binding
  ALLOW(clearance = m.clearance, signerKeyId = signer.keyId)

Listing 2: Server clearance verification (verifyServerClearance), faithful to the shipping
implementation.

     The order is security-relevant. Capability and signedness are cheap structural checks; signer
lookup and the approvedClearance check establish authority (does the trust root let this signer
vouch for this level?) before the cryptographic verification; the signature check establishes authen-
ticity; and only then does the level comparison establish sufficiency. A server cannot self-promote:
even a validly signed assertion is denied if the signing key is not authorized in the trust root for the
level it claims.

5.1   The trust root
The trust root is a set of records, each pairing a keyId and an Ed25519 public key with an
approvedClearance list — the maximum set of levels that key is allowed to vouch for. A development
bundle ships three signers: a community signer and a bundled-extension signer, each approved only
up to INTERNAL, and a high-tier reference signer approved up through RESTRICTED-PLUS for exactly
the attested-MCP use case. Production deployments replace these with the operator’s own signers.
    The crucial property is that the trust root is lockable. The enclaved bootstrap calls
lockTrustRoot() immediately after seeding it; once locked, setTrustRoot() refuses further
mutation. This binds the running binary to the deploying organization’s signers and removes “swap
the trust root at runtime” from the adversary’s toolkit.

5.2   Connection gating and flavor semantics
The verifier returns a verdict; what the host does with a negative verdict depends on the flavor.

• Enclaved flavor: a negative verdict is a hard denial. The connection is not admitted, invoke
  returns an error, and an mcp.connect.deny record is appended to the audit log. This is the
  accreditable mode and satisfies goal G1.
• Open flavor: the same check runs, but a negative verdict is surfaced as a warning rather than
  masked. The client returns a non-OK result tagged “open flavor: warn-only” and writes an
  mcp.connect.warn record, leaving the host free to proceed if it explicitly chooses. Critically,

                                                   8
   the open path never silently rewrites a failure into a success — it refuses to return ok on a failed
   verification, so a warning can never be mistaken for a pass.

    A successful verification in either flavor appends mcp.connect.allow with the resolved clearance
and signer key id. There is also a deliberate first-party fast path: bundled bridges (e.g. a Google
Workspace or GitHub bridge) whose own signed extension manifest and registry registration already
constitute the admission decision may set skipClearancePreflight; this path still audits the allow,
so no admitted connection is unrecorded. The fast path exists because public third-party MCP
servers do not (yet) publish an Enclawed clearance assertion, and the bridge’s signed manifest is the
equivalent gate (Section 8 returns to this).

5.3   Tool-level admission
Admitting a server is not authorizing its tools. This is the second new gate and the answer to gap 3
of Section 2.2. Each server the host will use is recorded in a registry entry binding the endpoint to:
the owning bridge, the required clearance, a closed allowedTools list, and the transport. On every
invoke:
invoke(serverUrl, toolName, args):
  entry <- registry.byEndpoint(serverUrl)
  if entry exists:
    if toolName not in entry.allowedTools:
      audit("mcp.tool.deny", {server, bridge, toolName, "not in allowedTools"})
      return DENY
    if not connect(serverUrl).ok:    return DENY      // re-runs clearance gate
    return entry.transport.call("tools/call", {name: toolName, arguments: args})
  else:
    connect(serverUrl)               // gate still runs
    return DENY("no registered bridge; register the endpoint explicitly")

                  Listing 3: Tool dispatch with per-server allowlist enforcement.
    Three things follow. First, the allowlist is a closed list: a tool the model requests that is not
on it is denied and audited (mcp.tool.deny), regardless of what tools/list advertised — this is
goal G2. Second, the clearance gate is re-run at dispatch, not just at first connect, so a connection
cannot be admitted once and then reused indefinitely without re-checking. Third, an endpoint with
no registry entry cannot be driven at all: there is no implicit “trust whatever the model dialed” path.
The combination means a prompt-injected model that asks to call gmail.deleteAllMessages on a
server whose allowlist contains only gmail.search is denied at the host, before any byte reaches
the network.

5.4   Transport
Dispatch rides the existing MCP envelope unchanged: a JSON-RPC 2.0 tools/call over HTTP(S),
with an optional Authorization: Bearer token supplied by a pluggable auth provider for servers
that also do OAuth user-authorization. The extension adds no new message types to MCP; the
clearance assertion is fetched out-of-band at a well-known URI, and the tool allowlist is enforced
entirely host-side. An unextended MCP server is unaware that any of this happened.

5.5   Audit events
Every decision is an append to the framework’s hash-chained, optionally multi-witnessed audit
log [5]. The event vocabulary is small and total over the decision space:

                                                  9
           Event                  When                                        Carries
           mcp.connect.allow      verification passed (or bridge fast-path)   level, signerKeyId
           mcp.connect.deny       verification failed, enclaved flavor        reason
           mcp.connect.warn       verification failed, open flavor            reason
           mcp.tool.deny          tool not in server allowlist                bridge, toolName

   Because the log is hash-chained, the sequence of admission decisions is tamper-evident: an
auditor can replay it and detect any excision or back-dating, which is what AU-9 asks for and what
goal G3 requires.


6    Security analysis
We restate the guarantees as properties and argue each from the mechanism.
Property 1 (Authenticated, authorized admission). In the enclaved flavor, a connection is enforced
as admitted only if the server’s clearance assertion (a) declares the mcp-server capability, (b) is
signed, (c) by a key present in the locked trust root, (d) whose notAfter (if set) has not passed,
(e) that is approved for the asserted level, (f) the signature verifies over the canonical body, (g) the
asserted level dominates the required level, and (h) when the assertion carries a signed host allow-list,
the connected host is a member of it.
Argument. Each clause is a guarded DENY in Section 5 that precedes ALLOW; the conjunction is
necessary. Forging (f) requires a trust-root private key (adversary limit); bypassing (c), (d), or
(e) requires mutating the trust root, which is locked after startup (Section 5.1). A validly-signed
assertion cannot have its level escalated, because the level is inside the signed body. Clause (h)
closes cross-host replay: because netAllowedHosts is part of the signed canonical body, an attacker
cannot retarget a valid assertion to a host the signer did not authorize without invalidating the
signature; an assertion that omits the list remains origin-agnostic and relies, as before, on the
enclave’s mutually-authenticated TLS and trust-root scoping. Our adversarial harness (Section 7)
confirms clauses (a)–(h) fire as guarded denials, including a host-bound assertion replayed from a
foreign origin and an assertion signed by an expired signer.
Property 2 (Tool least-privilege). An admitted server’s tool is dispatched only if it appears in that
server’s closed allowedTools list, independent of what the server advertises or the model requests.
Argument. invoke checks isToolAdmitted against the registry entry before any transport call and
denies otherwise; an unregistered endpoint has no dispatch path at all (Section 5.3). The server’s
tools/list feeds the model’s options but not the host’s authorization.
Property 3 (Decision auditability). Every admission and tool-gating decision appends one event to
a hash-chained log; the event set is total over {allow, deny, warn, tool-deny}.
Argument. Each return path in connect and invoke is preceded by an audit append (Section 5.5);
the chain is tamper-evident by construction.
Property 4 (Trust-root immutability). Once locked at startup, the pinned trust root cannot be
mutated, so the set of signers under which a server may be admitted cannot be widened at runtime.
Argument.     lockTrustRoot() sets a one-way flag; thereafter setTrustRoot() raises
TrustRootLockedError (Section 5.1). Integrity of the host binary itself is a trusted-computing-base
assumption (Section 3), not a property this layer claims.

                                                   10
Residuals (explicitly out of scope). The extension does not provide: (i) protection against a
correctly admitted, correctly cleared server that misbehaves within its allowed tools — that is the
job of capability containment on the skill/tool side [12]; (ii) content inspection of data crossing an
admitted connection — that is the egress reference monitor [11] and the data-loss-prevention (DLP)
scanner, which run downstream; (iii) defense against an LLM that simply refuses to use a tool (a
liveness, not safety, concern); (iv) multi-tenant adversarial isolation on one shared gateway, which
the framework’s trust model excludes by design. These layers compose: a call must pass admission
and clearance and tool-allowlist (this paper) and capability containment and egress screening before
it leaves the host.

FIPS posture. The admission path uses only Ed25519 (FIPS 186-5) and the Secure Hash
Algorithm SHA-256 (FIPS 180-4), routed through the framework’s approved-algorithm enforcement,
so it runs unmodified in a FIPS-mode enclaved deployment.


7     Evaluation
The properties of Section 6 are stated as arguments from the mechanism; this section turns
each into an executable test and reports the result. The tests ship in the open enclawed-oss
reference implementation (extensions/mcp-attested) and are reproducible with npx vitest run
.../adversarial.test.ts.

7.1    Methodology
Hermetic, network-observing harness. Every test runs against in-memory stubs, never a live
server. Two seams make this faithful rather than merely convenient: the verifier’s fetcher argument
supplies the clearance assertion, and the transport’s fetchImpl supplies tool-call responses. The
transport stub increments a counter on every call, so a denial that nonetheless leaked a network
write would be caught by an assertion that the counter is zero. A fake runtime installed through
setRuntime() records every audit append, so the audit vocabulary of Section 5.5 is checked directly
rather than inferred.

Faithful positives, single-mutation negatives. Trust roots are seeded per test with freshly
generated Ed25519 keypairs. Valid baselines are signed through exactly the production path
(canonicalManifestBytes → signManifest); each negative is one targeted mutation of a baseline
— drop the signature, swap the signer, upgrade the clearance field after signing, omit the mcp-server
capability, and so on — so a test isolates exactly one guard of Property 1.

LLM-generated adversarial corpus. The inputs are a red-team corpus authored by the LLM
as if it were the attacker. For the tool-name gate it spans command-chaining (list_labels;
delete_everything), case folding, whitespace and control-character injection, Unicode homoglyph
/ right-to-left-override (RTL) / zero-width tricks, path traversal, near-miss truncations, prototype-
pollution probe strings (__proto__, constructor), and JSON smuggling. For the admission gate it
spans unsigned, wrong-signer, signer self-promotion, signature tamper, post-signing body upgrade,
capability omission, level shortfall, and malformed / transport error assertions.




                                                 11
7.2    Results
All 48 tests across the mcp-attested admission layer and its Google Workspace bridge pass (44
under vitest, 4 under node:test); the 20 adversarial tests are summarized below.

   Property under test                      Inputs           Outcome
   Property 2 tool least-privilege        31 evasions        all 31 denied (mcp.tool.deny); 0 network
                                                             writes; only the 2 exact allowlisted names
                                                             admitted
   Property 1 authenticated, autho-   2 valid + 12 invalid   both valid admitted (incl. a host-bound as-
   rized admission                                           sertion from its own origin); all 12 denied,
                                                             each at the expected guard (unsigned, not-
                                                             in-root, expired-signer, not-approved, bad-
                                                             signature, below-required, host-not-bound,
                                                             ...)
   Auditability + flavor gating             3 paths          enclaved fail → mcp.connect.deny; open
                                                             fail → mcp.connect.warn and never ok;
                                                             success → mcp.connect.allow


The harness is adversarial in substance. Beyond confirming intended denials, the corpus
surfaced a genuine origin-binding weakness in an earlier verifier — which is why the verifier now
enforces the signed host allow-list (Property 1(h)). A from-scratch adversarial corpus that forces a
real fix, rather than only re-confirming the happy path, is the evidence that the suite earns its name.

7.3    Dynamic and live conformance (gated)
Two further harnesses ship alongside the hermetic suite but depend on external prerequisites, so we
describe their method rather than report numbers.

LLM-driven fuzzing. A local model served by Ollama is asked, at run time, to red-team the
gate — to emit tool-name evasions against a bridge allowlist and to forge clearance assertions that
might slip past the verifier. Each generated tool name that is not an exact allowlist member must
be denied with no network write, and each forged assertion must be rejected. Crucially, the security
invariant is independent of the model’s quality: the model never holds a trust-root private key, so it
cannot produce a verifying signature, and exact-match admission is immune to its surface tricks —
a stronger model merely yields more inventive denials. The harness is enabled with OLLAMA_LIVE=1
and fails loudly if no model is reachable, so it never passes vacuously.
    We ran a coverage campaign with llama3.2 served by Ollama 0.24.0 (Figure 2: 1500 generation
rounds per phase at 6-way graphics-processing-unit (GPU) concurrency, deduplicated). Because
the gate is deterministic — exact-match for tool names, an Ed25519 signature for assertions — a
passing result is full coverage, not a deny probability: Table 1 reports how many distinct adversarial
inputs the model produced and how many the gate denied. Of 27,025 unique tool-name evasions
(from 47,945 generated) spanning whitespace/control, separator-chaining, near-miss, path-traversal,
homoglyph/zero-width/RTL, and case-variant tricks, all were denied with zero network writes and
none admitted. Of the model’s forged clearance assertions, 14,378 distinct ones survived JSON
parsing and all were rejected (the model holds no trust-root private key, so a verifying signature is
out of reach; malformed forgeries are discarded by the harness and would be denied in any case).
This attacker-side campaign is complemented by independent defender-side baselines from the


                                                     12
AlgoVoi Agent-Trust-Bench suite [8], whose differential profiles across 29-tool surfaces confirm that
unprotected deployments remain uniformly vulnerable to the runtime routing and session exploits
enumerated in Section 3.
                                   Ollama 0.24.0 · llama3.2 (3B)
                       100% GPU (RTX 4090, 24 GB) · NUM_PARALLEL=6 · ctx 4096

                                                      concurrent JSON

                             Campaign harness (vitest, 1500 rounds/phase)
                             generate → dedupe → classify, pool of 6 in flight



                                 tool name                      forged assertion



                               invoke()                   verifyServerClearance()
                             exact-match                    Ed25519 vs. trust root,
                             tool allowlist                   level + capability




              tallies: denied / admitted · network-write counter (= 0) · audit log → Table 1


Figure 2: Runtime configuration of the adversarial campaign. A GPU-resident local model (Ollama /
llama3.2) generates adversarial tool names and forged clearance assertions; the harness deduplicates
and feeds them through the two deterministic gate paths; outcomes (denials, admitted, network
writes) are tallied into Table 1.


Live end-to-end. A second harness uses the local model as the agent brain driving the real
Google Workspace bridge (Section 2.4) through the gate, with operator-supplied OAuth read only
from the environment. It asserts the deterministic invariant — a tool outside the allowlist is denied
before any network call — and, best-effort, that an allowlisted tool the model selects is dispatched
to the live endpoint, with any failure on that path required to be a transport/scope error rather
than an admission denial. It is gated behind GOOGLE_LIVE=1 plus operator credentials. We executed
it against Google’s live Gmail MCP endpoint (gmailmcp.googleapis.com/mcp/v1, independently
confirmed reachable with an HTTP 200 to tools/list) using an operator-supplied OAuth token:
the gate admitted the allowlisted tool the model selected and dispatched it to the real endpoint
with no admission denial, and denied the out-of-allowlist tool before any network call.
    This keeps the headline numbers honest: the 48 hermetic tests reproduce anywhere with no
setup, while the gated LLM-driven and live tests (the Ollama fuzz, the coverage campaign, and the
live Gmail end-to-end) — which additionally require a local model and, for the Gmail path, operator
credentials — were run and also pass. They are provided as operator-runnable conformance checks.


8    Why a protocol extension, and how to standardize it
The design choices above were made so that the mechanism is a candidate for a generic MCP
extension, not just an Enclawed feature.

                                                    13
Table 1: LLM-driven coverage campaign (llama3.2, 1500 rounds/phase): every distinct adversarial
input the model generated was denied by the gate.
      Tool-name evasion category          unique   denied                                      admitted
      unclassified / other                12,106    12,106                                            0
      whitespace / control char            9,012     9,012                                            0
      separator / command chaining         3,469     3,469                                            0
      near-miss (edit dist. ≤2)            1,251     1,251                                            0
      path-traversal                         752       752                                            0
      homoglyph / zero-width / RTL           393       393                                            0
      case-variant of an allow name           42        42                                            0
      Total (47,945 generated)            27,025   27,025                                             0
      Network writes on denied calls: 0      Forged assertions: 14,378 unique, 14,378 denied, 0 admitted


If it already works above MCP, why change the standard? The natural objection: the
extension is purely additive (below), so an integrator can bolt it on today without the maintainers
lifting a finger — why ask them to do anything? Because additive is not interoperable. Bolted on
by one vendor, attestation secures only that vendor’s island: a server’s signed clearance document
means something only to hosts that already agreed, out of band, on its shape and verification
order. The payoff — “this server is attested” as a claim any host can check, servers publishing
one document instead of N vendor dialects, and the protocol’s own SDKs shipping the gate on
by default so security stops being each integrator’s opt-in — exists only once a single format is
agreed. And only the specification owner can mint that agreement: no vendor can unilaterally make
a well-known name and a verification order the ecosystem’s Schelling point, which is precisely why
public MCP servers publish no attestation today (Section 5.2). The maintainers’ work is small,
and is the part only they can do: reserve the well-known name and bless one document shape and
verification order (Section 8.1) — the reference implementation and conformance vectors (Section D)
already exist. That the mechanism rides entirely above MCP is what makes adoption cheap and
low-risk, not a reason to defer it: it is an optional, additive addendum with no compatibility tax.

It is purely additive. The clearance assertion lives at a well-known URI [17]; an unextended
host never fetches it and is unaffected. The tool allowlist is host-side state; an unextended server
never sees it. No existing MCP message changes shape. This is the same additive discipline that let
OAuth, security.txt, and OpenID discovery ride the well-known mechanism without forking the
protocols they extended.

It separates the three questions MCP conflates. TLS answers “did I reach the named
endpoint.” OAuth answers “is the user allowed to use this server.” The clearance assertion answers
the missing third question: “is this server one my organization has authorized as a tool provider,
and at what sensitivity.” These are orthogonal and should be layered, not merged; a standardized
clearance assertion could sit alongside MCP’s existing OAuth profile rather than competing with it.

8.1     Normative specification: Attested Tool-Server Admission (ATSA)
We state the extension in normative form so that it can be adopted as an MCP addendum without
further design work — and so that no reviewer can dismiss it as under-specified. The key words must,
must not, required, shall, should, should not, may, and optional are to be interpreted as


                                                      14
in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174. “Host” and “server” carry their MCP meanings. The extension adds
no new MCP message type and alters no existing one (compatibility, below).

Discovery. A server may advertise an attestation two interoperable ways. (i) Well-known resource:
the server should serve a Server Attestation Document (SAD) at /.well-known/mcp-attestation
(the Enclawed profile uses /.well-known/enclawed-clearance.json) on the same origin as its
MCP endpoint, over TLS. (ii) In-band: a server may return the SAD in the initialize result under
an experimental capability key. A conforming host must attempt (i), may attempt (ii), and must
treat the absence of both as “unattested,” applying its configured posture (see compatibility).

Server Attestation Document. The SAD is the vendor-neutral name for the clearance assertion
of Section 4: a JSON object whose required fields are: v (integer 1); id (stable server identity);
publisher; version; clearance (a canonical name or alias of a level in a named, totally ordered
classification scheme, Section 4.1); capabilities (string array that must contain "mcp-server");
signerKeyId (identifies a key in the host trust root); and signature (base64 detached signature
over the canonical body). Two fields are optional and, when present, are part of the signed body:
netAllowedHosts (string array) is recommended — when non-empty it binds the SAD to those
origins — and verification (string, e.g. tested) records the producer’s verification level. The
formal schema is Section A. Verifiers must ignore unknown fields and must not include them in
the canonical body unless a future v registers them.

Canonicalization and signature. The canonical body is the deterministic JSON serialization of
every registered field except signature, object keys in sorted order, array members sorted, an absent
signerKeyId serialized as null (Definition 1). Signer and verifier must compute the signature over
exactly these bytes. The Enclawed profile uses Ed25519 [9]; a profile may substitute another suite if
signer and verifier agree.

Host verification rules. Before treating a connection as admitted, a host must evaluate the
following in order and must deny on the first failure:
 (a) the SAD parses and its capabilities contain "mcp-server";
 (b) signerKeyId and signature are present;
 (c) signerKeyId resolves to a key in the trust root;
 (d) that key’s validity window (notAfter, if set) includes now;
 (e) the key is approved for the asserted clearance;
 (f) the signature verifies over the canonical body;
 (g) clearance dominates the host’s required level (Definition 2); and
 (h) if netAllowedHosts is non-empty, the connected origin is a member.
A host in a deny-by-default (high-assurance) posture must reject an unattested or failing server; a
permissive host should surface the failure and must not silently treat it as success. These rules
are exactly Property 1, and every clause is exercised by Section 7.

Tool authorization. Admitting a server must not be read as authorizing all its tools. A host
should keep a per-server allow-list and must deny a tools/call for any tool absent from it before
any network dispatch. Per-tool clearance may be added in a future v.

                                                 15
Audit. A conforming host should append a tamper-evident record for every admission decision
(allow / deny / warn) and every tool-authorization denial, carrying the resolved signerKeyId and
clearance or the denial reason (Section B).

Trust establishment. How the trust root is provisioned, pinned, and sealed is deployment policy
and out of scope of the wire format. Profiles may anchor it in a pinned key set (Enclawed), X.509
chains, Secure Production Identity Framework for Everyone (SPIFFE) verifiable identity documents
(SVIDs) [4], or a sigstore-style transparency log [16]; the verification rules are independent of the
choice.

Compatibility, versioning, negotiation. v versions the document and a verifier must reject
versions it does not understand. The extension is purely additive: an unextended host never fetches
the SAD and behaves exactly as today, and an unextended server never sees the host-side allow-list;
a host must therefore interoperate with unattested servers under its posture, which is what makes
incremental rollout (Section 5.2) possible.

Conformance. A conforming implementation must reproduce the verdicts of the test vectors in
Section D. The Enclawed mcp-attested extension is a production reference implementation: its
48 hermetic tests and the LLM-driven coverage campaign (Section 7) exercise every verification
clause and the tool-authorization rule against crafted and model-generated adversarial inputs. Wire
format (Section A), verification rules, error registry (Section B), well-known registration (Section C),
and executable vectors (Section D) together leave no normative gap for an implementer to fill by
guesswork — the bar an addition to the MCP specification must clear.

Bootstrapping the ecosystem. The first-party bridge fast path (Section 5.2) is the migration
story in miniature: today’s public MCP servers do not publish attestation documents, so the host’s
trust in them is mediated by a locally signed bridge manifest instead. As servers begin publishing
well-known attestation documents, the same host gate verifies them directly and the bridge shim
falls away — exactly how a well-known-URI extension is meant to roll out incrementally.


9    Composition with runtime drift monitoring
ATSA establishes trust strictly at the point of admission: it verifies an unforgeable server identity
and evaluates a pinned signer key before any network dispatch. This is a point-in-time guarantee
that answers whether a host is authorized to communicate with a specific server at a designated
sensitivity level at the moment of connection. By design, the wire format does not address whether a
tool’s internal behavior or exposed schema drifts over the lifetime of an active session. An admitted
server may pass verification successfully but subsequently mutate its tool surface: a tool declared
as read-only during an initial handshake could later advertise mutating side effects, inject new
sensitive-data parameters (e.g., personally identifiable information), escalate network externalities,
or trigger dynamic schema modifications between polling intervals. Because the underlying server
identity remains unchanged, the cryptographic admission guarantee holds, but the capability surface
has drifted. This operational boundary is where a downstream runtime drift-monitoring layer
composes with ATSA.




                                                  16
What the drift layer needs from ATSA. A continuous-monitoring framework requires a
stable, cryptographically verified anchor to bind its behavioral baselines to. ATSA provides this
structural dependency via two primitives:
1. Verified server identity (id). The unforgeable identity string that the runtime monitor uses
   as the primary indexing key for its tool-schema baseline. Without this cryptographic constraint,
   a drift monitor can be spoofed into baselining an adversarial substitute server.
2. Pinned signer key (signerKeyId). The cryptographic guarantee that the entity producing
   tool definitions at execution time matches the entity that was admitted. This ensures an attacker
   cannot bypass drift telemetry by impersonating an admitted origin.
The downstream monitor anchors each tool baseline to the unique tuple (id, toolName) at the first
observation post-admission, checking subsequent tools/list or tools/call envelopes against that
baseline.

Explicit non-requirements of the wire format. To prevent protocol scope creep and maintain
structural minimalism, three boundaries are enforced. State isolation: the wire format must
not carry drift state, baseline histories, or schema-versioning metadata; baseline persistence and
delta evaluation are strictly implementation concerns of the runtime monitor. Telemetry isolation:
the wire format is not responsible for detecting or signaling structural mutations — it provides
the authenticated identity context; detecting change is the monitor’s responsibility. Frequency
decoupling: ATSA is not required to execute full cryptographic re-attestation on every individual
message frame; admission remains an edge gate, and continuous runtime verification lives in the
downstream monitoring layer.

Systemic synergy. Admission control without drift monitoring risks trusting a modified capability
surface indefinitely. Conversely, drift monitoring without a verified admission anchor operates in
the dark — its baselines remain completely vulnerable to origin spoofing. Composed, the two layers
provide a complete security posture: ATSA guarantees who, while the drift layer guarantees that
the who hasn’t silently changed what.


10     Related work
Guardrails for LLM applications. Toolkits such as NeMo Guardrails [19] police the content of
model inputs and outputs with programmable rails. They are complementary and downstream of
this work: a content rail does not decide which server a tool call may reach or at what clearance; it
inspects the message once the connection is assumed. Enclawed pairs admission control (this paper)
with a multi-modal egress reference monitor [11] for the content side.

Workload and service identity. SPIFFE/SVID [4] and mutual TLS give services cryptographic
identities; our clearance assertion adds an orthogonal authorization-to-a-sensitivity-level attribute
and a host-side admission ordering on top of whatever identity layer is present. A SPIFFE deployment
is a natural trust-root provider for the standardized profile.

Software-supply-chain attestation. The Update Framework (TUF) [22], in-toto [23], and
sigstore [16] sign and verify artifacts and build provenance; the clearance assertion borrows their
offline-signing and pinned-root discipline but applies it to a live endpoint’s authorization, verified at
connection time rather than install time.

                                                   17
Information-flow and access control. The clearance lattice is a direct application of Bell–
LaPadula [3] and the least-privilege principle [21] to the MCP admission point; the confused-deputy
framing [7] is exactly the risk a self-asserted, wholesale-trusted tool list creates. The companion
skills paper [12] provides the capability-containment layer that governs behavior after admission.


11    Limitations and future work
Several directions remain open. Per-tool clearance. The assertion binds a level to a server,
not to individual tools; letting one server expose a PUBLIC search tool beside a RESTRICTED send
tool is a natural refinement that the registry’s per-server allow-list already half-anticipates. Per-
assertion freshness and revocation. Beyond the per-signer notAfter the verifier enforces,
a short-lived notBefore/expiry on the assertion itself and an online, Online-Certificate-Status-
Protocol (OCSP)-style revocation channel for compromised signer keys would tighten the freshness
story. Standardization. The normative extension of Section 8.1 is specified but not yet submitted
to the MCP maintainers; reconciling its clearance field with MCP’s evolving OAuth profile and
capability-negotiation handshake is the concrete next step.


12    Conclusions
MCP left trust to the deployment, and that gap is exploitable everywhere — a prompt-injected
model can drive a destructive tool on any server it reaches. A lone operator may absorb that risk;
a regulated one cannot, and without an admission record cannot even audit it. We showed the
missing trust layer can be added entirely above MCP, without changing a single message, and backed
each guarantee (authenticated admission, tool least-privilege, auditability, tamper-resistance) with
crafted and LLM-generated adversarial tests.

Why this belongs in the MCP specification, not in N vendor forks. Several forces argue
for standardizing admission at the spec level rather than leaving it to each deployment:

• Trust does not compose across dialects. If every host and server invents its own attestation
  scheme, none interoperate and the ecosystem’s security ceiling is set by its least-attested member.
  One standardized shape — a single well-known document and a single verification ordering — is
  what makes “this server is attested” a portable claim instead of a private convention.
• The gap is intrinsic to MCP, so the fix belongs at MCP’s layer. MCP deliberately omitted
  trust; pushing that omission onto deployments does not remove it, it fragments it — forcing
  every regulated adopter to reinvent admission control, usually worse and never interoperably.
• Network effects need a Schelling point. A well-known URI and a capability handshake
  only pay off once both sides converge on one format. Public MCP servers publish no attestation
  today precisely because there is no standard to publish against; a spec creates the target, after
  which adoption is incremental and self-reinforcing (the bridge path of Section 5.2 is that rollout
  in miniature).
• Standardizing costs non-adopters nothing. Because the extension is purely additive it can
  be optional in the spec yet uniform in shape: an unextended host or server is wholly unaffected,
  while adopters gain interoperable admission. There is no compatibility tax to set against the
  benefit.



                                                 18
• It is cheaper now than later. MCP is young; agentic AI on regulated data is not waiting.
  Retrofitting a trust layer after a large installed base has hard-coded “connect and trust” is far
  costlier than reserving the well-known name and the document shape today.

We have also removed the usual reasons to defer. The extension is given normatively (Section 8.1)
with a JSON Schema, an error registry, a well-known-URI registration, and machine-checkable
conformance vectors, and it ships with a reference implementation whose adversarial evaluation
drives every verification clause with tens of thousands of model-generated inputs. “Incomplete,”
“unproven,” and “it forks the protocol” are no longer available objections. What remains is a decision
the specification’s maintainers are uniquely positioned to make: to let agentic MCP reach regulated
environments by adopting attested tool-server admission as a standard, optional, additive part of
the protocol — rather than leaving each adopter to rebuild it alone.


A       SAD JSON Schema
The Server Attestation Document conforms to the following JSON Schema (Draft 2020-12).
signature covers the canonical body (Definition 1) of all other fields.
{
    "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
    "title": "MCP Server Attestation Document",
    "type": "object",
    "required": ["v","id","publisher","version","clearance",
                 "capabilities","signerKeyId","signature"],
    "additionalProperties": false,
    "properties": {
      "v":            { "const": 1 },
      "id":           { "type": "string", "minLength": 1 },
      "publisher":    { "type": "string", "minLength": 1 },
      "version":      { "type": "string", "minLength": 1 },
      "clearance":    { "type": "string", "minLength": 1,
                        "description": "canonical name or alias in the active scheme" },
      "capabilities": { "type": "array", "items": { "type": "string" },
                        "contains": { "const": "mcp-server" } },
      "signerKeyId": { "type": "string", "minLength": 1 },
      "netAllowedHosts": { "type": "array", "items": { "type": "string" },
                        "description": "optional; non-empty binds the SAD to these origins" },
      "verification": { "type": "string" },
      "signature":    { "type": "string", "contentEncoding": "base64" }
    }
}

                           Listing 4: Server Attestation Document schema.


B      Error registry
When a host surfaces an attestation rejection in-band it should carry a machine-readable reason in
data.reason. The reference reasons, one per verification clause of Property 1:




                                                  19
                data.reason              clause    meaning
                not_mcp_server           (a)       capabilities lacks "mcp-server"
                unsigned                 (b)       signerKeyId/signature absent
                signer_not_trusted       (c)       signer not in trust root
                signer_expired           (d)       signer notAfter elapsed
                signer_not_approved      (e)       signer not approved for level
                bad_signature            (f)       signature does not verify
                below_required           (g)       level below the host’s requirement
                host_not_bound           (h)       origin not in netAllowedHosts
                tool_not_admitted        —         tools/call for a non-allowlisted tool


C     Well-known URI registration
Per RFC 8615 [17], the registration template:

                          URI suffix                mcp-attestation
                          Change controller         MCP maintainers
                          Specification document    this extension (Section 8.1)
                          Status                    permanent (proposed)
                          Media type                application/json

The Enclawed profile additionally serves the same document at /.well-known/enclawed-clearance.json
for backward compatibility with deployed clients.


D     Conformance test vectors
A conforming verifier must reproduce the verdicts below for a trust root containing one signer S
(Ed25519) approved up to restricted-plus, required level restricted-plus. Each vector is a
single-mutation derivation of vector 1, mirroring the reference suite (Section 7); “ADMIT/DENY(x)”
names the deciding clause of Property 1.

                     #    verdict      vector (relative to a valid baseline signed by
                                       S)
                     1    ADMIT        valid                          baseline:
                                       clearance=restricted-plus,       signed
                                       by S, netAllowedHosts=[]
                     2    DENY (a)     capabilities = ["tool.invoke"]
                     3    DENY (b)     signature removed
                     4    DENY (c)     signerKeyId = "unknown"
                     5    DENY (d)     S.notAfter in the past
                     6    DENY (e)     S approved only to internal
                     7    DENY (f)     one byte of signature flipped
                     8    DENY (f)     clearance raised to restricted-plus af-
                                       ter signing at internal
                     9    DENY (g)     clearance=internal,            required
                                       restricted-plus
                     10   DENY (h)     netAllowedHosts=["a.example"], served
                                       from b.example
                     11   ADMIT        netAllowedHosts=["a.example"], served
                                       from a.example


                                                   20
These eleven vectors are the T2 cases of the reference implementation’s adversarial suite and pass
against it; the LLM-driven campaign (Section 7) extends vectors 2–10 to tens of thousands of
model-generated instances (27,025 tool names, 14,378 forged assertions).


Acknowledgements
The author thanks Maaz (@maaz-interlock) of Interlock for critical contributions to the archi-
tectural framing of the admission/runtime boundary and for drafting the normative composition
language for downstream continuous drift-monitoring frameworks (Section 9); and Christopher
Hopley and the AlgoVoi team for deploying the Agent-Trust-Bench production adversarial suite,
which empirically validated the runtime threat taxonomy ATSA closes and supplied the defender-side
baseline data referenced in Sections 3 and 7. Their contributions are reflected in the corresponding
sections of the companion SEP (modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol#2809).


References
 [1] Anthropic. Introducing the model context protocol. https://www.anthropic.com/news/
     model-context-protocol, 2024.

 [2] Anthropic. Model context protocol specification.           https://modelcontextprotocol.io/
     specification, 2024. Accessed 2026.

 [3] D. Elliott Bell and Leonard J. LaPadula. Secure computer systems: Mathematical foundations.
     MITRE Technical Report 2547, I, 1973.

 [4] Cloud Native Computing Foundation. SPIFFE: Secure production identity framework for
     everyone. https://spiffe.io, 2018.

 [5] Enclawed LLC. Enclawed — the compliance layer for agentic ai. https://enclawed.com,
     2026.

 [6] Dick Hardt. The OAuth 2.0 authorization framework. Technical Report RFC 6749, IETF,
     2012.

 [7] Norm Hardy. The confused deputy: (or why capabilities might have been invented), 1988.

 [8] Christopher Hopley and AlgoVoi. Agent-trust-bench: Differential defender-side profiles for multi-
     server mcp deployments. https://agent-trust-bench.algovoi.co.uk/, 2026. Production
     adversarial test suite; differential profiles across 29-tool surfaces evaluating tool-name shadowing,
     dynamic schema drift, and registry poisoning under multiple model personas.

 [9] Simon Josefsson and Ilari Liusvaara. Edwards-curve digital signature algorithm (EdDSA).
     Technical Report RFC 8032, IETF, 2017.

[10] JSON-RPC Working Group. JSON-RPC 2.0 specification. https://www.jsonrpc.org/
     specification, 2013.

[11] Alfredo Metere. An application-layer multi-modal covert-channel reference monitor for LLM
     agent egress. arXiv, https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.20734, 2026. Enclawed LLC preprint.



                                                   21
[12] Alfredo Metere. Methods for formal verification of agent skills: Three layers toward a mechan-
     ically checkable capability-containment proof. Zenodo, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
     20100248, 2026. Enclawed LLC preprint.

[13] MITRE. MITRE ATLAS: Adversarial threat landscape for artificial-intelligence systems.
     https://atlas.mitre.org, 2024.

[14] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Security requirements for cryptographic
     modules. Technical Report FIPS PUB 140-3, NIST, 2019.

[15] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Security and privacy controls for information
     systems and organizations. Technical Report SP 800-53 Rev. 5, NIST, 2020.

[16] Zachary Newman, John Speed Meyers, and Santiago Torres-Arias. Sigstore: Software signing
     for everybody. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
     Communications Security (CCS), pages 2353–2367, 2022.

[17] Mark Nottingham. Well-known uniform resource identifiers (URIs). Technical Report RFC
     8615, IETF, 2019.

[18] OWASP Foundation. OWASP top 10 for large language model applications. https://owasp.
     org/www-project-top-10-for-large-language-model-applications/, 2025.

[19] Traian Rebedea, Razvan Dinu, Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar, Christopher Parisien, and Jonathan
     Cohen. NeMo guardrails: A toolkit for controllable and safe LLM applications with pro-
     grammable rails. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
     Language Processing: System Demonstrations (EMNLP), pages 431–445, 2023.

[20] Eric Rescorla. The transport layer security (TLS) protocol version 1.3. Technical Report RFC
     8446, IETF, 2018.

[21] Jerome H. Saltzer and Michael D. Schroeder. The protection of information in computer
     systems. In Proceedings of the IEEE, volume 63, pages 1278–1308, 1975.

[22] Justin Samuel, Nick Mathewson, Justin Cappos, and Roger Dingledine. Survivable key
     compromise in software update systems. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on
     Computer and Communications Security (CCS), pages 61–72, 2010.

[23] Santiago Torres-Arias, Hammad Afzali, Trishank Karthik Kuppusamy, Reza Curtmola, and
     Justin Cappos. in-toto: Providing farm-to-table guarantees for bits and bytes. In 28th USENIX
     Security Symposium (USENIX Security), pages 1393–1410, 2019.




                                               22
