                                                    TraceGraph: Shared Decision Landscapes for
                                                    Diagnosing and Improving Agent Trajectories

                                                     Junjie Nian1* , Kang Chen1* , Ge Zhang2 , Yixin Cao1,3† , Yugang Jiang1
                                                                                   ,            ,
                                                                  1 Fudan University 2 ByteDance 3 Shanghai Innovation Institute




arXiv:2605.31308v1 [cs.AI] 29 May 2026
                                                                                           Abstract
                                              Agent benchmarks increasingly record rich interaction trajectories, yet evaluation often reduces each
                                              rollout to a pass rate or reward score. We introduce TraceGraph, a graph-based framework that turns
                                              released multi-model agent trajectories into shared decision landscapes. For each task, TraceGraph
                                              builds a graph over observable action–observation states from pooled rollouts before model identity
                                              is introduced. It then overlays outcome-informed productive cores and trap regions, and summarizes
                                              each rollout with three events: Access, Trap exposure, and Repair. Across trajectories spanning five
                                              benchmark splits, TraceGraph profiles reveal navigation differences hidden by aggregate scores
                                              and show that splits differ in whether they reward avoiding traps or recovering from them. The same
                                              TraceGraph landscape also motivates a trap-aware recovery pipeline for SWE-bench: a runtime
                                              detector fires on states matching historical trap regions, then lightweight continuation policies are
                                              evaluated from the same prefix. On fired states, the best pooled single-factor policy raises official
                                              resolved rate from 40.4% to 43.5% on the per-provider fired subset and from 41.0% to 44.8% on
                                              common-fired instances, with provider-specific active components. Overall, TraceGraph provides
                                              a process vocabulary for asking what agent benchmarks test, where models diverge on a shared
                                              landscape, and how failure regions can guide downstream improvement.

                                              Correspondence: yxcao@fudan.edu.cn




                                         1    Introduction
                                         Language models first made intermediate computation visible through chain-of-thought prompting and
                                         self-consistency sampling [16, 18]. Agent benchmarks extend this trace to interleaved thoughts, tool calls, and
                                         environment feedback, as in ReAct and Toolformer-style tool use [13, 22]. Yet most reports still collapse each
                                         rollout to one scalar: a pass/fail label, reward score, or leaderboard average. Such scores rank systems, but
                                         they do not reveal what process a benchmark rewards.
                                         The challenge is that these process differences are not exposed as aligned units. Agent trajectories are
                                         long, branching, and benchmark-specific; their states mix tool choices, observations, file cues, environment
                                         feedback, and partial evidence. A single rollout can be inspected manually, but such inspection does not
                                         tell us whether another model reached an analogous state, avoided the same failure region, or recovered
                                         through a different route. What is missing is a shared coordinate system for comparing many trajectories as
                                         movements through the same task landscape.
                                             * Contributed equally.
                                             † Corresponding author.


                                                                                                1
We introduce TraceGraph, a framework that analyzes agent
behavior not by inspecting individual trajectories in isolation,
but by placing many trajectories from different models onto a
shared graph-based decision landscape using observable action-
observation signatures. The key hypothesis is that, once trajec-
tories are aligned through observable action–observation states,
model behaviors are not arbitrary traces: they form recurring
traffic patterns over task-specific regions. TraceGraph then over-
lays outcome-informed productive cores and trap regions, and
summarizes each rollout with three events: reaching a core (Ac-
cess), entering a trap (Trap exposure), and returning from a trap to
a core (Repair). The name reflects the workflow: traces become         Figure 1 Pass rates can hide process di-
graphs, and models are compared by how they move through               versity. Left: three models score within
the resulting landscape. These roles use terminal outcomes by          3 points on the same benchmark. Right:
design, so TraceGraph is descriptive rather than a blind success       on a shared decision landscape built from
predictor: given a common map, what process does each model            pooled rollouts, they follow distinct paths:
supply, and what process does each benchmark demand?                   broad exploration with repair, shallow trap
                                                                       avoidance, or high-access navigation with
A shared landscape is useful not only for retrospective diagnosis,     more trap exposure.
but also for deciding when a live agent trajectory has entered a
historically risky region. If trap regions correspond to repeatable
trajectory states, an online detector built from those states should identify moments where a small recovery
policy can help. We therefore instantiate a TraceGraph-guided trap-aware prefix-fork pipeline on the
benchmark with the clearest positive Repair demand. An agent proceeds until a trap detector fires; matched
continuations then resume from the same state while varying a conservative diagnosis note and a temperature
bump. The goal is not to claim a universal recovery mechanism, but to show that graph-derived traps can
guide a downstream policy that improves task resolution.
Our contributions can be summarized:
    • TraceGraph for shared decision landscapes. We construct model-agnostic task graphs from pooled
      rollouts, then overlay outcome-informed core and trap regions after graph construction.
    • A compact process profile. Across a five-split trajectory release spanning 7,329 records, 427 tasks,
      and five models, Access, Trap exposure, and Repair separate model navigation styles and benchmark
      demands that aggregate scores collapse.
    • A TraceGraph-guided recovery pipeline. Because SWE-bench shows the clearest positive Repair
      demand, we turn graph-derived traps into runtime triggers and test two single-factor recovery policies
      on all 500 SWE-bench Verified instances. The best pooled policy improves resolved rate by +3.1 points
      (𝑝=0.016) on the per-provider fired subset and by +3.8 points (𝑝=0.045) on common-fired instances,
      while the active component differs by provider.

2   Related Work
Outcome-centered evaluation. Frameworks such as HELM and the LM Evaluation Harness emphasize coverage,
transparency, and reproducibility across many tasks and metrics [6, 9]. Agent benchmarks bring this apparatus
to interactive settings, including software repair, tool use, and general agent environments [7, 11, 23]. They
are indispensable for tracking progress, but their headline artifacts usually summarize final success. We
reuse the released logs for a complementary purpose: describing the process demands that separate high-
and low-outcome trajectories.

Process traces, failure patterns, and intervention. Chain-of-thought and self-consistency showed that sampled
traces expose alternative reasoning paths before answers are aggregated [16, 18]. ReAct, Toolformer, WebShop,


                                                       2
Figure 2 Overview of TraceGraph. Stage 1: action–observation steps from five benchmark splits are encoded into
sparse observable keys and compared via IDF-weighted Jaccard similarity. Stage 2: all model rollouts are pooled into a
mutual-𝑘NN graph, decomposed into BCCs and articulation gates, then annotated with outcome-informed overlays
(productive cores, trap regions). Stage 3: three rollout events—Access, Trap, and Repair—are read from each model’s
path. The same trap overlay later seeds a runtime trigger for a lightweight SWE-bench recovery pipeline.


and ALFWorld extended this process view to tool use and environment interaction [13, 14, 20, 22]. Recent
intervention work also treats long-trace failures as actionable: Trap-Aware Adaptive Restart identifies
“thinking traps” and restarts from earlier reasoning prefixes [4]. We study an analogous but distinct setting:
tool-using software agents, where trap states are observable action–observation signatures and continuations
resume from a live benchmark state.

Graphs as inference programs and measurement objects. Tree-of-Thoughts and Graph-of-Thoughts use graph
structure during inference to guide search [2, 21]. Other work uses graphs after generation to cluster chain-of-
thought units, analyze trace topology, and model software-agent processes over exploration, localization,
patching, validation, and loops [10, 15, 19]. A related methodological precedent is SliceGraph, a post-hoc
atlas of same-answer chain-of-thought route isomerism over hidden activation slices [3]. TraceGraph adopts
this graph-as-measurement perspective, but shifts the object to observable agent states, multi-model task
graphs, benchmark-level process demand, and trap-triggered recovery on SWE-bench.

3     TraceGraph: Building Shared Decision Landscapes
TraceGraph takes as input a set of agent rollouts and returns a shared decision landscape with three readable
rollout events. For a task 𝑡, let ℛ𝑡 = 𝑚 ℛ𝑡,𝑚 be all rollouts from all available models. Because the released
                                      Ð
data contain only a few passes per model per task, TraceGraph builds one landscape from ℛ𝑡 and compares
models only after that landscape is fixed. This separation is central to the framework: graph construction
defines the terrain, while model and benchmark analyses are overlays on that terrain.

3.1    Stage 1: Building the Shared Landscape
Each action–observation step 𝑖 is encoded as a sparse set of observable keys 𝐾 𝑖 : tool and action type, command
class, observation pattern, file cue, temporal phase, and a pre-specified search-interaction family for Search.
Pairwise similarity is IDF-weighted Jaccard overlap over key sets,

                                                            𝑘∈𝐾 𝑖 ∩𝐾 𝑗 idf(𝑘)
                                                        Í
                                            sim(𝑖, 𝑗) = Í                       ,                                  (1)
                                                            𝑘∈𝐾 𝑖 ∪𝐾 𝑗 idf(𝑘)




                                                          3
so rare and more informative keys like a specific traceback pattern at a specific file weigh more than generic
ones like a bare ”read” action. We convert this to a distance 𝑑(𝑖, 𝑗) = 1 − sim(𝑖, 𝑗); among mutual-𝑘NN pairs,
the graph edge weight is 𝑤 𝑖𝑗 = exp(−𝑑(𝑖, 𝑗)/𝜎) with fixed scale 𝜎. For each task we build this mutual-𝑘NN
graph over all pooled steps, then decompose it into biconnected components (BCCs) and articulation points.
The BCC decomposition is the structural foundation of the landscape: each BCC groups steps that share dense
mutual similarity, and the articulation points (or gates) between BCCs mark strategy or phase transitions—places
where a rollout can branch into qualitatively different continuations. A separate annotation pass confirms
that 82 of 100 graph-identified articulation crossings correspond to a human-judged strategy or phase change
(4.6× enrichment over random consecutive steps; see §4.2). Model identity is never part of the signature,
distance, or graph construction. The exact key alphabet and fixed graph hyperparameters are in Appendix C.1
and Appendix 3.

3.2   Stage 2: Outcome Overlays
On top of the fixed BCC structure, we add two outcome-informed overlays. Let 𝐺 𝐵 = (ℬ𝑡 , 𝐸𝐵 ) be the block
quotient graph, whose nodes are BCC blocks. For a block 𝑏, let ℛ𝑏 = {𝑟 : 𝑏 ∈ 𝑉𝑟 } be the rollouts that visit it
and let 𝑦𝑟 ∈ [0, 1] be the terminal outcome (binary for all benchmarks except the max-normalized MCPBench
reward). We assign each block a Laplace-smoothed reward,
                                                              1
                                                   𝑟∈ℛ𝑏 𝑦 𝑟 + 2
                                               Í
                                      𝜇ˆ 𝑏 =                      ,    𝑠 𝑏 = 𝜇ˆ 𝑏 − 𝑦¯𝑡 ,                         (2)
                                                   |ℛ𝑏 | + 1

where 𝑦¯𝑡 is the mean outcome over rollouts of task 𝑡. To avoid treating each block independently, we diffuse
this centered reward over the quotient graph:

                                               𝑣 (ℓ +1) = 𝛼𝑃𝐵⊤ 𝑣 (ℓ ) + (1 − 𝛼)𝑠,                                 (3)

where 𝑃𝐵 is the row-normalized weighted adjacency matrix of 𝐺 𝐵 and 𝑣 (0) = 𝑠. After fixed-step diffusion and
𝐿∞ normalization, the productive core and trap masks are the high positive and low negative quantiles,
                                                                      +
                                          𝐶𝑡 = {𝑏 : 𝑣 𝑏 > 0 ∧ 𝑣 𝑏 ≥ 𝑄 .75 },
                                                                      −
                                          𝐵𝑡 = {𝑏 : 𝑣 𝑏 < 0 ∧ 𝑣 𝑏 ≤ 𝑄 .25 },                                      (4)

where 𝑄 .75
         +
            is the 75th percentile among positive field values and 𝑄 .25−
                                                                           is the 25th percentile among negative
field values. These overlays are descriptive: they locate where high- and low-outcome traffic concentrates,
rather than predicting outcomes for unseen runs. Thus 𝐶𝑡 and 𝐵𝑡 are not semantic labels like “good action”
or “bad action”; a trap block can still contain exploratory traffic (see §4.2).

3.3   Stage 3: Rollout Events
The final TraceGraph representation uses only three rollout events, all defined on core/trap overlays. For a
rollout 𝑟, let 𝑉𝑟 be its visited block set and 𝑏 𝑟,1:𝑇𝑟 its compact block sequence. Access asks whether 𝑉𝑟 intersects
𝐶𝑡 . Trap exposure asks whether 𝑉𝑟 intersects 𝐵𝑡 . Repair asks whether the sequence visits a trap and later
reaches a core.

                                      𝐴𝑟 = 1[𝑉𝑟 ∩ 𝐶𝑡 ≠ ∅],
                                       𝐸𝑟 = 1[𝑉𝑟 ∩ 𝐵𝑡 ≠ ∅],
                                       𝑅 𝑟 = 1[∃𝑠 < 𝑢 : 𝑏 𝑟,𝑠 ∈ 𝐵𝑡 , 𝑏 𝑟,𝑢 ∈ 𝐶𝑡 ].                                (5)

For binary-reward benchmarks, the rollout outcome is the recorded binary success/reward field; for
MCPBench, it is the per-task max-normalized continuous reward. Appendix B.2 gives full definitions.




                                                                  4
3.4     Supply and Demand Profiles
TraceGraph turns the three events into two descriptive summaries. A model’s supply is the task-centered
mean of its rollout events,
                                    𝑆𝑚,𝑎 = 𝔼𝑡 𝑎 𝑚,𝑡 − 𝔼𝑚 ′ ∈𝑀𝑡 𝑎 𝑚 ′ ,𝑡 ,                            (6)
                                                                      

where 𝑎 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐸, 𝑅} and 𝑎 𝑚,𝑡 is the average event value for model 𝑚 on task 𝑡. A benchmark’s demand is the
reward-weighted contrast between high- and low-outcome traffic,

                                                     𝑟∈𝑏 𝑦 𝑟 𝑎 𝑟    𝑟∈𝑏 (1 − 𝑦 𝑟 )𝑎 𝑟
                                                   Í              Í
                                            𝐷𝑏,𝑎 =               − Í                  .                                    (7)
                                                          𝑟∈𝑏 𝑦 𝑟       𝑟∈𝑏 (1 − 𝑦 𝑟 )
                                                    Í

For binary rewards this is simply the mean event value among resolved rollouts minus the mean event value
among failed rollouts. For MCPBench it is the continuous analogue using normalized reward. We use these
profiles for interpretation, not as a score-prediction model.

4     Graph Analysis with TraceGraph
4.1     Data and Setup

Split           Records Models Process focus
MCPBench             899      5   MCP tool orchestration
Search             3,270      5   Web search and answer synthesis
SWE-bench            747      5   Repository editing and tests
𝜏2 -bench            984      5   API use under policies
TerminalBench      1,429      5   Command-line tasks


Table 1 Trajectory records in the five retained release splits before graph-validity filtering. Each task is attempted by five
models with up to roughly four passes per model, with some missing or filtered attempts.


We analyze the gated cx-cmu agent trajectory release on Hugging Face [5]. The analyzed splits include tool
orchestration, web-search answer synthesis, software repair, API-policy interaction, and command-line tasks
from MCPBench [17], the Search split of the cx-cmu trajectory release [5], SWE-bench [7], 𝜏2 -bench [1],
and TerminalBench [12]. The public dataset card describes several benchmark splits and multiple passes
from the same five models on the same tasks; it records Search as a split label with web-search trajectories
for answering complex questions, including browsecomp, webvoyager, and mind2web domains [5]. We
therefore use Search as the release split name rather than as a standalone benchmark title, while noting
that the release tool inventory is reconstructed from the General-AgentBench source tree [5, 8]. We use the
five splits with rich tool or environment interaction and exclude the short math split, leaving a retained
release subset of 7,329 trajectory records on 427 tasks before graph-validity filtering. The analyzed trajectories
are English-language task interactions with code, tool, or API observations. The models are DeepSeek-R1,
DeepSeek-V3.2, Gemini-2.5-Flash, Qwen3-235B, and Qwen3-Next.
For the four binary-reward splits, 𝑦𝑟 is the recorded binary success/reward flag: for example, SWE-bench
uses resolved-style issue success, whereas Search uses the binary score recorded in the release. For
MCPBench, which reports a continuous multi-criteria score, we use per-task max-normalized reward. This
avoids introducing a binary threshold for a split that is near-saturated under a positive-reward rule. For
Search, we add pre-specified search-interaction keys for URL domain, query novelty, and cumulative source
diversity; exact extraction rules are in Appendix C.1.

4.2     Do TraceGraph Landscapes Expose Interpretable Agent States?
We first check whether a TraceGraph landscape is a usable measurement scaffold. The evidence is
deliberately modest: it asks whether the graph units are interpretable enough to support analysis, not whether
every block has a perfect semantic label.


                                                                    5
                                                                         50                                              60
SWE-bench                                      +89                             44                                                Core
                                                                         40                 38                           50      Trap                          48%



                                                     Crossings (/ 100)
 MCPBench                                      +47
                                                                         30                                              40                      36%     36%

                                                                                                            Blocks (%)
                                                                                                                              34%
   ²-bench                                   +66                                                                                           30%
                                                                                                    18                   30
                                                                         20
   Search                                +29                                                                             20         16%
                                                                         10
  Terminal                            +25                                                                                10
                                                                          0
             0   20     40      60     80      100                             Clear       Minor     No                   0
                  Pairs judged similar (%)                                    change       shift   change                     Productive   Exploration    Other

Figure 3 Human annotation checks for graph-derived states. (a) Within-BCC step pairs are judged similar far more
often than across-BCC pairs on every benchmark (overall 84.8% vs. 40.2% after dropping unsure labels; Fisher OR = 8.30).
(b) Of 100 graph-identified articulation crossings, 82 show a strategy or phase change (4.6× the random baseline, dashed
line). (c) Core blocks are annotated as productive progress 2.1× more often than trap blocks (34% vs. 16%); 36% of trap
blocks are exploration rather than dead ends.


Block semantics. Two annotators scored 400 blinded BCC pairs, split evenly between within-BCC and across-
BCC pairs. After dropping unsure labels, within-BCC pairs were marked similar 84.8% of the time (162/191),
compared with 40.2% for across-BCC pairs (72/179; Fisher exact OR=8.30, 𝑝 = 1.4 × 10−19 ). Per-benchmark
gaps range from +89 percentage points on SWE-bench to +25 percentage points on TerminalBench; Search
has a +29 point gap under the pre-enrichment signature. This supports reading BCCs as coarse shared agent
states (Figure 3a).

Articulations and regions. A second annotation pass scored 100 graph-identified articulation crossings.
Eighty-two show at least a minor strategy or phase change, a 4.6× enrichment over random consecutive steps
(Figure 3b). We use this as a graph-construction sanity check, not as a main supply–demand axis. A third
pass scored 50 core blocks and 50 trap blocks. Core blocks are 2.1× more likely than trap blocks to be judged
productive progress (34% vs. 16%, Fisher 𝑝 = 0.032), and region-consistent extreme labels—productive core
blocks and looping/dead-end trap blocks—outnumber inconsistent extremes 35 to 11. However, 36% of trap
blocks are judged exploration, so a trap is best understood as a low-outcome region, not necessarily useless
behavior (Figure 3c).

Why a shared graph? Pooled graphs produce an average of 16.1 non-trivial blocks across 408 valid tasks,
enough to compare several models as traffic on the same terrain. Per-model graphs are much smaller because
each model contributes only a few rollouts per task. A representation ablation further shows that the full
multi-channel signature has the broadest valid-task coverage; the ablation is kept in Appendix B.4 because it
is a sanity check rather than the semantic core of the paper.

4.3     What Process Profiles Do Models Exhibit?
Once the landscape is fixed, model identity is traffic over the same terrain. Figure 4a shows model supply as
a heatmap; exact values with bootstrap CIs are in Appendix Table 5. Positive values mean the model exhibits
that event more often than the average model on the same tasks; for Trap exposure, lower values mean more
avoidance.
The profiles give model descriptions rather than a new ranking. DeepSeek-V3.2 is the clearest high-access,
high-repair model: its Access and Repair CIs are both positive, while Trap is nearly neutral. Qwen3-Next
is low-access and low-repair, with lower Trap supply; this looks less like robust recovery and more like
conservative, shallow navigation. Qwen3-235B shows mildly elevated Access and marginally elevated Trap
exposure, suggesting a less conservative exploration style, but its Repair interval overlaps zero. DeepSeek-R1
is near-balanced, and Gemini-2.5-Flash has lower Access and Repair supply in this corpus.




                                                                                       6
                                                                                                            MCPBench +0.216                -0.166          +0.020         0.8
      DeepSeek-R1 -0.022              +0.012    +0.007
                                                                0.10                                                                                                      0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                 High low outcome contrast
  DeepSeek-V3.2 +0.098                +0.018   +0.040                                                             Search +0.468            +0.014         +0.029          0.4



                                                                        Task-centered residual
                                                                0.05                                                                                                      0.2
Gemini-2.5-Flash -0.022               -0.024   -0.017           0.00                                       SWE-bench +0.769                +0.065         +0.111          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                            0.2
      Qwen3-235B +0.016 +0.028                  +0.011            0.05                                           ²-bench +0.519            -0.401          +0.032           0.4
                                                                                                                                                                            0.6
                                                                  0.10
      Qwen3-Next -0.092               -0.042   -0.049                                                  TerminalBench +0.689                -0.124          +0.006           0.8
                      Access            Trap    Repair                                                                          Access      Trap           Repair
Figure 4 Supply–demand profile heatmaps. (a) Model supply: task-centered event residuals; DeepSeek-V3.2 is distinctly
high-Access/high-Repair, while Qwen3-Next is low on both. (b) Benchmark demand: resolved-minus-failed contrasts
(or the reward-weighted analogue on MCPBench); Access is universally positive, 𝜏2 -bench is strongly Trap-averse,
MCPBench/TerminalBench are also negative on Trap, and SWE-bench has by far the strongest positive Repair
demand. Filled markers (•) denote 95% bootstrap CIs excluding zero.


                    B8                                                                           B8
                    B5         B4                                                                B5        B4                       Next
                               B6                                                                          B6
                          B0                                                                          B0                           235B
             B11                 B9                                   B11                                  B9
                                                                                                                                  Gemini
                                                                                                                                    V3.2                          R
                                                                                                                                     R1                                     R
          Core     Trap   Gate         Other             R1: repair             Gemini: direct                  Next: trapped                      Core    Trap   Gate   Other

Figure 5 A shared landscape on SWE-bench task django-9296. (a) Block quotient graph: nodes are BCC blocks
(green=core, amber=trap, blue=articulation landmark, gray=other). (b) Three trajectories as arrows: DeepSeek-R1 repairs
from B6 back to core; Gemini navigates directly; Qwen3-Next (dashed) cycles in B9↔B6 without escaping. (c) Block
ribbons per model; ✓ /× marks resolution, R marks Repair.


4.4     What Process Demands Do Benchmarks Impose?
We next ask which events separate high-outcome from low-outcome traffic inside each benchmark. Figure 4b
shows the demand heatmap; exact values with bootstrap CIs are in Appendix Table 6. On binary splits this is
resolved minus failed traffic; on MCPBench it is the continuous reward-weighted analogue.
Access is broadly shared: every split has a positive Access demand with CIs excluding zero. The more
diagnostic differences are Trap and Repair.

Trap-averse benchmarks. 𝜏2 -bench has the most negative Trap demand (−0.401), while MCPBench (−0.166)
and TerminalBench (−0.124) are also trap-averse with intervals below zero. High-outcome rollouts in
these splits avoid low-outcome regions, which matches settings where state updates, protocol mistakes, or
invalid tool choices can be difficult to undo. MCPBench also has a clearly positive Access demand (+0.216),
suggesting that successful tool-orchestration trajectories must both reach productive regions and avoid
drifting into low-outcome states. This explains why lower-Trap supply can be useful even when a model is
otherwise low-access.

Repair-heavy software tasks. SWE-bench has the strongest Repair demand (+0.111) and the strongest Access
demand (+0.769), both with positive intervals. Successful repository-editing trajectories must both reach
productive code regions and recover after failed tests, wrong files, or bad edits. This makes SWE-bench the


                                                                                                  7
natural setting for the TraceGraph-guided recovery pipeline in §5: the intended lever is not trap avoidance,
but recovery after a trap-like state. By contrast, the negative Trap demand on 𝜏2 -bench and MCPBench
suggests a different design target, namely preventing risky state updates before they occur, so we do not use a
repair-style diagnosis policy as the pipeline test for those splits.

Search as access-and-repair. Search is not trap-averse in this signature, but it has positive Access demand
(+0.468) and a smaller positive Repair demand (+0.029). Under the evidence-quality keys, high-outcome
search rollouts are distinguished mainly by reaching productive evidence states, with occasional recovery
from unproductive query paths.
Together, the supply and demand profiles make the central point: benchmarks are not simply harder or easier
versions of the same task. They reward different process events, and models align with those demands in
different ways. Figure 4 visualises both matrices as heatmaps; filled markers denote bootstrap CIs excluding
zero. Figure 5 concretizes this on a single SWE-bench task, showing how three models navigate the same
shared landscape with visibly different strategies.

5     TraceGraph-Guided Trap-Aware Recovery
The TraceGraph analysis asks where high- and low-outcome traffic concentrates on a shared task map.
We next test whether that map can guide a small recovery pipeline: act only when a live rollout reaches a
state resembling historical traps, and use only information already visible in the agent’s context. Because
§4.4 shows that SWE-bench most strongly demands recovery after trap exposure, we instantiate trap-aware
recovery on SWE-bench and measure official resolved rate after trap-triggered continuations. The goal is not
a universal repair algorithm, but a test of whether graph-derived traps identify states where a lightweight,
non-oracular continuation change helps.

                    Provider                        𝑛fired        Baseline           Hot              Note
                                                             (𝑇=0.6, no note)   (𝑇=0.9, no note)   (𝑇=0.6, note)

                                 Per-provider fired subset (each provider’s own complete set)
                    Qwen3.6-35B-A3B                  214            29.4          30.8 (+1.4)      34.1 (+4.7)
                    GLM-5.1                          196            48.0          52.6 (+4.6)      49.5 (+1.5)
                    DeepSeek-V4-Pro                  206            44.7          48.1 (+3.4)      45.6 (+1.0)
                    Pooled (3-prov, 𝑛=616 cells)     616            40.4          43.5 (+3.1)      42.9 (+2.4)
                                Common-fired subset (same 96 instances, all three providers)
                    Qwen3.6-35B-A3B                   96            31.2          31.2             34.4 (+3.1)
                    GLM-5.1                           96            50.0          56.2 (+6.2)      52.1 (+2.1)
                    DeepSeek-V4-Pro                   96            41.7          46.9 (+5.2)      44.8 (+3.1)
                    Pooled (3-prov, 𝑛=288 cells)     288            41.0          44.8 (+3.8)      43.8 (+2.8)

Table 2 TraceGraph-guided trap-aware recovery on the full 500-instance SWE-bench Verified pool. Cells report
official resolved rate (%); parentheses show paired gain over Baseline. Gains are computed from unrounded paired
outcomes, so they may differ by 0.1 pp from subtracting displayed rounded rates. Best non-Baseline cells are bold-shaded.
Appendix B.10 reports uncertainty; Appendix B.11 gives cases.


5.1   From Trap Regions to Runtime Triggers
TraceGraph converts the trap overlay into a runtime detector by storing canonicalized key sets from trap-side
states, such as ACTION:edit, OBS:error, TOOL:<name>, and local file-path cues. Generic phase and
non-tool keys are stripped so the detector matches recurring failure contexts rather than full traces. A second



                                                              8
library comes from high-committor non-trap states. At a live step 𝑠, the detector computes the candidate key
set 𝑞 𝑠 and scores

                                          simtrap (𝑠) = max 𝐽idf (𝑞 𝑠 , 𝑢),
                                                         𝑢∈𝒯
                                          simcore (𝑠) = max 𝐽idf (𝑞 𝑠 , 𝑢),                                  (8)
                                                         𝑢∈𝒩

where 𝒯 and 𝒩 are the trap and non-trap libraries. A trigger fires when trap similarity clears a fixed threshold
and exceeds core similarity by a margin (Appendix Table 7). For SWE-bench, the current step must also
carry a local file-path cue, and the candidate action must be an edit or submit action. These local checks keep
the trigger tied to observable graph signatures while reducing fires on generic exploration.

5.2    Prefix-Fork Recovery Policy
When the detector fires, we snapshot the docker workspace and conversation prefix, then continue from that
identical state under three policies. The no-intervention Baseline continues at 𝑇=0.6 with no added note. Hot
raises temperature to 𝑇=0.9 with top-𝑝=0.95. Note keeps 𝑇=0.6 and appends a conservative diagnosis note
drawn only from the agent’s recent log: the last action, observation signal, implicated file or target keys,
detector confidence, and a family-level diagnosis. The note asks the agent to re-read the failing evidence,
localize narrowly, make one minimal change, and revise or discard the edit if the evidence does not support it.
No arm receives a gold patch, verified-test list, or oracle information.
This prefix-fork design compares the same trap state with no pipeline action, extra sampling diversity, or
evidence-grounded localization. We report official SWE-bench resolved rate in Table 2; Appendix B.10
provides paired uncertainty estimates.

5.3    Downstream Accuracy Improves at Trap-Triggered States
The experiment uses the full 500-instance SWE-bench Verified pool at seed 11, spanning 12 repositories and
three continuation providers not used in the observational graph analysis: Qwen3.6-35B-A3B, GLM-5.1, and
DeepSeek-V4-Pro. Table 2 reports each provider’s complete fired subset and a common-fired subset of 96
instances where all providers fire and complete all three arms.
TraceGraph-triggered recovery improves downstream resolution on fired states. In the per-provider fired
subset, pooled Hot raises resolved rate from 40.4% to 43.5% (+3.1 pp, 𝑝=0.016), and pooled Note reaches
42.9% (+2.4 pp, 𝑝=0.064). The common-fired subset shows the same pattern: Hot increases pooled resolved
rate from 41.0% to 44.8% (+3.8 pp, 𝑝=0.045). Thus a trap region discovered from shared offline trajectories
can become a runtime trigger that improves a downstream metric.
The active recovery route is provider-specific: Qwen3.6-35B-A3B benefits most from the diagnosis note
(+4.7 pp, 𝑝=0.036), while GLM-5.1 (+4.6 pp, 𝑝=0.037) and DeepSeek-V4-Pro (+3.4 pp) benefit most from the
temperature bump.
Appendix B.10 reports the full component statistics and the conservative diagnosis template; Appendix B.11
gives case studies showing how the same trigger state can lead to different provider-specific recoveries.

6     Discussion and Conclusion
TraceGraph is neither another scalar score nor a blind success predictor. Its outcome-informed core and
trap regions are descriptive: they show where successful and failed traffic concentrates on a shared map,
turning each rollout into a process reading over Access, Trap exposure, and Repair. This exposes differences
hidden by aggregate scores. DeepSeek-V3.2 is the clearest high-access, high-repair model, Qwen3-Next is
conservative and shallow, and other models lie between them (§4.3). Benchmarks also impose different
process demands: 𝜏2 -bench is strongly trap-averse, MCPBench and TerminalBench are negative on Trap,
SWE-bench adds Repair demand, and Search mainly rewards productive evidence access (§4.4). Thus,


                                                         9
benchmark difficulty is better understood as a mixture of exploration, avoidance, and recovery demands
rather than a hidden factor.
The recovery experiment shows that this map can guide a small downstream intervention without becoming
a full controller. Graph-derived traps trigger prefix-fork continuations only when a live SWE-bench rollout
enters a historical failure region. On fired states from the 500-instance SWE-bench Verified pool, the best
pooled single-factor policy raises resolved rate by +3.1 points on the per-provider fired subset and by +3.8
points on common-fired instances .

7   Limitations
The TraceGraph landscape roles are outcome-informed, so the framework is an analytical instrument for
explaining where high- and low-outcome traffic concentrates, not a blind success predictor. The source
data contains roughly four passes per model per task across five observational models; shared graphs
mitigate sparsity for landscape construction but not for cell-level inference. For MCPBench, a per-task
max-normalized continuous reward replaces binarization but treats the per-task maximum as the local ceiling,
which it may not be. The symbolic signature captures tool, command, observation, file, and phase cues, but
may miss fine-grained natural-language semantics, especially for Search. The TraceGraph-guided recovery
pipeline applies only to a structurally selected SWE-bench fired subset and three continuation providers, so
its gains should be read as local downstream improvements rather than as a universal agent-repair result.




                                                    10
References
 [1] Victor Barres, Honghua Dong, Soham Ray, Xujie Si, and Karthik Narasimhan. 𝜏2 -bench: Evaluating conversational
     agents in a dual-control environment, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07982.
 [2] Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda,
     Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, and Torsten Hoefler. Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate
     problems with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2024. doi:
     10.1609/aaai.v38i16.29720. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/29720.
 [3] Kang Chen, Junjie Nian, Yixin Cao, and Yugang Jiang. SliceGraph: Mapping process isomers in multi-run
     chain-of-thought reasoning, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.14619.
 [4] Kang Chen, Fan Yu, Junjie Nian, Shihan Zhao, Zhuoka Feng, Zĳun Yao, Heng Wang, Minshen Yu, and Yixin
     Cao. Thinking traps in long chain-of-thought: A measurable study and trap-aware adaptive restart, 2026. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.11940.
 [5] Chenyan Xiong Research Group at CMU. Agent trajectories dataset: Processing and format documentation. Hugging
     Face dataset, 2026. URL https://huggingface.co/datasets/cx-cmu/agent_trajectories.
 [6] Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence
     Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang,
     Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin
     Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework for few-shot language model evaluation. Zenodo, December 2023. URL
     https://zenodo.org/records/10256836. Version v0.4.0.
 [7] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan.
     SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world GitHub issues? In Proceedings of the Twelfth International
     Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
 [8] Xiaochuan Li, Ryan Ming, Pranav Setlur, Abhĳay Paladugu, Andy Tang, Hao Kang, Shuai Shao, Rong Jin, and Chenyan
     Xiong. Benchmark test-time scaling of general LLM agents, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.18998.
 [9] Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian Zhang,
     Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, Benjamin Newman, Binhang Yuan, Bobby Yan, Ce Zhang,
     Christian Alexander Cosgrove, Christopher D. Manning, Christopher Re, Diana Acosta-Navas, Drew Arad Hudson,
     Eric Zelikman, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda Rong, Hongyu Ren, Huaxiu Yao, Jue Wang, Keshav Santhanam,
     Laurel Orr, Lucia Zheng, Mert Yuksekgonul, Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Kim, Neel Guha, Niladri S. Chatterji, Omar
     Khattab, Peter Henderson, Qian Huang, Ryan Andrew Chi, Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Surya Ganguli,
     Tatsunori Hashimoto, Thomas Icard, Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav Chaudhary, William Wang, Xuechen Li, Yifan Mai, Yuhui
     Zhang, and Yuta Koreeda. HELM: Holistic evaluation of language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research,
     2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=iO4LZibEqW. Featured Certification, Expert Certification.
[10] Shuyang Liu, Yang Chen, Rahul Krishna, Saurabh Sinha, Jatin Ganhotra, and Reyhan Jabbarvand. Process-centric
     analysis of agentic software systems, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.02393.
[11] Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan
     Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su,
     Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. In Proceedings of
     the Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
     zAdUB0aCTQ.
[12] Mike A. Merrill, Alexander G. Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich, Lin Shi, Jeong Yeon
     Shin, Thomas Walshe, E. Kelly Buchanan, Junhong Shen, Guanghao Ye, Haowei Lin, Jason Poulos, Maoyu Wang,
     Marianna Nezhurina, Jenia Jitsev, Di Lu, Orfeas Menis Mastromichalakis, Zhiwei Xu, Zizhao Chen, Yue Liu, Robert
     Zhang, Leon Liangyu Chen, Anurag Kashyap, Jan-Lucas Uslu, Jeffrey Li, Jianbo Wu, Minghao Yan, Song Bian,
     Vedang Sharma, Ke Sun, Steven Dillmann, Akshay Anand, Andrew Lanpouthakoun, Bardia Koopah, Changran Hu,
     Etash Guha, Gabriel H. S. Dreiman, Jiacheng Zhu, Karl Krauth, Li Zhong, Niklas Muennighoff, Robert Amanfu,
     Shangyin Tan, Shreyas Pimpalgaonkar, Tushar Aggarwal, Xiangning Lin, Xin Lan, Xuandong Zhao, Yiqing Liang,
     Yuanli Wang, Zilong Wang, Changzhi Zhou, David Heineman, Hange Liu, Harsh Trivedi, John Yang, Junhong Lin,
     Manish Shetty, Michael Yang, Nabil Omi, Negin Raoof, Shanda Li, Terry Yue Zhuo, Wuwei Lin, Yiwei Dai, Yuxin



                                                         11
     Wang, Wenhao Chai, Shang Zhou, Dariush Wahdany, Ziyu She, Jiaming Hu, Zhikang Dong, Yuxuan Zhu, Sasha
     Cui, Ahson Saiyed, Arinbjörn Kolbeinsson, Jesse Hu, Christopher Michael Rytting, Ryan Marten, Yixin Wang, Alex
     Dimakis, Andy Konwinski, and Ludwig Schmidt. Terminal-bench: Benchmarking agents on hard, realistic tasks in
     command line interfaces, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.11868.
[13] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda,
     and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04761.
[14] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht.
     ALFWorld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In Proceedings of the International
     Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=0IOX0YcCdTn.
[15] Xue Wen Tan, Nathaniel Tan, Galen Lee, and Stanley Kok. The shape of reasoning: Topological analysis of reasoning
     traces in large language models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.20665.
[16] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and
     Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In Proceedings of the
     Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
     1PL1NIMMrw.
[17] Zhenting Wang, Qi Chang, Hemani Patel, Shashank Bĳu, Cheng-En Wu, Quan Liu, Aolin Ding, Alireza Rezazadeh,
     Ankit Shah, Yujia Bao, and Eugene Siow. MCP-bench: Benchmarking tool-using LLM agents with complex real-world
     tasks via MCP servers, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.20453.
[18] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny
     Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=_VjQlMeSB_J.
[19] Zhen Xiong, Yujun Cai, Zhecheng Li, and Yiwei Wang. Mapping the minds of LLMs: A graph-based analysis of
     reasoning LLMs. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 17751–
     17763, 2025. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-main.896. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.emnlp-main.
     896/.
[20] Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. WebShop: Towards scalable real-world web
     interaction with grounded language agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.01206.
[21] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree
     of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=5Xc1ecxO1h.
[22] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing
     reasoning and acting in language models. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X.
[23] Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik R. Narasimhan. 𝜏-bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user
     interaction in real-world domains. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=roNSXZpUDN.


A    Responsible Research Statement
Potential risks. TraceGraph is an analysis and evaluation framework, not a deployed agent-control system.
The main risks are over-interpreting outcome-informed graph roles as blind predictors of success, overfitting
recovery policies to benchmark-specific traps, or using automated software-editing agents without human
review. We mitigate these risks by presenting the recovery pipeline as a local benchmark intervention on fired
SWE-bench states, using no gold patches or verified-test lists in the recovery note, reporting provider-specific
behavior, and avoiding any deployment recommendation.




                                                             12
Artifacts, licenses, and intended use. We use access-controlled or provider-served research artifacts: the gated
cx-cmu agent trajectory release on Hugging Face, the underlying benchmark suites and evaluation harnesses,
and the three continuation models cited in §4.1 and §5. The public card for the cx-cmu release gates file
access behind contact sharing, and the public README does not list a separate dataset license or a detailed
citation block. We therefore cite the dataset card directly, treat the trajectories as access-controlled research
material, and use them only for the analysis reported in this paper. For the recovery study, GLM-5.1 and
DeepSeek-V4-Pro are accessed through provider APIs under provider terms, while Qwen3.6-35B-A3B is
run locally from Qwen-family weights whose public model card lists the Apache-2.0 license. We do not
redistribute raw trajectories, benchmark instances, source repositories, model weights, or API outputs. Our
intended use is research evaluation and process analysis of agent benchmarks, and any future sharing of
derived artifacts would need to respect the access conditions of the source artifacts.

Privacy, content, and data handling. We do not collect new personal data, infer demographic attributes, or
conduct user profiling. The source artifacts consist of benchmark tasks, model-generated traces, tool outputs,
repository paths, issue statements, and synthetic or benchmark-specific environment records. We inspected
the schema and representative examples for fields that directly name or identify people, and the analysis
converts textual fields into canonicalized symbolic keys such as tool type, command class, observation pattern,
file cue, and phase cue. The paper reports aggregate statistics and illustrative benchmark snippets rather than
raw private user conversations.

Computation and reproducibility. We do not train or fine-tune models. Graph construction, annotation
analysis, bootstrapping, and table generation use custom scripts over fixed symbolic signatures and fixed
hyperparameters reported in §3 and Appendix 3. The recovery experiment uses two API-served continuation
providers (GLM-5.1 and DeepSeek-V4-Pro) and one locally hosted continuation model (Qwen3.6-35B-A3B).
Provider-side infrastructure for the API models is not observable to us, so we report model/provider names,
data sizes, fired subsets, temperatures, top-𝑝 values, confidence intervals, and permutation tests rather than
provider GPU hours. The locally hosted Qwen3.6-35B-A3B runs on a single NVIDIA H20 GPU, and the Qwen
intervention sweep consumed approximately ten GPU-hours in total.

Human annotation. The graph-interpretability sanity checks use two internal annotators rather than crowd-
workers or recruited human subjects. The annotators were given task-level trajectory fragments and asked
to judge within- vs. across-block similarity, articulation phase changes, and whether core/trap blocks
correspond to productive progress or low-outcome exploration. No external participants were recruited or
paid, no annotator personal data were collected, and the annotation is used only as a sanity check for graph
interpretability. The full instruction text is in Appendix B.6.

AI assistance. AI assistants were used for language polishing, LaTeX editing, patch preparation, and
submission-checklist drafting. The authors supplied the research ideas, experimental design, data analysis,
and claims, and manually verified all citations, numerical results, and final text. No AI assistant is treated as
an author.

B     Additional TraceGraph Details
B.1    Hyperparameters
All graph and diffusion hyperparameters are fixed across benchmarks.

B.2    Rollout-Event Definitions
The three rollout events in §3.3 are defined on the role overlays (𝐶𝑡 , 𝐵𝑡 ). For a rollout 𝑟 with compact
primary-block sequence 𝑏 𝑟,1:𝑇𝑟 and visit set 𝑉𝑟 = {𝑏 𝑟,𝑠 }:



                                                       13
                                   Parameter                                     Value
                                   Mutual-𝑘NN 𝑘                                  6
                                   Edge-weight RBF scale 𝜎                       0.35
                                   Diffusion teleport 𝛼                          0.65
                                   Diffusion steps                               24
                                   Core quantile (top, 𝐶𝑡 )                      0.75
                                   Trap quantile (bottom of negative, 𝐵𝑡 )       0.25
                                   Bootstrap resamples                           2,000

                               Table 3 Fixed hyperparameters used by TraceGraph.




                                      𝐴𝑟 = 1[𝑉𝑟 ∩ 𝐶𝑡 ≠ ∅],                                                        (9)
                                       𝐸𝑟 = 1[𝑉𝑟 ∩ 𝐵𝑡 ≠ ∅],                                                     (10)
                                      𝑅 𝑟 = 1[∃𝑠 < 𝑢 : 𝑏 𝑟,𝑠 ∈ 𝐵𝑡 , 𝑏 𝑟,𝑢 ∈ 𝐶𝑡 ].                               (11)

For binary benchmarks 𝑦𝑟 ∈ {0, 1}; for MCPBench we use the per-task max-normalized continuous reward
𝑦𝑟 = reward𝑟 /max𝑟 ′ ∈ℛ𝑡 reward𝑟 ′ ∈ [0, 1].
The model supply 𝑆𝑚,𝑎 is the average over tasks of the task-centered cell residual:

                                           𝑎 𝑚,𝑡 = 𝔼𝑟∈ℛ𝑡,𝑚 [𝑎 𝑟 ],
                                                             1 Õ
                                           𝑎˜ 𝑚,𝑡 = 𝑎 𝑚,𝑡 −         𝑎 𝑚 ′ ,𝑡 ,
                                                            |𝑀𝑡 | ′
                                                                  𝑚 ∈𝑀𝑡

                                          𝑆𝑚,𝑎 = 𝔼𝑡 [ 𝑎˜ 𝑚,𝑡 ],                                                 (12)

where 𝑎 ∈ {𝐴, 𝐸, 𝑅}.
The benchmark demand 𝐷𝑏,𝑎 is the reward-weighted contrast over rollouts:

                                                       𝑤𝑟 𝑎𝑟        (1 − 𝑤 𝑟 )𝑎 𝑟
                                               Í                  Í
                                       𝐷𝑏,𝑎 = Í𝑟∈𝑏           − Í𝑟∈𝑏               ,
                                                     𝑟∈𝑏 𝑤 𝑟     𝑟∈𝑏 (1 − 𝑤 𝑟 )
                                        𝑤 𝑟 = 𝑦𝑟 .                                                              (13)

For binary 𝑦𝑟 , 𝑤 𝑟 is 0/1 so Eq. 13 reduces exactly to the mean-over-resolved minus mean-over-failed contrast.

B.3   Axis Sign Sanity, Rollout Events
The three events are descriptive coordinates, not predictors, but they should still align with success in the
expected direction across the corpus: high-outcome traffic should have larger 𝐴 and 𝑅 and smaller 𝐸 than
low-outcome traffic. Pooling all rollouts on the four binary splits and computing the unweighted contrast
𝔼 𝑦=1 [𝑎 𝑟 ] − 𝔼 𝑦=0 [𝑎 𝑟 ] with 2,000-bootstrap 95% CIs, all three events have CIs that exclude zero in the expected
direction (Table 4). Including MCPBench under the continuous treatment gives the same qualitative pattern:
positive Access, negative Trap, and small Repair.

B.4   Signature Ablation
We rebuild the pipeline on 150 tasks under seven representation conditions. The full signature has the
largest model-separation statistic among non-degenerate representations and the broadest valid-task coverage;
observation-only and no-phase variants remain useful, tool-only lowers separation while preserving broad



                                                            14
                                      Event                       𝔼 𝑦=1 − 𝔼 𝑦=0         95% CI
                                      Access (𝐴𝑟 )                  +0.572        [+0.544, +0.600]
                                      Trap exposure (𝐸𝑟 )           −0.064        [−0.091, −0.036]
                                      Repair (𝑅 𝑟 )                 +0.040        [+0.023, +0.057]
                                      All three sign-consistent                   Yes


Table 4 Rollout-event sign sanity on the four binary benchmarks (4,686 graph-valid binary rollout-event rows; 2,000-
bootstrap 95% CIs). All three main events shift in the expected direction at 𝑝 < 0.05.


coverage, and file-only, action-only, and random reassignment collapse coverage, with action-only yielding
no stable separation estimate (Figure 6).

           Full                                             1.82                                                             146
   Obs only                                              1.68                                                         112
   No phase                                            1.61                                                                  141
   Tool only                             1.06                                                                          121
      Random                           0.98                                                          24
      File only           0.23                                                                       27
Action only         n/a                                                                               33
                  0.0      0.5      1.0         1.5          2.0                           0              50    100         150
                                 Separation F                                                        Valid tasks (/ 150)
Figure 6 Signature ablation on 150 tasks. Full signatures give the strongest model separation (𝐹 = 1.82) and widest
valid-task coverage (146/150); random, file-only, and action-only collapse coverage, and action-only yields no stable
separation estimate.


B.5    Score Matrix and Reward Semantics
The four binary-reward splits use the resolved/failed flag of each rollout. For MCPBench, the dataset
provides a continuous multi-criteria reward; the main text uses the per-task max-normalized continuous
reward 𝑦𝑟 = reward𝑟 /max𝑟 ′ ∈ℛ𝑡 reward𝑟 ′ throughout the reward field and benchmark-demand calculations. A
simple positive-reward threshold is near-saturated (∼ 97% resolved across models), so we use the normalized
continuous treatment instead; no threshold sweep is reported as a main result because the analysis avoids
binarization altogether.

B.6    Annotation Instructions
The graph-interpretability sanity checks used two internal annotators. The annotators were shown de-
identified task id, benchmark name, two or three consecutive trajectory fragments, and the graph-derived
relation being checked; model identity and terminal outcome were hidden. The instruction text was:
       Read only the displayed action, observation, tool, file, and phase cues. For a pair of steps, label
       them similar if they represent the same local subtask, evidence-gathering mode, tool-use mode,
       or edit/debugging phase, even if the surface text differs; otherwise label them different. For
       an articulation crossing, label whether the second step marks a clear strategy or phase change
       relative to the first. For a block, label the fragment as productive progress, exploration without


                                                                   15
      convergence, repeated or stuck behavior, or unclear. Do not infer model identity, do not use
      terminal success, and mark unclear when the displayed evidence is insufficient. This annotation
      is for aggregate method validation only and should not identify any person or judge any human
      participant.
No screenshots or additional risk disclaimers were used because the task was an internal, non-interactive
annotation of already released agent traces. The directional sanity-check 𝑝-values reported in §4.2 use
one-sided alternatives matched to the stated hypotheses: within-BCC similarity > across-BCC similarity, and
core productive-progress rate > trap productive-progress rate.

B.7   Illustrative Annotation Examples
We show representative trajectory fragments from each of the three annotation tasks in §4.2. Tool arguments
and observations are lightly trimmed for space.

BCC pair: within-block (similar). SWE-bench, task sympy-16886. Two steps from the same BCC block; the
annotator labelled them similar.
A view crypto/crypto.py:1500–1550 → Morse-code definitions
B view crypto/crypto.py:500–600 → Vigenère helpers

Both steps view different sections of the same file, reflecting a single “inspect source” strategy. The graph
merges them because their key sets share the high-IDF key FILE_PATH:crypto/crypto.py.

BCC pair: across-block (different). SWE-bench, task pytest-5773. Two steps from different BCC blocks; the
annotator labelled them different.

A bash: git show de6f.. | grep "python_files" → commit diff
B str_replace on _pytest/python.py → “replaced”

Step A inspects git history; Step B edits source code. Their key sets differ on tool, action type, command class,
and observation pattern, so they land in separate blocks.

Articulation crossing: clear phase change. TerminalBench, task processing-pipeline. Two steps immedi-
ately before and after an articulation point; the annotator labelled the crossing a clear phase change.

Before read_file collect_data.sh → shell script body
After read_file run_pipeline.sh → orchestration calling collect, process, report

The rollout shifts from examining an individual component to the top-level orchestration wrapper. The
articulation point captures this strategy transition.

Core block: productive progress. MCPBench, task mcpbench_10. Three consecutive steps from a block
labelled core by the diffusion field; the annotator judged the block productive progress.

1 MCP_sum([10.3, 5.4, 8.2]) → 23.9
2 MCP_sum([52, 29, 43]) → 124
3 MCP_sum([52.2, 29.1, 43.2]) → 124.5

The rollout makes consistent, goal-directed MCP tool calls. All observed visitors attain the task-local maximum
normalized reward, placing the block firmly in the productive core.




                                                       16
Trap block: low-outcome exploration. SWE-bench, task django-14580. Three steps from a block labelled trap;
the annotator judged the block exploration without convergence.

1 view serializer.py:270–280 → TypeSerializer def
2 view serializer.py:170–190 → functools imports
3 view serializer.py:400–450 → (empty—file ends)

The rollout reads scattered sections of the same file without converging on a fix. Block purity is 0.125 (most
visitors fail), placing it in the trap region. Notably, 36% of annotated trap blocks are labelled exploration
rather than dead-end, consistent with the main-text observation that traps are low-outcome regions, not
necessarily useless behavior.

B.8    Robustness of Supply and Demand Profiles
We report task-bootstrap CIs in the main text and additionally sweep the graph-role hyperparameters. The
qualitative signs used in the paper are stable under core-quantile, trap-quantile, Laplace-smoothing, diffusion,
and mutual-𝑘NN perturbations. For MCPBench under the continuous treatment, Access remains positive
and Trap remains negative across the same perturbations, while Repair stays small. Trap-averse conclusions
for MCPBench and 𝜏2 -bench are stable across trap thresholds, and SWE-bench remains the split with
the strongest positive Repair demand across the baseline sweep. The only borderline sign in the sweeps
is TerminalBench Trap under the largest 𝑘NN setting, which is why the main text treats TerminalBench
as mildly rather than strongly trap-averse. As an external replication check, an independently ingested
TerminalBench trajectory set reproduces the three-axis demand shape (Access positive, Trap negative, Repair
near zero). Figure 7 shows the baseline demand values alongside the sweep ranges; all signs remain stable
except the borderline TerminalBench Trap under the largest 𝑘NN setting.



   Terminal

      ²-bench

SWE-bench

      Search

 MCPBench

                0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8         0.4         0.2   0.0             0.00    0.05      0.10   0.15
                            Access                                Trap                            Repair
Figure 7 Demand-sign robustness across hyperparameter sweeps. Dots show baseline values; shaded bars show the
range across core-quantile, trap-quantile, Laplace-smoothing, diffusion, and mutual-𝑘NN perturbations. All qualitative
signs are stable except the borderline TerminalBench Trap sign under the largest mutual-𝑘NN setting.


B.9    Full Supply and Demand Tables
Tables 5 and 6 give the exact numerical values underlying Figure 4. Table 5 reports model supply as
task-centered residuals with task-bootstrap confidence intervals, while Table 6 reports benchmark demand
as resolved-minus-failed contrasts (or the reward-weighted analogue for MCPBench); positive Access and


                                                             17
Repair indicate that high-outcome traffic uses those events more often, whereas negative Trap indicates
stronger avoidance of low-outcome regions.

                 Model                    Access                   Trap                 Repair
                 DeepSeek-R1        −.022 [−.043, −.001]   +.012 [−.010, +.035]   +.007 [−.007, +.020]
                 DeepSeek-V3.2      +.098 [+.077, +.118]   +.018 [−.003, +.038]   +.040 [+.027, +.052]
                 Gemini-2.5-Flash   −.022 [−.040, −.004]   −.024 [−.041, −.006]   −.017 [−.025, −.009]
                 Qwen3-235B         +.016 [−.002, +.035]   +.028 [+.009, +.047]   +.011 [−.000, +.022]
                 Qwen3-Next         −.092 [−.116, −.067]   −.042 [−.067, −.017]   −.049 [−.058, −.039]

Table 5 Model supply profiles with 2,000 task-bootstrap 95% CIs. Values are task-centered event residuals; because
graph-valid task support differs by model, columns need not sum to zero exactly.


                 Benchmark                Access                   Trap                 Repair
                 MCPBench           +.216 [+.182, +.249]   −.166 [−.199, −.130]   +.020 [−.004, +.042]
                 Search             +.468 [+.423, +.508]   +.014 [−.026, +.054]   +.029 [+.007, +.051]
                 SWE-bench          +.769 [+.713, +.822]   +.065 [−.009, +.148]   +.111 [+.049, +.175]
                 𝜏2 -bench          +.519 [+.456, +.579]   −.401 [−.467, −.333]   +.032 [−.014, +.083]
                 TerminalBench      +.689 [+.637, +.738]   −.124 [−.177, −.067]   +.006 [−.024, +.038]

Table 6 Benchmark demand profiles with 2,000-bootstrap 95% CIs. Negative Trap means high-outcome traffic avoids
low-outcome regions.


B.10   Additional Trap-Aware Recovery Details
Recovery arms. The three prefix-fork arms defined in §5.2 separate two single-factor recovery routes. Baseline
continues from the trigger snapshot at the baseline temperature 𝑇=0.6 with no inserted note. Hot switches
the continuation to 𝑇=0.9, top-𝑝=0.95 with no note, isolating the effect of increased sampling diversity. Note
appends the diagnosis note at 𝑇=0.6, isolating the effect of evidence-grounded localization.

                              Detector setting             Value
                              Trap similarity threshold    0.35
                              Trap–core margin             0.03
                              Warmup steps                 2
                              Cooldown steps               4
                              Max triggers per rollout     1
                              Allowed intents              edit, submit
                              Observation-key gate         none
                              File-locality gate           require a FILE_PATH:* cue
                              Rollout step budget          30 total steps per arm

Table 7 Fixed detector and continuation settings used in the 500-instance SWE-bench recovery study across all three
providers.


Conservative diagnosis note. The trap-side note is a fixed template populated at fire time. The operative
content is: re-read the failing test, traceback, or last database observation; localize to the smallest directly
relevant function or read-only check; make one minimal change consistent with the evidence; and revise or
discard the current edit/action if the evidence does not support it. The slots are populated only from the
agent’s own per-step log: last command/action, last observation signal, implicated file or target keys, detector
confidence, and a six-way family-level trap diagnosis. No gold patch, verified-test list, or other oracle signal is
used.



                                                           18
Tested instances. The main TraceGraph-guided recovery experiment uses the full 500-instance SWE-bench
Verified pool at seed 11, covering all 12 SWE-bench repositories that appear in the cx-cmu trajectory
release: django (231), sympy (75), sphinx-doc (44), scikit-learn (32), matplotlib (34), pytest-dev
(19), astropy (22), pydata (22), pylint-dev (10), psf (8), mwaskom (2), pallets (1). The fired-subset
analysis in the upper block of Table 2 uses each provider’s own complete three-arm set (𝑛=196 for GLM-5.1,
206 for DeepSeek-V4-Pro, 214 for Qwen3.6-35B-A3B); the common-fired analysis in the lower block restricts
to the 96 instances on which all three providers fire and produce a complete three-arm set.

Paired contrast statistics. Table 8 reports the full set of paired contrasts that summarise Table 2; the main-text
intervention 𝑝-values refer to these same tests. All confidence intervals use the cluster bootstrap with 10,000
resamples clustered by instance id; 𝑝-values are one-sided paired-sign permutation against the alternative
Δ > 0.

             Subset / pool                             Contrast          Δ (pp)   95% CI (pp)      𝑝
                                                       Hot − Baseline    +4.59    [+0.0, +9.2]   0.037 ✓
             GLM-5.1 (𝑛=196)
                                                       Note − Baseline   +1.53    [−3.6, +6.6]    0.348
                                                       Hot − Baseline    +3.40    [−1.5, +8.7]    0.132
             DeepSeek-V4-Pro (𝑛=206)
                                                       Note − Baseline   +0.97    [−4.4, +6.3]    0.428
                                                       Hot − Baseline    +1.40    [−2.3, +5.1]    0.332
             Qwen3.6-35B-A3B (𝑛=214)
                                                       Note − Baseline   +4.67    [+0.0, +9.3]   0.036 ✓
                                                       Hot − Baseline    +3.08    [+0.3, +5.9]   0.016 ✓
             Per-provider fired pooled (𝑛=616 cells)
                                                       Note − Baseline   +2.44    [−0.6, +5.5]    0.064◦
                                                       Hot − Baseline    +3.82    [+0.0, +8.0]   0.045 ✓
             Common-fired pooled (𝑛=288 cells)
                                                       Note − Baseline   +2.78    [−2.1, +7.6]    0.148

Table 8 Paired contrasts for Table 2. Per-provider rows use each provider’s own fired iids; the two pooled rows stack
provider × iid cells (clustered by iid). ✓ 𝑝<0.05; ◦ 𝑝<0.10.


B.11    Trap-Aware Intervention Case Studies
Illustrative intervention cases. The following three cases separate a positive xarray example, a positive Django
example, and a regression-style failure mode.

Case 1: pydata__xarray-4094. The same trigger snapshot drives three qualitatively different recovery
patterns across providers (Table 9). The detector fires while the agent is already reading xarray/core/
dataarray.py, with trigger keys ACTION:edit, CMD:sed, FILE_PATH:xarray/core/dataarray.py,
and an earlier ValueError reproduction context. Across providers, the raw assistant traces converge on the
same local diagnosis: after selecting one variable from the stacked array, the stacked coordinate remains as a
scalar coordinate, so later merging the per-variable arrays back into a dataset creates a coordinate conflict. The
divergence appears one refinement later. Qwen3.6-35B-A3B under Baseline and Hot spends the post-trigger
budget on reproduction and environment repair (missing numpy, then a numpy version mismatch) and
never submits a patch. Under Note, it eventually reaches the right local fix idea and edits the key line to
drop the stacked coordinate after squeeze(drop=True), but the first version uses drop_vars(dim) and
then fails on the broader multi-dimensional round-trip test because the coordinate is not always present.
DeepSeek-V4-Pro shows a milder version of the same phenomenon: Baseline reaches the right diagnosis
but commits the brittle drop(dim) variant, whereas either Hot or Note is enough to move it to the safer
drop_vars(dim, errors="ignore") form. GLM-5.1 is the easiest case: once triggered, both non-Baseline
arms jump directly to that safe one-line fix.

Case 2: django__django-13128. The trigger fires later in the rollout, after the agent has already nar-
rowed the bug to django/db/models/expressions.py and is inspecting CombinedExpression with an


                                                         19
                                    Provider           Baseline        Hot          Note
                                    GLM-5.1            no patch     ✓ (572 ch)    ✓ (572 ch)
                                    DeepSeek-V4-Pro    ×(550 ch)    ✓ (572 ch)    ✓ (572 ch)
                                    Qwen3.6-35B-A3B    no patch      no patch     ×(555 ch)


Table 9 pydata__xarray-4094 per-arm outcomes. ✓ marks resolved; × marks a submitted patch that fails the verified
tests; “no patch” marks an empty submission. Parentheses show patch length in characters.


OBS:error context (Table 10). The trap here is not a wrong first diagnosis but a low-yield validation loop.
In the GLM-5.1 Baseline trace, the model states the correct diagnosis almost immediately in its own scratch
reasoning: subtracting two temporal fields is being inferred as DateTimeField when it should produce
DurationField. But the baseline rollout then burns budget on environment setup and brittle ad-hoc
probes, repeatedly re-deriving the same explanation without committing a final patch. Hot and Note both
shorten that loop. The successful GLM arms add a narrow _resolve_output_field() override directly to
CombinedExpression, then fix one subtle bug exposed by a direct probe: comparing field instances with ==
is too strict, so the final patch compares field types / internal types and returns fields.DurationField()
only for temporal subtraction. The Note arm is especially illustrative: after trigger it stays anchored to the
smallest relevant region—CombinedExpression and the temporal-subtraction tests—rather than relaxing
the global mixed-type logic elsewhere in BaseExpression. DeepSeek-V4-Pro shows the complementary
provider-specific pattern on the same instance. Only Hot reaches a submitted fix; the Note arm remains in the
expression-tree / test-harness analysis loop and ends with an empty submission, matching the aggregate
result that this provider benefits mainly from extra sampling diversity rather than the diagnosis note itself.

                                   Provider           Baseline        Hot           Note
                                   GLM-5.1            no patch     ✓ (1057 ch)   ✓ (1001 ch)
                                   DeepSeek-V4-Pro    no patch     ✓ (1175 ch)    no patch


Table 10 django__django-13128 per-arm outcomes for the two providers discussed in the text. Parentheses show
patch length in characters.


Case 3: failure mode on django__django-14311. The same framework can also hurt performance when
the note over-focuses the continuation on an overly narrow local pattern. On django__django-14311, the
trigger fires while GLM-5.1 is already inspecting tests/utils_tests/test_autoreload.py, with trigger
keys anchored to an edit candidate in the autoreload path and an earlier RuntimeError context. All three
arms correctly identify the broad bug family: get_child_arguments() should reconstruct the -m target
from __main__.__spec__. But the Note arm overcommits to the immediately visible package-with-__
main__ example from utils_tests.test_module. It rewrites the logic to always use __spec__.name.
removesuffix(’.__main__’), which fixes the package case but breaks the non-package module case and
regresses three previously passing tests. By contrast, the successful Baseline arm makes the minimal string
replacement name.replace(’.__main__’, ”), and the successful Hot arm reaches the same fix with a
slightly different edit path. This is a concrete example of a trap-aware note becoming too prescriptive: it
improves localization, but can also bias the model toward an over-specialized repair if the visible trigger
context is only one branch of the full behavioral contract.

                                       Provider   Baseline          Hot          Note
                                       GLM-5.1    ✓ (694 ch)     ✓ (953 ch)   × (852 ch)


Table 11 A regression-style intervention case. On django__django-14311, the Note arm fails test_run_as_non_-
django_module_non_package and three pass-to-pass autoreload tests, while the other two arms resolve the instance.




                                                             20
B.12   Agent Framework and Recovery Templates
The SWE-bench continuation agent is a single-tool bash agent. We reproduce here the templates that fully
specify what the agent sees on every step and what each arm injects: the system prompt that fixes the
response format, the issue-statement user message, the observation wrapper used after every command, and
the 5-block diagnosis-note template that the Note arm injects at the trigger step (with the Baseline and Hot
arms injecting nothing).

System prompt.     Used as the first message of every rollout, on every arm.

   You are a software engineer tasked with solving a GitHub issue. You have access to a bash shell to explore
   the repository, understand the codebase, locate the relevant code, and make the necessary changes to fix the
   issue.

   ## Response Format

   Every response must contain exactly TWO sections:

   1. **THOUGHT**: Your reasoning about what to do next. Analyze the problem, plan your approach, and explain
   your next step.

   2. **ACTION**: A single bash command to execute. This must be wrapped in a bash code block.

   Example response:

   THOUGHT:
   I need to find the file that contains the buggy function.

   ACTION:
   ```bash
   find . -type f -name "*.py" | xargs grep -l "def process_data"
   ```

   ## Important Rules

   - Each response must contain exactly ONE bash command in the ACTION section.
   - To submit your solution when done, use the special command:
     ```bash
     submit
     ```
   - Do NOT run interactive commands (vim, nano, python REPL, etc.).
   - Do NOT use `git push` or modify remote state.
   - Keep your changes minimal and focused on the issue.
   - Always verify your fix with relevant tests before submitting.
   - If you need to edit a file, use `sed`, `awk`, or heredoc redirects.
   - If a command produces too much output, pipe through `head` or `tail`.



Initial user message. Inserted once at step 0 to communicate the GitHub issue. The placeholder {problem_statement}
is filled with the verbatim SWE-bench Verified problem_statement field.

   Here is the GitHub issue to solve:

   <issue>
   {problem_statement}
   </issue>

   You are in the repository root. The repository has already been checked out to the correct commit. Explore
   the repo, understand the issue, make the fix, and run tests to verify. When you are confident your fix is
   correct, use the `submit` command.



Per-step observation wrapper. After every ACTION bash command, the harness executes it inside the docker
workspace and returns the (truncated) combined stdout/stderr to the agent as a user message wrapped in:

   OBSERVATION:
   {observation}




                                                       21
Trap-diagnosis note (Note arm). At the trigger step both Note-on arms inject the following message as
a user message immediately after the last observation, before the agent’s next THOUGHT/ACTION turn.
The header marks the message as internal; the five slots {ctx_command}, {ctx_signal}, {ctx_files},
{ctx_confidence}, {ctx_trap_pattern} are populated only from the agent’s own per-step log and a
per-pattern diagnosis sidecar; no gold-patch or verified-test information is used.

    [INTERNAL DIAGNOSTIC -- not visible to graders]
    A trajectory pattern previously associated with low task-resolution rates fired at this step. Concretely:

       - Last command: {ctx_command}
       - Last error/test signal: {ctx_signal}
       - File(s) touched in this region: {ctx_files}
       - Detector confidence (trap similarity): {ctx_confidence}

       Trap pattern (from prior failed trajectories with this signature):
       {ctx_trap_pattern}

    Before continuing:
      1. Re-read the failing test/traceback for the specific assertion or unexpected value (do not rely on
      memory of earlier steps).
      2. Localize to the smallest function or class implicated by that evidence, in the file(s) above.
      3. Propose ONE minimal change consistent with the evidence; do not rewrite unrelated code.
      4. Run the narrowest relevant test or check before submitting.
      5. If your current patch is not supported by the error/test evidence, revise or discard it.

    Respond in the normal THOUGHT / ACTION format with exactly one bash command.



Slot filling. At trigger time the slots are populated from the agent’s own per-step record (no oracle signal):
{ctx_command} is the most recent ACTION bash command, truncated to 200 characters; {ctx_signal} is
the most recent observation passed through a fixed regular-expression family for traceback / pytest / syntax
/ import / missing-file / timeout cues, truncated to 300 characters; {ctx_files} is the top-3 file paths from
the trigger key set (only files the agent itself has opened in its own commands); {ctx_confidence} is the
trap similarity score simtrap formatted to two decimals; {ctx_trap_pattern} is the family-level diagnosis
string for the matched trap pattern (one of six pre-specified families), read from a sidecar JSON keyed on the
trap key-set fingerprint. The Baseline and Hot arms inject nothing at the trigger step; the conversation proceeds
directly from the trigger observation to the agent’s next THOUGHT/ACTION turn at the arm’s continuation
temperature.

C     Algorithmic Details
C.1     Signature Key Alphabet
A step’s symbolic key set 𝐾 𝑖 contains keys from the channels in Table 12. Keys are case-sensitive and
prefix-tagged, so different channels never collide in the IDF dictionary. Observation keys are produced by
fixed regular-expression families over the first 2,000 characters of the tool response; the families include error,
traceback, test pass/fail, syntax error, import error, missing file, permission error, timeout, and explicit success
messages. The search-specific keys (URL_DOMAIN, QUERY_NOVELTY, EVIDENCE_COUNT) are pre-specified
from the search tool-call/result format, not selected from outcome inspection.

 Channel               Information captured
 Tool name             Tool or API name after benchmark-specific prefix stripping.
 Action type           Coarse action class such as bash, edit, read, search, submit, or other.
 Command class         Shell-command families such as pytest, grep, cat, sed, python, and git.
 Observation pattern   Error, pass/fail, timeout, missing-file, and success cues.
 File cue              Last path components and file extensions mentioned in the action.
 Temporal phase        Early, middle, or late third of the rollout.
 Search-only           URL/result domain (eTLD+1), query novelty (new/refine/repeat), and cumulative distinct-domain count buckets.


                            Table 12 Compact signature key alphabet used by the signature extractor.




                                                                       22
C.2   Reward Field, Core and Trap Masks, Block Quotient Graph
The block quotient graph 𝐺 𝐵 = (𝐵, 𝐸𝐵 ) has one node per non-trivial BCC and an undirected edge (𝑏, 𝑏 ′ ) ∈ 𝐸𝐵
weighted by the number of slices shared between the two blocks. Edge weights are row-stochastically
normalized into a transition matrix 𝑃𝐵 , and the teleport-𝛼 diffusion update is

                                            𝑣 (𝑡+1) = 𝛼 𝑃𝐵⊤ 𝑣 (𝑡) + (1 − 𝛼) 𝑠,                                    (14)

where ℛ𝑏 is the set of rollouts visiting block 𝑏, and the seed 𝑠 𝑏 = 𝜇ˆ 𝑏 − 𝑦¯𝑡 is the Laplace-smoothed excess
outcome of block 𝑏 relative to the task average, with 𝜇ˆ 𝑏 = ( 𝑟∈ℛ𝑏 𝑦𝑟 + 12 )/(|ℛ𝑏 | + 1). We iterate Eq. 14 for 𝑇 = 24
                                                              Í
steps with 𝛼 = 0.65 and L∞-normalize to [−1, 1]. Let 𝑄 .75  +
                                                               be the 75th percentile of positive field values and
𝑄 .25 the 25th percentile of negative field values. The role overlays used in the main text are then:
  −


                                                     (𝑇)            (𝑇)  +
                                         𝐶𝑡 = {𝑏 : 𝑣 𝑏     > 0 ∧ 𝑣 𝑏 ≥ 𝑄 .75 },                                   (15)
                                                     (𝑇)       (𝑇)   −
                                         𝐵𝑡 = {𝑏 : 𝑣 𝑏 < 0 ∧ 𝑣 𝑏 ≤ 𝑄 .25 }.                                       (16)

Note that 𝐵𝑡 is a direct bottom-quartile mask of the negative diffusion field, which avoids a circularity between
the trap definition and the 𝑅 𝑟 event. Articulation points remain useful for graph visualization and the RQ1
sanity annotation, but they are not used as a main rollout event or as a recovery target.




                                                            23
