                                             Causal Past Logic for Runtime Verification of
                                                 Distributed LLM Agent Workflows

                                                                             Benedikt Bollig

                                             Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, ENS Paris-Saclay, LMF, Gif-sur-Yvette, France




arXiv:2605.20923v1 [cs.LO] 20 May 2026
                                                Abstract. Distributed LLM agent workflows should not be monitored
                                                as if they produced a single sequential log. In an asynchronous exe-
                                                cution, a decision can only depend on events that are causally visible
                                                to the lifeline that makes it: an event that appears earlier in some log
                                                may still be unknown locally. We extend the ZipperGen agent-workflow
                                                framework with Causal Past Logic (CPL), a small past-time temporal
                                                logic for guards in conditionals and while loops. In addition to standard
                                                past-time modalities such as previous and since, a guard can inspect
                                                the latest causally visible event of another lifeline and selected variables
                                                stored there. The formula is a source-level guard: it is evaluated online
                                                by the owner lifeline and can influence control flow at runtime. We give
                                                a vector-clock monitor with latest-value views and prove that the locally
                                                computed monitor value coincides with the denotational semantics of the
                                                guard at the current event. Thus runtime verification becomes part of
                                                the coordination language itself, rather than a post-hoc check over an
                                                execution log.

                                                Keywords: Runtime verification · Message sequence charts · LLM agents
                                                · Distributed systems · Causal order


                                         1    Introduction
                                         Large language models have led to the development of LLM agents, where lan-
                                         guage models are equipped with tools and can execute actions. Many useful
                                         applications do not rely on a single agent, but on several interacting agents that
                                         work on separate tasks and maintain separate contexts. This can improve effi-
                                         ciency and can also make the system easier to structure: each agent has its own
                                         role, its own local information, and its own interaction history. In practice, this
                                         separation may also reduce unnecessary context growth.
                                             However, these agents still need to communicate. They exchange plans, find-
                                         ings, approvals, warnings, and intermediate results over communication channels.
                                         At this point, agent workflows become distributed systems. This is useful, but
                                         it also brings back the usual difficulties of distributed programming. Failures
                                         are not limited to wrong LLM outputs. A committer may merge a patch whose
                                         tests have since failed. An executor may rely on an approval that was given for
                                         an earlier version. A reviewer may see a message that is locally the latest one
                                         received, although it does not contain the latest information available elsewhere
                                         in the system.
    Runtime verification [4, 6, 30] is a natural way to complement static coordi-
nation guarantees in this setting. In classical runtime verification, one specifies
properties of executions, often in a temporal logic, and monitors check at run-
time whether the current execution satisfies the specification. If something goes
wrong, the monitor can raise an alarm. For agent workflows, however, it is often
not enough to report a violation after the fact. Monitoring should also affect the
execution at the point where a decision is made. If a committer has not seen a
clean test result in its causal past, the right response is not to merge and report
a violation later. The workflow should instead take another branch: block the
merge, request a re-run, or escalate.
     We develop this idea for ZipperGen [11]. ZipperGen programs are written
as global workflows and projected to local agent programs that communicate
asynchronously. It follows the general philosophy of choreographic program-
ming [14,24,35,43]: the programmer writes the coordination from a global point
of view, and the framework derives the local behavior of the individual agents.
We use the term lifeline for the local participant, usually an agent, that exe-
cutes its part of the workflow. In ZipperGen, branch and loop decisions have
an explicit owner lifeline. The projection inserts control broadcasts so that the
lifelines that need to know a decision are informed about it.
    The point of this paper is that even with such a projection discipline, which
guarantees deadlock-freeness, runtime decisions may depend on causal informa-
tion that is not easy to track by hand. Messages exchanged between agents cre-
ate causal dependencies. As a result, the latest message received by an agent is
not necessarily the latest relevant information produced by another agent. Con-
versely, information that appears earlier in a sequential log may not be causally
visible to the agent that is about to make a decision. Thus, for distributed agent
workflows, monitoring should not be interpreted over an arbitrary sequential log.
It should be interpreted over causally structured executions. Since guards are
evaluated by their owner lifeline, monitoring is distributed as well: a decision
cannot rely on a complete sequential log maintained by a central observer.
    The same issue also arises with per-lifeline parallel composition. Several lo-
cal actions of the same lifeline may be enabled at the same time, and their
actual order may be chosen at runtime rather than fixed statically by the source
workflow. Runtime guards should therefore be evaluated against the causal in-
formation available at the event where the decision is actually made.
    To address this, we extend the guard language of ZipperGen with Causal Past
Logic (CPL), a small past-time logic interpreted over message sequence charts
(MSCs), which depict lifelines and the messages exchanged between them. A
guard is written as φ@A and is evaluated locally by lifeline A, which owns the
corresponding branch or loop. CPL formulas can express causal-temporal facts
such as “the owner has causally seen that the tests passed, and has not seen any
later visible failure”. They can also combine such facts with identity checks, for
instance whether the visible test result concerns the same merge candidate as
the current proposal.


                                        2
    Unlike external runtime specifications, CPL formulas are source-level guards.
They are not checked beside the workflow after the fact: their truth values choose
the next branch or loop step. This is why the logic is past-time: at each decision
point, the owner lifeline must determine the guard from the information causally
visible to it. An external monitor could only report verdicts on an execution
that has already happened. A guard, on the other hand, determines what the
execution becomes.
    This perspective also differs from many guardrail mechanisms for LLM ap-
plications, which treat the execution as a sequential log. Such logs are useful for
debugging and auditing, but workflow control needs a different notion of past:
what matters is what is causally visible at the decision point.

Contributions. We extend ZipperGen guards with Causal Past Logic formulas
that are evaluated at runtime and influence the control flow at decision points.
Formally, CPL formulas are interpreted at runtime events, and guard evaluation
is represented by a choice event on the owner lifeline. In addition to standard
past-time temporal modalities, such as previous and since along one lifeline, the
logic contains causal past modalities and access to the values of variables at the
latest visible event of a lifeline. This allows formulas to compare information from
different lifelines. We give an online monitoring algorithm based on vector clocks
and latest-value views, and prove that local runtime evaluation coincides with
the denotational MSC semantics. We also report on a prototype implementation
in ZipperGen (https://zippergen.io).

Mechanization. We mechanized the definitions of MSCs, CPL satisfaction, the
local evaluator, latest-value monitor state, receive-update propagation, and the
                                                                        FORMALIZED
monitor-correctness theorem in Lean 4 [37]. Clicking a badge          Lean    or
    VERIFIED
   Lean   opens the corresponding source file.

Outline. Section 2 illustrates the approach with a concurrent code review exam-
ple. In Section 3, we define executions in terms of MSCs. Section 4 introduces
Causal Past Logic. Section 5 presents the online monitoring algorithm and proves
correctness. Section 6 discusses related work. We conclude in Section 7.

Acknowledgments. This work was partly supported by the “France 2030” gov-
ernment investment plan managed by ANR (reference ANR-23-PEIA-0006).


2     A Distributed Code Review Example

In an LLM agent workflow, agents exchange messages over dedicated channels
and have no shared memory. In the formal development, we call each agent a
lifeline. In this section, we use the two terms interchangeably.
     Consider a coding-agent workflow in which a patch is checked by several
specialized agents. A TestRunner executes the test suite, a Security agent checks
for vulnerabilities, and a Committer decides whether a merge candidate may be


                                         3
                                     TestRunner
                                                     test
                            h                               resu
                        patc                                       lts
                                    merge proposal
      Orchestrator                                                       Committer

                         patc                                      lts
                             h                              resu
                                                     scan
                                       Security


Fig. 1. Architecture for concurrent code review. The Orchestrator distributes the patch
to the TestRunner and Security agent, and sends a merge proposal to the Committer
when a candidate is ready to be considered. The proposal triggers the Committer’s
decision procedure. The reviewers run in parallel and may send updated assessments
after their first report.


merged. These agents run concurrently and report their results asynchronously.
They may also send updated assessments after an initial result. For example,
the required pre-merge checks may pass, while a subsequent check detects a
regression. Similarly, a security scan may first clear a patch and later report a
vulnerable dependency.
    The Committer may merge a pull request only if, in its causal past, the
required tests have passed with no later visible failure, and the security scan has
cleared the patch with no later visible critical issue. Both results must concern
the same merge candidate as the current proposal.
    Figure 1 shows the architecture. The merge proposal is an ordinary message
to the Committer. Its receive event stores the proposed candidate locally and
triggers the decision procedure; the guard is evaluated at the following owner-
side choice event. The guard checks the latest visible state of each reviewer, and
also checks that these states refer to the current candidate:
     @TestRunner.candidate = candidate ∧ @Security.candidate = candidate
  ∧ @TestRunner(status ̸= failed S status = passed)
  ∧ @Security(status ̸= critical S status = cleared).

Here candidate is the merge candidate stored at the current Committer event.
The term @A.x denotes the value of variable x at the latest event of lifeline A
that is causally visible to the Committer. Thus, the two equalities check that
the visible reviewer states refer to the current candidate. The formula @A(φ)
evaluates φ at that same latest visible event of A. The temporal subformulas,
where S is the past-time since operator, are evaluated along the local histories
of the review lifelines.
    The status variable is local to the corresponding reviewer. When the TestRun-
ner starts processing a candidate, its local status is reset. Later events may set
status to passed or failed for that candidate. The value passed should be read
as “the required pre-merge checks have cleared”, not “all possible checks have
finished”. Hence status ̸= failed S status = passed holds at a TestRunner event


                                          4
              Orchestrator                 TestRunner                          Committer

                        required check passes;
                                   send result                        updat
                                                                           e

                               full check fails;
                                  send update

                                                        up
                                                           d   at
send merge proposal          merge prop                           e
                                          osal




                                                                                     choice event

                                                                                     failure arrives
                                                                                     too late


Fig. 2. Causal structure around a merge decision, focusing on the events relevant to
the Committer’s guard. Earlier messages that assign the patch to the TestRunner are
omitted. The required check passes and its result reaches the Committer before the
merge proposal. A subsequent check finds a failure, but this update has not yet been
delivered. It is therefore not in the Committer’s causal past at the choice event.


if the required checks have passed for the candidate stored there and no later
local TestRunner event has recorded a failure. The Security part is analogous.
    Reviewer reports make the corresponding reviewer states causally visible to
the Committer. The guard itself is stated over those reviewer states, rather than
over the Committer’s receive history. A Committer-local encoding would have to
reconstruct the reviewers’ local orders from received reports, for example using
sequence numbers or causal metadata. This is especially relevant when reports
are propagated through intermediate participants or when delivery is not FIFO:
the order in which reports reach the Committer need not reflect the reviewer’s
local order.
    Figure 2 shows why the causal interpretation matters. The choice event is
not a global join point at which all review activity has stopped. It is a local
decision action on the Committer’s lifeline, triggered by the arrival of the merge
proposal. The guard is therefore evaluated using the Committer’s causal past.
    In the figure, the required-check result has reached the Committer before the
merge proposal. A subsequent check has already found a failure, but the corre-
sponding update has not yet been delivered. Therefore, the latest TestRunner
state visible to the Committer is still the required-check pass. At the decision
point, the formula @TestRunner(status ̸= failed S status = passed) holds, and
the formula @TestRunner.candidate = candidate verifies that this visible state
concerns the proposed candidate.
    A monitor that uses a sequential log ordered by send time would see the
failure before the decision and would block the merge. This is not what the
Committer can enforce locally: the failure exists in the global execution, but it


                                             5
 is not yet causally visible at the decision point. The policy expressed here is
 therefore not “merge only after all checks have finished”, but “merge once the
 required checks have passed, unless a later visible failure has appeared”. If the
 intended policy is stronger, the workflow must add synchronization before the
 merge proposal. CPL does not replace such synchronization. It makes explicit
 which information is visible at the local decision point.


 3   Message Sequence Charts
 We model agent-workflow executions as message sequence charts (MSCs). An
 MSC consists of events distributed over lifelines. Each event represents one ob-
 servable step: sending or receiving a message, executing a local action, or making
 a branching decision. Events on the same lifeline are linearly ordered. Messages
 are represented by matching send and receive events. In prefixes, some sends
 may not yet have been received. The causal order combines local succession
 with message delivery. Figure 2 shows a small MSC for the merge scenario: the
 Orchestrator sends a merge proposal to the Committer, the TestRunner sends
 a result that arrives before the proposal, and a later update is still in transit at
 the choice event.
     We enrich each event with a valuation. The valuation at an event records the
 local state of the corresponding lifeline after that event. It is a mapping from
 variables to values, for instance the current merge candidate or the latest test
 status. The MSC semantics specifies where formulas are evaluated and which
 valuations they may inspect. It does not define the internal store semantics of
 the agents.
     Let L be a finite set of lifelines.
                                                              FORMALIZED
 Definition 1 (Message Sequence Chart (MSC)                   Lean         ). A Message
 Sequence Chart (MSC) over L is a tuple

                           M = (E, →, ◁, kind, pid, val),

 where E is a finite set of events, → ⊆ E × E is the local successor relation,
 ◁ ⊆ E × E is the message relation, kind : E → {act, recv, choice} ⊎ ({send} ×
 L ) classifies events. A send event has kind (send, B), where B is its intended
 receiver. The map pid : E → L assigns each event to its lifeline, and val assigns
 an event valuation to each event. For A ∈ L , define EA = {e ∈ E | pid(e) = A}
 and →A = → ∩ (EA × EA ). The tuple satisfies the following conditions.
  (i) The relation → is local: if e → f , then pid(e) = pid(f ).
 (ii) For each A, the relation →A is the immediate-successor relation of a finite
      linear order on EA . We write ≤A for its reflexive transitive closure and <A
      for the corresponding strict order.
(iii) The message relation ◁ is a partial matching between send and receive
      events. If s ◁ r, then

           kind(s) = (send, pid(r)),     kind(r) = recv,      pid(s) ̸= pid(r).


                                          6
     Every receive has exactly one matching send, and every send has at most
     one matching receive. Unmatched sends are messages still in transit, but
     their intended receiver is still given by their event kind. Note that messages
     are not necessarily delivered in FIFO order.
(iv) The graph generated by local successor edges and message edges is acyclic.

    The Lean development formalizes event kinds, message matching, and the
semantic interface used by CPL: lifelines, local order, causal order, valuations,
and the previous-local and latest-visible navigation operations.
    The causal order ≤M is the reflexive transitive closure of local successor edges
and message edges. By acyclicity, ≤M is a partial order. We write e <M f if
e ≤M f and e ̸= f .
    For an event e, we write νe := val(e). Thus νe (x) is the value of variable x at
event e. One can think of νe as the local store of the lifeline after event e. Actions
and receives may update this store, while send and choice events typically leave
it unchanged. For choice events, νe is the store on which the guard is evaluated.


4    Causal Past Logic

This section defines the guard language used at decision events. The logic is
past-time: formulas are evaluated at an event and refer only to the local and
causally visible history of that event.
                                    FORMALIZED
Definition 2 (CPL syntax       Lean   ). Variable terms t, atomic conditions
α, and CPL formulas φ are given by the following grammar:

             t ::= x | @A.x     α ::= p(t1 , . . . , tn )
             φ ::= α | @A(φ) | Yφ | φ1 S φ2 | φ1 ∧ φ2 | φ1 ∨ φ2 | ¬φ.

Here, x ranges over workflow variables and p ranges over application-level pred-
icate symbols. We use standard mathematical notation for common predicates.
Thus x < 10 abbreviates a unary predicate on x, status = approved abbreviates a
unary predicate on status, and @TestRunner.candidate = candidate abbreviates
a binary equality predicate applied to the two displayed terms.
    Moreover, Y and S are the usual previous and since operators from past-time
linear temporal logic, interpreted along the current lifeline. The operator @A(φ)
is the causal part: it evaluates φ at the latest visible event of lifeline A. The term
@A.x is different. It reads the value of x at that event and can only occur inside
atomic conditions.
    Let e ∈ E, and let A = pid(e). Define the previous local event, if it exists, by
lastloc (e) = max{f ∈ EA | f <A e}. For any lifeline B, define the latest visible
event of B from e by lastB (e) = max{f ∈ EB | f ≤M e}. Both maxima are
unique when they exist, since events on a lifeline are linearly ordered.
    The value of a variable term at event e is partial. It is defined by

             [[x]]M (e) = νe (x)   and           [[@A.x]]M (e) = νlastA (e) (x),


                                           7
when the right-hand side is defined. Atomic conditions are evaluated only when
all variable terms occurring in them are defined. If any term in a predicate
atom or comparison is undefined, then the atom is false. In particular, if no
latest visible A-event exists, then any atomic condition using @A.x is false. Thus
@A.x always reads the latest visible value of x on lifeline A. This is the current
event itself when e is on A, and the latest causally visible A-event otherwise.
Strict movement is expressed separately with the local previous operator Y. For
example, @A(Yφ) moves to the latest visible A-event and then one local step
back.
    The application fixes how atomic conditions are evaluated. We write νe |=M α
when the atomic condition α is true at event e. The judgment may depend on
M , because terms of the form @A.x are resolved through the causal structure of
the MSC. All unqualified variables are read from νe . Atomic predicates may also
inspect fixed event metadata, such as the event kind, but the examples below
use only local-store and latest-value data. Thus, the application fixes the atomic
predicates, while the MSC semantics fixes the temporal and causal operators.
                                         FORMALIZED
Definition 3 (CPL semantics           Lean    ). The satisfaction relation M, e |=
φ, defined for e ∈ E, is given inductively as follows:

       M, e |= α                if νe |=M α,
       M, e |= Yφ               if lastloc (e) is defined and M, lastloc (e) |= φ,
       M, e |= @A(φ)            if lastA (e) is defined and M, lastA (e) |= φ.

Boolean connectives are interpreted as usual. If lastloc (e) is undefined, then Yφ
is false; if no latest visible A-event exists, then @A(φ) is false. For e ∈ EA ,

                                    M, e |= φ1 S φ2

if there exists f ∈ EA with f ≤A e, M, f |= φ2 , and M, g |= φ1 for every g ∈ EA
with f <A g ≤A e.

   Thus the S navigation is local, while φ1 and φ2 may themselves contain causal
modalities. For example, status ̸= failed S status = passed holds at a TestRunner
event e if the required checks have passed and no failure has been recorded since,
up to e.
   Causal past is a derived notation and is non-strict:
                                    _
                             Pφ :=       @B(true S φ).
                                     B∈L

The lifeline-specific form is

                                PA (φ) := @A(true S φ).

    Thus, PA (φ) holds at e exactly when some event on lifeline A visible from e
satisfies φ, and Pφ is the disjunction over all lifelines. For instance, the formula
PTestRunner (status = passed) holds at an event e if some event on the TestRunner


                                            8
lifeline visible from e satisfies status = passed. The atom status = passed belongs
to the application layer; the causal-past quantification is defined by the logic.
     The abbreviation SeenA := @A(true) tests whether some event of A is visible.
If the current event itself is on A, this is true by non-strictness.


5    Online Monitoring

At runtime, each guard is evaluated by its owner lifeline. The monitor must
therefore track which events are causally visible at the current event. Each lifeline
A maintains a vector clock [20,27,32], which is of the form vcA : L → N. We use
vector clocks after the current event has been processed. Thus, after processing
an event e ∈ EA , the value vcA (B) records how many events of B are in the
causal past of e, including e itself when B = A. This matches the non-strict
semantics of @B(φ) and @B.x: both refer to the latest visible B-event. We let
eB
 k denote the k-th event on lifeline B (where indexing starts at 1).
    Let Φ be a finite set of CPL formulas, sub(Φ) the set of all their subformulas,
and Vars(Φ) the set of variable names that appear in cross-lifeline terms @B.x
in Φ. For the workflow under consideration, Φ contains all CPL guards that can
be evaluated at runtime, where derived shorthands such as PA are unfolded to
primitive CPL syntax before taking subformulas. The monitor state is designed
to answer three kinds of local queries: strict previous-local formulas, latest visible
formulas on each lifeline, and latest visible field values used by terms @B.x. This
is formalized in the following definition:
                                       FORMALIZED
Definition 4 (Monitor state            Lean         ). At each lifeline A, the monitor
maintains:

 – a vector clock vcA : L → N;
 – a partial Boolean latest-value view viewA : L × sub(Φ) ⇀ {0, 1};
 – a partial variable view varA : L × Vars(Φ) ⇀ Val, where Val is the domain
   of stored values;
 – a local store σA for the current event valuation;
 – a previous-local copy oldA (ψ) ∈ {0, 1} for each ψ ∈ sub(Φ), used during
   formula evaluation.

In a stable state, after an event update has completed, the clock is the presence
test for the two latest-value tables: entries with first component B are defined
exactly when vcA (B) > 0. If vcA (B) = k > 0, those entries refer to the k-th
event of B; if vcA (B) = 0, they are absent.

    The previous-local copy oldA is total, not partial. At the first event of A, it
is set to 0 for every ψ ∈ sub(Φ).
    For a fixed workflow, the Boolean part of the monitor state has size O(|L | ·
|sub(Φ)|) per lifeline, plus the temporary local copy used during one update.
Variable views add O(|L |·|Vars(Φ)|) selected data values. The vector-clock com-
ponents are unbounded counters. This is consistent with lower bounds showing


                                          9
that finite-state monitors cannot in general track latest values exactly [9]. In
practice, these counters are bounded by the lifetime of the run or a timeout.
    We reason about a run by fixing an arbitrary linear extension of the causal
order of the MSC. Each event is processed by the monitor of its own lifeline when
that event occurs. The prefix processed before an event is therefore causally
closed: if an event has been processed, all of its causal predecessors have been
processed as well.
    When lifeline A creates a new event, the monitor runs Algorithm 1. For
a receive, it first merges the vector clock, Boolean views, and variable views
carried by the incoming message. Entries are copied from the message exactly
when the message is ahead on a lifeline B. In that case the message clock is
positive on B, so the corresponding message entries are defined. The monitor
then increments its local clock component, updates the local store, evaluates
all subformulas bottom-up (Algorithm 2), and records the results. All messages
carry vector clocks and latest-value views; the algorithm treats user messages
and projection-internal control messages uniformly.
    The local store update is performed only by effect: actions and receives update
the store, while sends and choice events leave it unchanged.
    Algorithm 2 computes truth values bottom-up. If there is no previous local
event, Yθ is false; if no latest visible B-event exists, @B(θ) is false. The @B(θ)
case is non-strict: for B = A it evaluates θ at the current event, and for B ̸= A,
it first checks whether a B-event is visible and only then reads viewA (B, θ).
A previous local event exists when vcA (A) > 1. We write (σA , varA ) |= α for
runtime atomic evaluation: unqualified variables are read from σA , terms @B.x
are read from varA (B, x), and a missing required field makes the atom false. For
example, the Committer evaluates
                      @TestRunner.candidate = candidate
by comparing varCommitter (TestRunner, candidate) with its current local candidate.
                                                           FORMALIZED
Definition 5 (Coherent pre-evaluation state         Lean   ). Let e ∈ EA . The
monitor state of A is coherent before evaluating formulas at e if the following
conditions hold.
(i) For every lifeline B,
                            vcA (B) = |{f ∈ EB | f ≤M e}|.
     Thus, if vcA (B) = k > 0, then the latest visible event of B from e is eB
                                                                             k.
(ii) For every B ̸= A with k = vcA (B) > 0, the entries for B are defined and
     describe eB
               k:
                          viewA (B, ψ) = 1 iff M, eB   k |= ψ
    for all ψ ∈ sub(Φ), and
                               varA (B, x) = val(eB
                                                  k )(x)

    for all x ∈ Vars(Φ). If vcA (B) = 0, then no B-event is visible and all entries
    viewA (B, ψ) and varA (B, x) are absent.


                                        10
                  Algorithm 1. Event update and view propagation.
  1   procedure ON_EVENT(A, e)
  2     if kind(e) = recv then
  3       µ ← message(e)
  4       for B ∈ L do
  5         if µ.vc(B) > vcA (B) then
  6           for ψ ∈ sub(Φ) do
  7             viewA (B, ψ) ← µ.view(B, ψ)
  8           end
  9           for x ∈ Vars(Φ) do
 10             varA (B, x) ← µ.var(B, x)
 11           end
 12         end
 13       end
 14       vcA ← max(vcA , µ.vc)
 15     end
 16

 17     for ψ ∈ sub(Φ) do
 18       oldA (ψ) ← viewA (A, ψ) if defined, otherwise 0
 19     end
 20

 21     vcA (A) ← vcA (A) + 1
 22     σA ← effect(e, σA )
 23     for x ∈ Vars(Φ) do
 24       varA (A, x) ← σA (x)
 25     end
 26

 27     for ψ ∈ sub(Φ) in bottom-up order do
 28       valA (ψ) ← EvalA (ψ, e, oldA )
 29     end
 30     for ψ ∈ sub(Φ) do
 31       viewA (A, ψ) ← valA (ψ)
 32     end
 33

 34     if kind(e) = (send, B) then
 35       emit to B the message (payload(e), vcA , viewA , varA )
 36     end
 37   end




(iii) For the owner lifeline A, the local store induces the current event valuation:
      for every unqualified variable x monitored by the formulas,

                                    σA (x) = val(e)(x).

      Moreover, varA (A, x) is defined and equal to val(e)(x) for every x ∈ Vars(Φ).
      No condition is imposed on the owner Boolean entries viewA (A, ψ) before for-


                                           11
          Algorithm 2. Formula evaluation at the current event on lifeline A.
 1    procedure EvalA (ψ, e, oldA )
 2      case ψ of
 3        α: return (σA , varA ) |= α
 4        Yθ:
 5          return (vcA (A) > 1) ∧ oldA (θ)
 6        @B(θ):
 7          if B = A then return EvalA (θ, e, oldA )
 8          else if vcA (B) = 0 then return 0
 9          else return viewA (B, θ)
 10       θ1 S θ 2 :
 11         prev ← (vcA (A) > 1) ∧ oldA (θ1 S θ2 )
 12         return EvalA (θ2 , e, oldA ) ∨ (EvalA (θ1 , e, oldA ) ∧ prev )
 13       ¬θ: return ¬EvalA (θ, e, oldA )
 14       θ1 ∧ θ2 : return EvalA (θ1 , e, oldA ) ∧ EvalA (θ2 , e, oldA )
 15       θ1 ∨ θ2 : return EvalA (θ1 , e, oldA ) ∨ EvalA (θ2 , e, oldA )
 16     end
 17   end




     mula evaluation; they are overwritten by Algorithm 1 after the subformulas
     have been evaluated.
(iv) For every ψ ∈ sub(Φ), oldA (ψ) is the truth value of ψ at the previous local
     event of A, if such an event exists, and is false otherwise.
                                             VERIFIED
Lemma 1 (Local evaluation            Lean  ). Let e ∈ EA . Suppose the monitor
state of A is coherent before evaluating formulas at e. Then, for every ψ ∈
sub(Φ),
                    EvalA (ψ, e, oldA ) = 1 iff M, e |= ψ.

Proof. The proof is by structural induction on ψ.
Atomic condition α. The runtime evaluates α against the current store σA and
the latest-visible variable views varA (B, x). Unqualified variables are read from
σA , which agrees with val(e) by coherence. For @A.x, coherence gives the value
of x at lastA (e) = e. For @B.x with B ̸= A, coherence gives the value of x at
eB
 vcA (B) = lastB (e) when a visible B-event exists; if none exists, both the runtime
and the semantics make the atom false.
Boolean connectives. The cases for ¬θ, θ1 ∧ θ2 , and θ1 ∨ θ2 follow directly from
the induction hypothesis.
Previous: Yθ. If vcA (A) = 1, then e is the first local event of A, so there is
no previous local event and both sides are false. Otherwise, coherence says that
oldA (θ) is the truth value of θ at the previous local event, which is exactly the
semantics of Y.
At-operator: @B(θ). If B = A, non-strictness gives lastA (e) = e, and the al-
gorithm recursively evaluates θ at the current event. The result is correct by


                                                12
 induction. If B ̸= A, the algorithm reads the latest-value view viewA (B, θ),
 which is correct by coherence. If no B-event is visible, both sides are false.
 Since: θ1 S θ2 . The algorithm uses the standard recurrence      for past-time since
 over the local order of A, i.e., θ1 S θ2 ≡ θ2 ∨ θ1 ∧ Y(θ1 S θ2 ) . The current values
 of θ1 and θ2 are correct by the induction hypothesis, and the previous value of
 the since formula is provided by oldA .                                             ⊔
                                                                                     ⊓
                                                  VERIFIED
 Lemma 2 (Monitor-state invariants             Lean ). After Algorithm 1 has pro-
 cessed an event e ∈ EA , the following hold for every lifeline B:
  (i) vcA (B) = |{f ∈ EB | f ≤M e}|.
 (ii) If vcA (B) = 0, then all entries varA (B, x) and viewA (B, ψ) are absent.
(iii) If vcA (B) = k > 0, then varA (B, x) is defined and equal to val(eB k )(x), for
      every x ∈ Vars(Φ).
(iv) If vcA (B) = k > 0, then viewA (B, ψ) is defined and

                            viewA (B, ψ) = 1    iff   M, eB
                                                          k |= ψ

     for every ψ ∈ sub(Φ).

 Proof. Fix a linear extension of the causal order. We proceed by induction over
 this order. Equivalently, the induction hypothesis is available for the causally
 closed prefix processed before the current event.
 Base case. Before any event is processed, vcA (B) = 0 for all B. No event is yet
 causally visible, so (i) holds. The latest-value tables are empty, so (ii) holds; (iii)
 and (iv) are irrelevant since no clock component is positive.
 Non-receive event e on A. This covers act, send, and choice events. The algorithm
 increments vcA (A) by one and leaves all other clock components unchanged.

  (i) This matches the causal past: since e is not a receive, the only newly visible
      event is e itself, on lifeline A.
 (ii) No entry becomes absent when processing an event; for lifelines whose clock
      remains zero, the tables remain empty.
(iii) The algorithm writes varA (A, x) ← val(e)(x) from the current local store,
      which equals val(eA                      A
                           vcA (A) )(x) since evcA (A) = e. For B ̸= A, varA (B, x) is
      unchanged and no new B-event became visible, so the stored value still
      refers to the correct event by induction.
(iv) Algorithm 1 overwrites viewA (A, ψ) with the value of ψ at e. The monitor
      state is coherent before formula evaluation: (i) gives the clock condition,
      remote views are unchanged and correct by induction, the local store has
      just been updated to induce val(e), local variable views have just been up-
      dated to val(e), and oldA contains the previous local truth values. Hence
      Lemma 1 gives the correctness of the new local Boolean entries. For B ̸= A,
      viewA (B, ψ) is unchanged.

 Receive event e on A, matching send s on B. The message carries vcsB , viewsB ,
 varsB , the monitor state of B immediately after s. By induction, all four invariants


                                           13
 hold for B at s. Since s <M e, every event causally visible to B at s is also
                                             −
 causally visible to A at e. Write vc−                  −
                                     A , viewA , and varA for the monitor state on
 A just before the receive merge.
    The algorithm sets vcA (C) ← max(vcA (C), vcsB (C)) for each C, then incre-
 ments vcA (A).

  (i) For C ̸= A: the only new non-local causal information at the receive event
      comes through the matching message edge s ◁ e. Hence a C-event visible at
      e is either already visible to A before the receive, or visible to B at the send
      event s. By induction, the two counts are vc−                   s
                                                          A (C) and vcB (C). Both sets of
      C-events are prefixes of the local order on C. Therefore their union is the
      longer prefix, whose size is the maximum of the two sizes.
      For C = A: any A-event visible to B at s is already a local predecessor of e.
      Indeed, if such an event a were after e on lifeline A, then a ≤M s <M e <A a,
      a causal cycle. Hence vcsB (A) ≤ vc−    A (A). The merge therefore does not change
      the A-component, and the final increment accounts for e itself.
 (ii) If the resulting clock on C is zero, then both incoming snapshots have clock
      zero on C, so both have absent entries by induction and the result remains
      absent.
(iii) The algorithm copies varsB (C, x) into varA (C, x) exactly when vcsB (C) >
      vc−A (C), i.e., when the sender is strictly ahead on C. By induction, we have
                                                                                    −
      varsB (C, x) = val(eC                                               s
                          vcsB (C) )(x), so the copy is correct. When vcB (C) ≤ vcA (C),
      the local view is already at least as recent as the sender’s view, so no copy
      is needed. The local entry varA (A, x) is set to val(e)(x) as in the non-receive
      case.
(iv) The same merge applies to viewA (C, ψ): when vcsB (C) > vc−                  s
                                                                       A (C), viewB (C, ψ)
      is copied. By induction,

                          viewsB (C, ψ) = 1    iff M, eC
                                                       vcs (C) |= ψ.
                                                               B


     For C ̸= A, after the vector-clock merge, the stored table entry refers to the
     correct latest visible event of C. After the merge and the local updates of
     Algorithm 1, the monitor state is coherent, so Lemma 1 applies as in the
     non-receive case.

 This concludes the proof of Lemma 2.                                                   ⊓
                                                                                        ⊔
     For an event e ∈ EA , let valeA (φ) denote the value computed for φ by Algo-
 rithm 1 during the update for e. The theorem applies to individual executions.
 Agreement on branch outcomes at the workflow level follows from ZipperGen’s
 projection discipline.
                                                    VERIFIED
 Theorem 1 (Monitor correctness              Lean ). Let M be an MSC, fix any
 linear extension of its causal order, and run the distributed monitors along this
 order. If e ∈ EA is an event on lifeline A, then immediately after the monitor
 on A has processed e, every formula φ ∈ Φ satisfies

                             valeA (φ) = 1    iff     M, e |= φ.


                                              14
        Algorithm 3. Variable-view fragment of a CPL guard in ZipperGen.
     same_candidate = At[TestRunner].candidate == Here.candidate

     @workflow
     def merge_candidate(candidate: str @ Orchestrator) -> str:
         ...
         if same_candidate @ Committer:
             Committer: decision = approve(candidate)
         else:
             Committer: decision = reject(candidate)



Proof. After processing e, the algorithm has copied valA (φ) into viewA (A, φ). By
Lemma 2(i), vcA (A) is the local index of e, so eA
                                                 vcA (A) = e. Applying Lemma 2(iv)
with B = A, we get viewA (A, φ) = 1 iff M, e |= φ. Since valeA (φ) = viewA (A, φ)
immediately after the update, the claim follows.                                 ⊓
                                                                                 ⊔

Implementation. CPL guards are implemented in a ZipperGen prototype1 , an
open-source Python framework for multi-agent LLM coordination. Guards are
Python expressions using At[B].x for variable terms, Here.x for the owner’s
current store, and standard Boolean connectives. The prototype keeps the mon-
itor state locally, sends vector clocks and latest-value views with each mes-
sage, and evaluates guards before owner-side choice events. Algorithm 3 shows
the variable-view part of the guard. The temporal status checks are imple-
mented analogously. The guard same candidate compares the variable view
varCommitter (TestRunner, candidate) with Committer’s local candidate. The merge
is blocked whenever the test result on record is for a different version.


6     Related Work
Runtime verification often monitors sequential traces against temporal specifica-
tions [4, 6, 30]. Frameworks such as Java-MOP and AspectJ-based temporal as-
sertions bring such specifications closer to the source [15, 45], and Control-Flow
Temporal Logic connects temporal reasoning with program control flow [17].
Runtime enforcement goes further: a monitor can prevent policy-violating exe-
cutions rather than only raising an alarm [41]. CPL formulas are not external
specifications checked after execution. They are source-level guards, evaluated
where a branch or loop decision is made.
    Several recent frameworks add runtime safety checks to LLM agent systems,
covering output validation, step-level contracts, message-action auditing, and
temporal compliance [2,39,46,48]. For instance, TRAC [2] uses LTL progression
over labeled input-output histories and also considers prediction and interven-
tion. Such approaches are typically based on a combined log or input-output
1
    https://zippergen.io


                                       15
history. CPL uses causal order instead, because a log event may still be invisible
to the lifeline making the next decision.
    The underlying workflow framework, ZipperGen [11], builds on choreographic
programming and multiparty session types [14, 24, 25, 35, 43]: global specifica-
tions are projected to asynchronous local programs with explicit owner life-
lines for control-flow choices. Global assertions add logical constraints that can
be projected to endpoints [8], and runtime monitoring for multiparty session
types projects such specifications to local monitors that check endpoint con-
formance [7, 16]. Recent work studies the monitorability of session-type confor-
mance and black-box multiparty protocol implementations [13, 23]. The Scrib-
ble/Python work on interruptible conversations [18] combines projection, end-
point monitoring, and asynchronous control constructs. CPL serves a different
role: formulas are workflow guards evaluated by the decision owner, and their
truth values determine the subsequent control flow. Pact [21] is complementary
work on choreographies for agentic workflows, adding strategic choices, utilities,
and priors so that protocols can be analyzed as games.
    The MSC formalism [3, 26] organizes events on lifelines into a causal par-
tial order. Logics over similar structures include local past dynamic logic [1]
over Mazurkiewicz traces [33], bidirectional dynamic logic for message-passing
systems [12], star-free propositional dynamic logic and process-indexed tempo-
ral modalities over MSCs [10], and local temporal reasoning over Lamport-style
diagrams [34]. CPL is narrower: its operators are chosen so that formulas can
be evaluated online by the decision owner without reconstructing the full causal
history. MSCs are also used as specifications for distributed runtime verification,
including offline matching with partial observation [31,47] and monitoring invari-
ant under reordering, local monitorability, and partial-order cuts [19, 29, 38, 44].
Vector clocks appear in causal monitoring of multithreaded programs [28, 42].
Our monitor uses vector clocks only to track the formula values and variable
values needed for workflow guards.
    Decentralized runtime verification distributes monitoring across system com-
ponents [5, 36]. Knowledge-based approaches study when a process has seen
enough to report a violation [22], and decentralized enforcement uses vector
clocks to prevent unwanted message sequences [40]. In CPL there is no separate
monitoring layer: guards are part of the workflow source, evaluated at branch
and loop points using exactly the causal information available there.


7   Conclusion

We presented Causal Past Logic, a past-time temporal logic for source-level
guards in distributed agent workflows. Guards are evaluated locally by the lifeline
that owns a branch or loop, and their truth values choose the next control-flow
step. The relevant past is not a prefix of a global log, but the causal past visible
at the MSC event where the decision is made. Future work includes evaluating
the implementation on realistic LLM agent workflows, including concurrent code
review with test and security checks, retries, and handoff to a human reviewer.

                                        16
References
 1. Adsul, B., Gastin, P., Kulkarni, S., Weil, P.: An expressively complete local past
    propositional dynamic logic over mazurkiewicz traces and its applications. In:
    Sobocinski, P., Lago, U.D., Esparza, J. (eds.) Proceedings of the 39th Annual
    ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2024, Tallinn, Esto-
    nia, July 8-11, 2024. pp. 2:1–2:13. ACM (2024)
 2. Alamdari, P.A., Klassen, T.Q., McIlraith, S.A.: Formal methods meet LLMs: Au-
    diting, monitoring, and intervention for compliance of advanced AI systems. In:
    Proceedings of the 2026 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
    parency (FAccT 2026). ACM, Montreal, QC, Canada (Jun 2026), to appear
 3. Alur, R., Yannakakis, M.: Model checking of message sequence charts. In: Baeten,
    J.C.M., Mauw, S. (eds.) CONCUR ’99: Concurrency Theory, 10th International
    Conference, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, August 24-27, 1999, Proceedings. pp.
    114–129. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer (1999)
 4. Bartocci, E., Falcone, Y., Francalanza, A., Reger, G.: Introduction to runtime
    verification. In: Bartocci, E., Falcone, Y. (eds.) Lectures on Runtime Verification -
    Introductory and Advanced Topics, pp. 1–33. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
    Springer (2018)
 5. Bauer, A., Falcone, Y.: Decentralised LTL monitoring. Formal Methods Syst. Des.
    48(1-2), 46–93 (2016)
 6. Bauer, A., Leucker, M., Schallhart, C.: Runtime verification for LTL and TLTL.
    ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 20(4), 14:1–14:64 (2011)
 7. Bocchi, L., Chen, T., Demangeon, R., Honda, K., Yoshida, N.: Monitoring networks
    through multiparty session types. Theor. Comput. Sci. 669, 33–58 (2017)
 8. Bocchi, L., Honda, K., Tuosto, E., Yoshida, N.: A theory of design-by-contract for
    distributed multiparty interactions. In: Gastin, P., Laroussinie, F. (eds.) CONCUR
    2010 - Concurrency Theory, 21th International Conference, CONCUR 2010, Paris,
    France, August 31-September 3, 2010. Proceedings. pp. 162–176. Lecture Notes in
    Computer Science, Springer (2010)
 9. Bollig, B., Fortin, M., Gastin, P.: Gossiping in message-passing systems. CoRR
    abs/1802.08641 (2018)
10. Bollig, B., Fortin, M., Gastin, P.: Communicating finite-state machines, first-order
    logic, and star-free propositional dynamic logic. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 115, 22–53
    (2021)
11. Bollig, B., Függer, M., Nowak, T.: Provable coordination for LLM agents via mes-
    sage sequence charts. CoRR abs/2604.17612 (2026)
12. Bollig, B., Kuske, D., Meinecke, I.: Propositional dynamic logic for message-passing
    systems. Log. Methods Comput. Sci. 6(3) (2010)
13. Burlò, C.B., Francalanza, A., Scalas, A.: On the monitorability of session types, in
    theory and practice (artifact). Dagstuhl Artifacts Ser. 7(2), 02:1–02:3 (2021)
14. Carbone, M., Montesi, F.: Deadlock-freedom-by-design: multiparty asynchronous
    global programming. In: Giacobazzi, R., Cousot, R. (eds.) The 40th Annual ACM
    SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL
    ’13, Rome, Italy - January 23 - 25, 2013. pp. 263–274. ACM (2013)
15. Chen, F., Rosu, G.: Java-mop: A monitoring oriented programming environment
    for java. In: Halbwachs, N., Zuck, L.D. (eds.) Tools and Algorithms for the Con-
    struction and Analysis of Systems, 11th International Conference, TACAS 2005,
    Held as Part of the Joint European Conferences on Theory and Practice of Soft-
    ware, ETAPS 2005, Edinburgh, UK, April 4-8, 2005, Proceedings. pp. 546–550.
    Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer (2005)


                                           17
16. Chen, T., Bocchi, L., Deniélou, P., Honda, K., Yoshida, N.: Asynchronous dis-
    tributed monitoring for multiparty session enforcement. In: Bruni, R., Sassone, V.
    (eds.) Trustworthy Global Computing - 6th International Symposium, TGC 2011,
    Aachen, Germany, June 9-10, 2011. Revised Selected Papers. pp. 25–45. Lecture
    Notes in Computer Science, Springer (2011)
17. Dawes, J.H., Reger, G.: Explaining violations of properties in control-flow temporal
    logic. In: Finkbeiner, B., Mariani, L. (eds.) Runtime Verification - 19th Interna-
    tional Conference, RV 2019, Porto, Portugal, October 8-11, 2019, Proceedings. pp.
    202–220. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer (2019)
18. Demangeon, R., Honda, K., Hu, R., Neykova, R., Yoshida, N.: Practical interrupt-
    ible conversations: distributed dynamic verification with multiparty session types
    and python. Formal Methods Syst. Des. 46(3), 197–225 (2015)
19. Diekert, V., Muscholl, A.: On distributed monitoring of asynchronous systems. In:
    Ong, C.L., de Queiroz, R.J.G.B. (eds.) Logic, Language, Information and Com-
    putation - 19th International Workshop, WoLLIC 2012, Buenos Aires, Argentina,
    September 3-6, 2012. Proceedings. pp. 70–84. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
    Springer (2012)
20. Fidge, C.J.: Timestamps in message-passing systems that preserve the partial or-
    dering. In: Proceedings of the 11th Australian Computer Science Conference. Aus-
    tralian Computer Science Communications, vol. 10, pp. 56–66 (Feb 1988)
21. Gopinathan, K., Feser, J., Naim, M., Tavares, Z., Bingham, E.: Pact: A choreo-
    graphic language for agentic ecosystems. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International
    Workshop on Choreographic Programming (CP 2026) (2026), to appear. Also avail-
    able as arXiv:2605.03143
22. Graf, S., Peled, D.A., Quinton, S.: Monitoring distributed systems using knowledge.
    In: Bruni, R., Dingel, J. (eds.) Formal Techniques for Distributed Systems - Joint
    13th IFIP WG 6.1 International Conference, FMOODS 2011, and 31st IFIP WG
    6.1 International Conference, FORTE 2011, Reykjavik, Iceland, June 6-9, 2011.
    Proceedings. pp. 183–197. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer (2011)
23. van den Heuvel, B., Pérez, J.A., Dobre, R.A.: Monitoring blackbox implementa-
    tions of multiparty session protocols. In: Katsaros, P., Nenzi, L. (eds.) Runtime
    Verification - 23rd International Conference, RV 2023, Thessaloniki, Greece, Octo-
    ber 3-6, 2023, Proceedings. pp. 66–85. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer
    (2023)
24. Hirsch, A.K., Garg, D.: Pirouette: higher-order typed functional choreographies.
    Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 6(POPL), 1–27 (2022)
25. Honda, K., Yoshida, N., Carbone, M.: Multiparty asynchronous session types. J.
    ACM 63(1), 9:1–9:67 (2016)
26. ITU-T: Recommendation Z.120: Message sequence chart (MSC). Tech. rep., Inter-
    national Telecommunication Union (2011)
27. Lamport, L.: Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a distributed system.
    Commun. ACM 21(7), 558–565 (1978)
28. de León, H.P., Haar, S., Longuet, D.: Distributed testing of concurrent systems:
    Vector clocks to the rescue. In: Ciobanu, G., Méry, D. (eds.) Theoretical Aspects
    of Computing - ICTAC 2014 - 11th International Colloquium, Bucharest, Roma-
    nia, September 17-19, 2014. Proceedings. pp. 369–387. Lecture Notes in Computer
    Science, Springer (2014)
29. Leucker, M.: A note on runtime verification of concurrent systems. In: Bertrand,
    N., Dubslaff, C., Klüppelholz, S. (eds.) Principles of Formal Quantitative Analysis
    - Essays Dedicated to Christel Baier on the Occasion of Her 60th Birthday. pp.
    253–265. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer (2025)


                                          18
30. Leucker, M., Schallhart, C.: A brief account of runtime verification. J. Log. Alge-
    braic Methods Program. 78(5), 293–303 (2009)
31. Mahe, E., Bannour, B., Gaston, C., Gall, P.L.: Efficient interaction-based offline
    runtime verification of distributed systems with lifeline removal. Sci. Comput. Pro-
    gram. 241, 103230 (2025)
32. Mattern, F.: Virtual time and global states of distributed systems. In: Parallel and
    Distributed Algorithms: Proceedings of the International Workshop on Parallel
    and Distributed Algorithms. pp. 215–226. North-Holland, Amsterdam (1989)
33. Mazurkiewicz, A.W.: Trace theory. In: Brauer, W., Reisig, W., Rozenberg, G. (eds.)
    Petri Nets: Central Models and Their Properties, Advances in Petri Nets 1986, Part
    II, Proceedings of an Advanced Course, Bad Honnef, Germany, 8-19 September
    1986. pp. 279–324. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer (1986)
34. Meenakshi, B., Ramanujam, R.: Reasoning about message passing in finite state
    environments. In: Montanari, U., Rolim, J.D.P., Welzl, E. (eds.) Automata, Lan-
    guages and Programming, 27th International Colloquium, ICALP 2000, Geneva,
    Switzerland, July 9-15, 2000, Proceedings. pp. 487–498. Lecture Notes in Computer
    Science, Springer (2000)
35. Montesi, F.: Introduction to Choreographies. Cambridge University Press (2023)
36. Mostafa, M., Bonakdarpour, B.: Decentralized runtime verification of LTL spec-
    ifications in distributed systems. In: 2015 IEEE International Parallel and Dis-
    tributed Processing Symposium, IPDPS 2015, Hyderabad, India, May 25-29, 2015.
    pp. 494–503. IEEE Computer Society (2015)
37. de Moura, L., Ullrich, S.: The Lean 4 theorem prover and programming language.
    In: Platzer, A., Sutcliffe, G. (eds.) Automated Deduction - CADE 28 - 28th In-
    ternational Conference on Automated Deduction, Virtual Event, July 12-15, 2021,
    Proceedings. pp. 625–635. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer (2021)
38. Omer, M., Peled, D., Porat, E., Garg, V.K.: Monitoring distributed systems based
    on partial order executions with global states. In: Könighofer, B., Torfah, H. (eds.)
    Runtime Verification - 25th International Conference, RV 2025, Graz, Austria,
    September 15-19, 2025, Proceedings. pp. 252–273. Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
    ence, Springer (2025)
39. Paduraru, C., Bouruc, P.L., Stefanescu, A.: A trace-based assurance framework for
    agentic AI orchestration: Contracts, testing, and governance (2026)
40. Samadi, M., Ghassemi, F., Khosravi, R.: Decentralized runtime verification of mes-
    sage sequences in message-based systems. Acta Informatica 60(2), 145–178 (2023)
41. Schneider, F.B.: Enforceable security policies. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur. 3(1),
    30–50 (2000)
42. Sen, K., Vardhan, A., Agha, G., Rosu, G.: Decentralized runtime analysis of mul-
    tithreaded applications. In: 20th International Parallel and Distributed Processing
    Symposium (IPDPS 2006), Proceedings, 25-29 April 2006, Rhodes Island, Greece.
    IEEE (2006)
43. Shen, G., Kashiwa, S., Kuper, L.: Haschor: Functional choreographic programming
    for all (functional pearl). Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7(ICFP), 541–565 (2023)
44. Soueidi, C., Falcone, Y.: Sound concurrent traces for online monitoring. In: Caltais,
    G., Schilling, C. (eds.) Model Checking Software - 29th International Symposium,
    SPIN 2023, Paris, France, April 26-27, 2023, Proceedings. pp. 59–80. Lecture Notes
    in Computer Science, Springer (2023)
45. Stolz, V., Bodden, E.: Temporal assertions using aspectj. In: Barringer, H.,
    Finkbeiner, B., Gurevich, Y., Sipma, H. (eds.) Proceedings of the Fifth Work-
    shop on Runtime Verification, RV@CAV 2005, Edinburgh, UK, July 12, 2005.


                                           19
    pp. 109–124. No. 4 in Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, Elsevier
    (2005)
46. Wang, H., Poskitt, C.M., Sun, J.: Agentspec: Customizable runtime enforcement
    for safe and reliable LLM agents. CoRR abs/2503.18666 (2025)
47. Weil-Kennedy, C., Rammal, D., Gaston, C., Lapitre, A.: Runtime verification of
    interactions using automata. CoRR abs/2511.00531 (2025)
48. Zhang, Y., Emma, S.Y., En, A.L.J., Dong, J.S.: RvLLM: LLM runtime verification
    with domain knowledge. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
    38: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2025, NeurIPS
    2025 (2025)




                                        20
