                                                 S HEPHERD: Enabling Programmable
                                         Meta-Agents via Reversible Agentic Execution Traces


                                                                              Simon Yu∗1 Derek Chong∗2 Ananjan Nandi∗2
                                                                   Dilara Soylu2 Jiuding Sun2 Christopher D Manning2 Weiyan Shi1
                                                                                1
                                                                                  Northeastern University 2 Stanford University




arXiv:2605.10913v3 [cs.AI] 24 Jun 2026
                                                                                   {yu.chi, we.shi}@northeastern.edu
                                                                     {derekch, ananjan, soylu, sunjd24, manning}@stanford.edu
                                                                                               ∗
                                                                                                 Equal contribution
                                                                                             Website                                   [ Blog            § Framework
                                                                                                                                                       from shepherd import agent, observe, revert, fork
                                                                                                                                                       # agent
                                                                      Create    Observe               Intercept                                        @agent(LLM="haiku")
                                            Meta-agent                                                                                                 def implement(repo, feature):
                                                                                                                                                           "Implement feature in repo"
                                                                                                 Revert
                                                                                                                                                       # meta-agent
                                                                                                                                           ╳   fail    @agent(LLM="opus", tool=[observe, revert, fork])
                                                                                            tool-call edit (buggy)                                     def oversee(agent_run):
                                                                                 LLM-call                                     LLM-call
                                                                       Agent                                                                               ”If tests break, revert the agent and retry"
                                                                                             Fork
                                                                                                                                           ✓ pass      # meta-agent manages the agent
                                                                                                    edit (patched)                                     agent_run = implement(repo, "login")
                                                                                                                              LLM-call                 implemented = oversee(agent_run)


                                             (a) Multi-Agent Runtime Intervention                                            (b) Counterfactual Optimization                            (c) Meta-Agent-Guided Tree RL
                                                (Pair Coding)               CooperBench                                                   LiveCodeBench                                             TerminalBench-2
                                                   60                                          54.7                                                                                          Base     FlatGRPO     Tree-GRPO +
                                                                                                                                       GEPA             CRO
                                                                                                                             50                                                                            39.4
                                                                                  45.3                                                 48.7%           51.0%                            40                                        37.2




                                             Pass Rate (%)                                                   Pass Rate (%)                                              Pass Rate (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    34.2                   33.8
                                                             40                                                                                                                                                     30.3
                                                                     28.8                                                    40                                                              26.1
                                                                                                                                                         MetaHarness
                                                                                                                                      Unoptimized             40.0%                     20
                                                             20                                                              30
                                                                                                                                         30.7%

                                                              0                                                              20                                                          0
                                                                   w/o meta-   Sonnet 4.6 Opus 4.7
                                                                                                 4.7                              0      50     100     150      200                           Qwen3.5            Nemotron-3-Super
                                                                     agent         w/ meta-agent                                        Optimization wall-clock (min)                          35B-A3B               120B-A12B


                                         Figure 1: S HEPHERD meta-agents. Top: A meta-agent optimizes an agent’s execution trace. Bottom:
                                         Results from three meta-agents: (A) runtime intervention; (B) meta-optimization; (C) Tree-GRPO.

                                                                                                                                         Abstract
                                                                  As LLM agent systems take on more complex tasks, they increasingly rely on
                                                                  meta-agents: higher-order agents that create, operate on and manage other agents.
                                                                  Meta-agent operations such as coordinating agents, halting risky actions before
                                                                  execution, or repairing failed runs, require runtime manipulation of agentic ex-
                                                                  ecution. Yet existing agentic substrates make this difficult: they expose only
                                                                  transcripts and environment snapshots, forcing meta-agents to build ad hoc tool-
                                                                  ing to reconstruct and operate over full execution state. Therefore, we introduce
                                                                  S HEPHERD, a Python substrate grounded in functional programming principles,
                                                                  where an agent’s execution is itself a first-class object that a meta-agent can easily
                                                                  inspect and transform. Every model action, tool call, and environment change
                                                                  becomes a structured event in a reversible, Git-like execution trace, where any
                                                                  past state can be reverted 5× faster than docker commit and fork. Three example
                                                                  use cases show S HEPHERD’s versatility: (1) a supervisor meta-agent prevents
                                                                  conflicts among parallel coding agents, lifting pair-coding pass rate from 28.8%

                                         Preprint.
         to 54.7% on CooperBench; (2) a counterfactual optimization meta-agent repairs
         agent workflows by proposing edits and replaying runs from the point of changed
         behavior, outperforming MetaHarness on Terminal-Bench 2.0 by 12.8% with 58%
         lower wall-clock; (3) a training meta-agent picks fork points during rollouts to
         improve credit assignment in long-horizon agentic RL, doubling GRPO’s uplift
         on Terminal-Bench 2.0. We open-source S HEPHERD to enable principled and
         efficient operations over agentic execution for both users and meta-agents.



1   Introduction

As LLM-based agentic systems mature, we increasingly see the use of agents that act on other agents
at runtime. Asawa et al. [3], Lin et al. [24] develop advisor agents that learn intervention policies
from execution traces to steer agents away from dead ends; meta-optimizers such as GEPA and
MetaHarness optimize agentic workflows to improve performance on a given downstream task [2, 20];
and Hou et al. [11], Ji et al. [13] build tree-search RL that branches rollouts to compare rewards from
alternate continuations and improve per-step credit assignment. We call these systems meta-agents:
higher-order agents that operate over other agents and their execution traces, during or after execution.
Meta-agents are increasingly central to extracting capability from agentic systems [50].
Yet, existing agentic substrates are not Table 1: Support for meta-agent operations on a running
designed for meta-agents. Consider a agent. = fully supported; = supported only for the agent;
supervisor meta-agent that forks a cod-   = supported only for the environment; = not supported.
ing agent before a risky write, watches
the branch execute, and reverts the                  Intercept     Fork        Revert        Modify
change in the event of failure. To do Method         execution agent + env. to past state agent behavior
this, the meta-agent must observe the
running agent, intercept and fork it BranchFS
before the write, revert it on failure, Docker
modify it to fix the failure, and then OpenHands
resume execution. Recent work ex- AgentGit
poses fragments of these operations: S HEPHERD
OpenHands surfaces a session’s event
stream [41], AgentGit gives the worker Git-like commit tools [23], BranchFS isolates the filesys-
tem [38] (Table 1). However, these substrates are designed to maintain runtime state for the running
agent, not to give a meta-agent the operations it needs to act on that agent. As a result, meta-agent
implementations need to reinvent custom tooling to support these operations in practice.
We argue for a different approach: give an agent and its execution the first-class treatment functions
get in functional programming – structured data a meta-agent can hold, execute, copy, and rewrite.
This approach then enables algebraic effect handlers [30] that intercept and observe execution without
modifying it, allowing its reversion, as well as continuations [7] that support pause-inspect-decide-
resume patterns for meta-agents. We therefore propose            S HEPHERD, a principled functional
programming model for higher-order agents, instantiated as an intuitive Python substrate (Figure 1,
Section 3).
S HEPHERD defines agents as tasks with typed inputs and outputs, and records the execution of these
tasks in a reversible, Git-like execution trace: every agent action (tool call, filesystem modification,
database operation) becomes a commit in this trace, every fork is a branch, and every past agent-
environment state can be reverted to through checkouts. A meta-agent can then observe a task’s
execution by subscribing to its commits, intercept by pushing events into its trace, revert to any prior
agent-environment state by checking out the corresponding commit, fork a new copy of this state,
and modify the task itself by rewriting its definition.
Our principled functional programming grounding gives S HEPHERD meta-agents several powerful
capabilities: an observing meta-agent does not perturb the observed agent’s execution, parallel agents
can run as isolated processes over forked environments within a shared sandbox, and reverting to any
commit restores a byte-identical copy of the corresponding agent-environment state. We formalize
these properties through a small algebraic-effects calculus mechanized in Lean, which also provides
a precise semantic contract for the execution trace. The implementation is model-agnostic and


                                                   2
lightweight: for a 5.8 GB docker image, S HEPHERD forks the agent-environment state at 5× the
speed of a docker commit, and reuses over 95% of the LLM provider’s KV cache.
S HEPHERD enables the easy implementation of meta-agent applications that previously required
substantial bespoke engineering. We showcase three example meta-agents spanning a typical agent
lifecycle. During execution, a runtime supervisor meta-agent (§5.1) watches the execution traces of
parallel coding workers and intercepts before they conflict, raising CooperBench [17] joint pass rate
from 28.8% to 54.7%. After execution, a counterfactual meta-optimizer (§5.2) diagnoses failures in
prior agent runs and validates proposed fixes by branching runs at the first point where the fix would
change behavior, outperforming state-of-the-art meta-optimizers such as MetaHarness [20] by up
to 27.5% on benchmarks such as LiveCodeBench [12] and Terminal-Bench 2.0 [25], while cutting
wall-clock time by up to 58%. During training, a tree-search RL trainer (§5.3) forks rollouts at meta-
agent-chosen turns and samples sibling continuations to improve credit assignment by computing
advantages from outcome rewards, outperforming GRPO [33]’s performance when used to train
Qwen3.5-35B-A3B [32] on Terminal-Bench 2.0 by 5.2 points.
In summary, we contribute (i)      S HEPHERD, a programming model for higher-order agents whose
core operations are grounded in functional programming and mechanized in Lean; (ii) a Python
framework instantiating this model in a performant and efficient substrate; and (iii) three meta-agents
spanning the agent lifecycle built using the S HEPHERD substrate.



2   Related Work

Meta-Agents. Meta-agent applications are emerging in recent work [50, 49]. Darwin-Gödel
Machines [52] and Group-Evolving Agents [44] maintain dynamic archives of self-modifying code.
Hyperagents [53] and Meta-Harness [20] optimize a task agent’s problem-solving strategies at
the meta level. Other lines refine an agent’s context and long-term retrieval through evolutionary
search [26, 42] or memory-augmented architectures [55, 22, 56, 47, 43, 34]. Each of these methods
reinvents the runtime machinery needed to act on agents – parsing transcripts, building bespoke
environment snapshots, re-executing with modified source code. S HEPHERD provides a unified
substrate for these operations, letting a meta-agent observe agents without perturbing them, fork their
coupled agent-environment state, and replay prior execution byte-identically.


Agentic Meta-Optimization. Orchestrating multiple LLM agents is a common strategy for per-
forming complex tasks and inference-time scaling. Standard multi-agent frameworks [45, 10, 1] route
natural-language messages between workers; CooperBench [17] shows the coordination failures that
can result from this. Pipeline optimizers [16, 6, 57] and test-time scaling methods [18, 21] use parallel
rollouts and majority voting, evaluating each candidate by full end-to-end re-execution. GEPA [2]
introduces a reflective meta-agent that proposes workflow edits. These methods treat the underlying
execution as a black box and re-run candidates from scratch. S HEPHERD adds a different evaluation
primitive: a meta-agent can branch a worker’s context at the exact commit where an edit first alters
behavior and replay only the affected suffix (Section 4), so candidates reuse computation effectively.


Agentic Runtime and Infrastructure. A parallel line of research adds infrastructure support
for agentic state management, placing the checkpoint primitive at different layers of the software
stack. AgentGit [23] exposes version-control operations as cooperative tools the agent can invoke
from within a LangGraph workflow. BranchFS [38] adds a kernel-level branch() system call
that isolates filesystem state, independent of the worker’s tool-call structure. AgentSPEX [39]
embeds checkpointing into a domain-specific language for agent workflows. Each of these places
the checkpoint primitive at a different point in the stack, with different trade-offs between agent
autonomy, transparency, and language-level integration. S HEPHERD sits at a different point in this
design space: it couples environment states with the agent execution state, so the substrate observes
the same events the worker emits without requiring the worker to be rewritten or replayed from
scratch. This lets the same substrate support runtime supervision, post-hoc trajectory optimization,
meta-optimization and stateful RL under a unified interface.


                                                   3
3      The       S HEPHERD Programming Model
The supervisor meta-agent in Figure 1 needs the following operations on worker agents: ob-
serve what it is doing at runtime, intercept and fork execution before a risky write to try
an alternative continuation, revert changes in case of failure, and then modify the agent
to fix the issue and resume execution. These are operations difficult to support in exist-
ing substrates because agentic execution is full of side effects such as model calls, filesys-
tem writes, and tool invocations, that resist being treated as inspectable, manipulable values.

Functional programming has a long tradi- Table 2: Mapping of S HEPHERD primitives to runtime
tion of structuring effectful computation meta-agent operations enabled and functional program-
by drawing a boundary separating what ming (FP) constructs.
a computation describes from how its ef-
fects reach the world. Computation inside Primitive Runtime Operation Enabled FP construct
this boundary becomes observable, substi- Task           Modify agent behavior             typed function
tutable, branchable, and replayable. S HEP - Effect      Observe and intercept execution algebraic effect
HERD extends this discipline to agentic        Scope     Fork execution state              scoped effect handler
                                               Trace     Revert and replay from past state persistent data structure
execution, treating it as a first-class ob-
ject [46]. Doing so requires elevating four
concepts to first-class status: what the agent is (tasks, § 3.1), what it does (effects, § 3.2), where it
runs (scopes, § 3.3), and what has already been done (execution trace, § 3.4). Each primitive is
grounded in a functional-programming construct (Table 2), and key properties of S HEPHERD rest on
a small Lean-mechanized semantics for typed effect traces (Appendix B).
3.1     Task: Agent Definition

For a supervisor meta-agent to modify an agent – by changing its code, composing them into
workflows or even synthesizing helper agents at runtime – the agent must be a value: something
that can be held, passed as an argument, or returned from a call. Functional programming gives this
property to functions. A function with a typed input and a typed output is substitutable for any other
function with the same type, and a higher-order function can take functions as arguments. Agents
in S HEPHERD have the same shape. A task is a typed function over agentic execution with typed
input and output, and a body that may call LLMs, tools, and other tasks. They are declared using the
@agent decorator over typed Python functions, and can call models through providers:
 1    @agent ( LLM = " haiku " )
 2    def implement ( repo : GitWorkspace , feature : str ) -> GitPatch :
 3    " " " Implement the feature in the repo . " " "
 4
 5    @agent ( LLM = " opus " )
 6    def oversee ( agent_run : Task [ GitPatch ]) -> GitPatch :
 7    " " " Watch the agent ; fork before risky edits ; merge the passing patch . " " "


Tasks are substitutable values. A task is fully specified by its signature and docstring – S HEPHERD
compiles them into an LLM prompt guided by the docstring, where the output is validated against
the defined type. Users may also implement a body for the task when a mix of deterministic and
LLM-driven computation is required. As shown above, meta-agents in S HEPHERD are just tasks
whose arguments happen to be other tasks, and they therefore hierarchically allow for meta-meta-
agents over their execution. Any task with the same typed signature can also substitute for each other,
allowing meta-agents to easily edit behavior at runtime. Because a task is fully specified by this typed
signature and docstring, a meta-agent can also create new sub-agents at runtime by synthesizing fresh
task definitions, not only modify existing ones.
A task turns an agent into a value, but when an agent interacts with its environment, the substrate still
has no handle on it. The next primitive gives every such action a typed value of its own.

3.2     Effects: Agent Actions

A supervisor meta-agent needs to see what the worker agent is doing while it executes, without
perturbing it. Functional programming solves the analogous problem for effectful programs with


                                                         4
algebraic effects [29, 30]: any operation that touches the outside world (read a file, send a message)
is reified as a typed event, and a handler decides what that event means. The same program can be
run under different handlers without changing its source: one handler could execute it, while another
logs it.
S HEPHERD applies this discipline to agent actions. An effect is a typed record of a single action
attempted by a worker. They can record LLM calls, tool calls, environment mutations, or even
user-defined custom actions. Every effect a worker emits is appended to the immutable effect stream
of the scope it’s running in (§3.3), and a meta-agent can observe the stream by subscribing to it, or
intercept a running execution by pushing effects into the stream.

An action’s intent and outcome are separate events. Each action emits two effects: an intent
when the worker issues the action, and an outcome when the world responds. Therefore, a meta-agent
can read an intent, decide it shouldn’t materialize, and act before the outcome arrives, as below:
 1    async for effect in work . trace . live () :
 2        if isinstance ( effect , To olCall Intent ) and i s_dest ructiv e ( effect ) :
 3            if check ( effect ) == " deny " :
 4                work . discard () # outcome never materializes



Observation is non-perturbing. Since the worker’s effect stream is immutable, it is byte-identical
whether or not a meta-agent is watching. Because intent is decoupled from execution, a meta-agent
can also replay a slice of the effect stream under a different handler. For example, a meta-agent can
replay a tool-call under a modified task body to see how the underlying agent’s behavior changes.

Most effects are reversible. Every effect carries a reversibility tier that determines its behavior
when materialized, or executed against the world. Reversible (such as filesystem writes, sandbox
state) and compensable effects (such as database writes) are captured by the substrate at emission time
and can be rolled back at will by an user or meta-agent. Reversible effects roll back natively through
their scope (§ 3.3), and compensable effects roll back through user-supplied compensation handlers
invoked by the substrate. However, irreversible effects (such as model calls, emails) materialize on
emission, and the stream can only record them for audit.
Reading, reverting and reinterpreting actions is enough for an observer. However, a meta-agent trying
alternative execution paths needs to be able to fork the worker and its environment atomically.

3.3     Scopes: Agent Environments

When the supervisor meta-agent forks an agent, it must run in its own, isolated world. Any effects
emitted in the branch must not leak into the parent’s effect stream. The functional programming
construct enabling this is the region-scoped effect handler. A function can open a fresh handler
for some sub-region of its execution, run inside it, and then either propagate that region’s effects
outward (commit) or abandon them (revert). Regions nest cleanly: each level owns its own effect
interpretation and cannot contaminate others. A scope in S HEPHERD implements this construct
for agentic execution. It binds the worker’s sandbox handles, model providers, tool surfaces, and
effect-stream cursor, and it owns the effects emitted by tasks running inside it.

Scopes support four primitives. emit writes an effect to the scope’s stream. fork opens a copy-
on-write child scope. merge propagates a child’s effects into its parent. discard abandons a child,
leaving the parent untouched. Filling in supervise’s body from §3.1:
 1    @agent
 2    def oversee ( work : Task [ Patch ]) -> Patch :
 3        child = scope . fork ()
 4        result = await work ( child )
 5        if result . failed : child . discard ()
 6        else : scope . merge ( child )
 7        return result




                                                  5
The agent and its environment are forked atomically. scope.fork() captures the worker’s
filesystem, processes, and bindings in one atomic copy-on-write step. A subsequent discard
therefore rolls back every trace of what the worker agent touched. The substrate realizes this through
overlay-filesystem virtualization and the native checkpoint facilities of containerized sandboxes,
behind a unified device-layer interface (Appendix C.7).

Scopes can be parallelized, nested, reverted and resumed. A meta-agent can create concurrent
forks from a parent scope and merge or discard each independently. Scopes also nest: a meta-
meta-agent can fork, observe, and resume a meta-agent without contaminating the worker beneath.
Discarding a child scope leaves the parent byte-identical to the moment of fork. Resuming a scope
also preserves the worker agent’s world: a paused worker resumed by a meta-agent sees the bindings
recorded in its original scope, not whatever the meta-agent currently holds.
A scope owns the present region of execution. However, to revert to an arbitrary past state, execution
history itself must be a navigable value. We address this next.

3.4     Execution Trace: Agent Execution History

A supervisor meta-agent that wants to revert a worker agent – return to an earlier moment in its
execution and either inspect it or run forward from there under different conditions – needs every past
state of the worker’s execution to be reachable on demand. In functional programming, persistent
data structures [28] provide this property: every version of the structure remains accessible after
modification, with new versions sharing structure with old ones for efficiency. In S HEPHERD, the
counterpart to this is the execution trace. It is a persistent Git-like commit graph: each scope’s
effect stream materializes as a sequence of typed commits on a branch of the graph. The four scope
operations of § 3.3 then compile to Git-like operations as well:
 1    scope . emit ( effect )     <= >   shepherd   commit -m " < effect > "
 2    scope . fork ()             <= >   shepherd   checkout -b < child - branch >
 3    scope . merge ( child )     <= >   shepherd   merge < child - branch >
 4    scope . discard ( child )   <= >   shepherd   branch -D < child - branch >



Every past state is reachable and replayable. A meta-agent can navigate to any commit by hash
and read the exact agent-environment state at that moment, with its full scope intact. Locating the
specific commit where a regression first appeared, or where two siblings began to diverge, reduces to
graph traversal on this trace. Replaying from a past commit also produces a byte-exact reconstruction
of the scope before diverging, so the only cost paid by the meta-agent is the executed suffix.

Divergent branches share storage. Just as persistent data structures share substructures across
versions, the execution trace shares storage across branches: two siblings forked from the same
commit share their entire prefix by content hash. A meta-agent fanning out across many forks pays
only for the divergent suffixes, and any set of branches can be diffed based on their captured effects,
therefore letting a meta-agent decide which to merge on the basis of their behavior.

4      Framework Performance
Three cost properties are crucial for meta-agents in S HEPHERD to be performant: scope.fork()
must be image-size-independent so branching is affordable; the trace must scale with what the
agent writes and not the image so it can persist across long executions; and the byte-identical replay
guarantee must reach the LLM provider’s prompt cache so re-execution efficiently reuses KV cache.
We measure each on real Terminal-Bench 2.0 images. Full results are in Appendix C.

Fork and revert are fast and image-size-independent. S HEPHERD fork creates a new copy-on-
write layer on top of the existing filesystem instead of duplicating it, so cost is constant regardless of
image size. As a result, forks take 134–143 ms regardless of image size (42 MB to 5.8 GB); on the
5.8 GB image, K forks cost K × 143 ms against K × 53.5 s for full-rootfs copies, a 192× per-branch
slowdown (Table 3). The next-fastest alternative, BranchFS [38], branches the filesystem alone via
FUSE; like the other methods, it supports no notion of the agent itself (Table 1).


                                                    6
Table 3: Fork/revert latency (ms), storage, and host resource cost at K=4 concurrent branches
across three Terminal-Bench 2.0 images. S HEPHERD’s 134–143 ms fork is 2–3% of one agent turn
(Appendix C.3). Best per group in bold; full ±std and protocol in Appendix C.1.
                                                                                                                            Branching (K=4)
           Image                                     Method                       Fork ↓     Revert ↓          Storage ↓
                                                                                                                            Disk ↓   RAM ↓
                                                     Full copy              5,154 ms         2,067 ms           268 MB     804 MB           112 MB
           openssl-selfsigned-cert                   Docker commit            658 ms           749 ms            30 KB      90 KB          29.8 MB
                                                     Modal snapshot         3,764 ms         2,260 ms                —          —                —
           (42 MB image)
                                                     BranchFS [38]            266 ms           360 ms            12 KB      48 KB          22.7 MB
                                                          S HEPHERD           134 ms           142 ms            10 KB      30 KB          20.5 MB
                                                     Full copy              5,971 ms         3,446 ms           645 MB      1.9 GB          230 MB
                                                     Docker commit            692 ms           761 ms            30 KB      90 KB          38.3 MB
           caffe-cifar-10
           (200 MB image)                            Modal snapshot         3,291 ms         2,463 ms                —           —               —
                                                     BranchFS [38]            272 ms           357 ms            12 KB      48 KB          29.4 MB
                                                          S HEPHERD           135 ms           140 ms            10 KB      30 KB          27.1 MB
                                                     Full copy             53,462 ms        25,943 ms            8.3 GB    24.9 GB          910 MB
           pytorch-model-recovery                    Docker commit            725 ms           828 ms             30 KB     90 KB          30.2 MB
                                                     Modal snapshot         3,160 ms         2,328 ms                 —          —               —
           (5.8 GB image)
                                                     BranchFS [38]            280 ms           358 ms             12 KB     48 KB          22.7 MB
                                                          S HEPHERD           143 ms           147 ms            10 KB      30 KB          25.7 MB



Replay reuses the LLM provider’s prompt cache. Because S HEPHERD fork preserves the par-
ent’s byte-identical LLM message prefix, the provider’s prompt cache resolves it without invalidation.
On Anthropic Claude Haiku 4.5 across 8 Terminal-Bench 2.0 tasks, cache-hit rate plateaus at ∼95%
from K=2 onwards, within 5% of the byte-identical ceiling. Cache reuse compounds whenever a
meta-agent fans out (Tree-GRPO siblings, Section 5.3) or replays completed trajectories (trajectory
compression, Section D). We provide further detail in Appendix C.6.

5     Experiments

    (a) Multi-Agent Runtime Intervention                              (b) Counterfactual Meta-                        (c) Meta-Agent-Guided Tree RL
                                                                            Optimization
           Agent A
                               Conflict
                           ╳
                                              ✓ Conflict
                                              resolved                Observ        Fork
                                          …                                                                                     Observe        Fork
                                                           Meta-agent e             & Fix                          Meta-agent               K rollouts


           Observ Intervene                                                                     …   ╳   fail
Meta-agent e                              …
                                                                          Agent
                                                                                                …   ✓ pass                       Agent
                           ╳
                               Conflict
           Agent B


Figure 2: Headline results from the three meta-agent applications built on S HEPHERD: (A) runtime
supervision on CooperBench, (B) counterfactual meta-optimization (CRO), and (C) meta-agent-
guided Tree-GRPO on Terminal-Bench 2.0.

The S Agent A
        HEPHERD substrate enables a wide range of meta-agent applications. In this section, we
                           Conflict
demonstrate three such applications,
                       ╳        …        spanning the agent development stack. (1) During R=1   execution, a               Shared prefix
runtime supervisor agent observes two parallel coding workers and intercepts them           mid-trajectory,
                                                                                     K rollouts   R=0.5
raising the pair pass ✓rate on CooperBench from 28.8% to 54.7% (§5.1). (2) For post-hoc workflow
                                                                                                  R=0
optimization,
          Observe
                  a meta-optimizer
                    Intervene Discard
                                      branches execution traces to test counterfactual workflow         edits,
outperforming MetaHarness on four of five datasets at up to 58% lower wall-clock (§5.2). (3) For
Meta-agent

agentic RL training, a meta-agent
                       ╳        ╳      selects fork points during RL rollouts to extract per-step credit,
         Terminal-Bench 2.0 by 5.2 points on Qwen3.5-35B-A3B over Flat GRPO (§5.3).
lifting Agent B
Each application exercises a different S HEPHERD property. § 5.1 requires non-perturbing observa-
tion: a supervisor that subscribes to both workers’ effect streams gains access to their traces without
perturbing them. § 5.2 leans on byte-identical replay: candidate edits are validated against a fixed
baseline by re-executing only the affected suffix. § 5.3 exercises cheap branching: S HEPHERD’s
cheap agent–environment state forking makes per-step credit assignment via sibling rollouts afford-
able. We report a fourth use case, which compresses completed trajectories into shorter reruns under


                                                                                    7
meta-agent hindsight, in Appendix D. We note that these applications are not exhaustive and discuss
further possible applications enabled by S HEPHERD in Appendix A.2.

5.1   Meta-Agent for Multi-Agent Coordination: Runtime Supervisor

Motivation. CooperBench [17] documents a curse of coordination: even when allowed to com-
municate, parallel coding agents coordinate poorly enough that they succeed less often than a single
agent working alone. S HEPHERD’s effect stream and scope primitives let a meta-agent close that gap
by inspecting both workers’ execution in real time and intercepting before damage compounds.

Method. Two Claude Haiku 4.5 worker agents run in parallel forked scopes, each assigned one
complementary feature to implement. A Claude Sonnet 4.6 or Opus 4.7 meta-agent subscribes to
both effect streams via S HEPHERD and is provided with three coordination tools: inject (push
guidance into a worker’s session), handoff (fork the leading worker’s scope as the follower’s new
root and restart), and discard (abort a stuck worker via scope.discard()).

Setup. We evaluate on CooperBench [17]. Baselines are solo (one Haiku 4.5 agent handling both
features sequentially) and coop (two parallel Haiku 4.5 agents in forked scopes with peer-to-peer
messaging via the relay sandbox, no supervisor). Full protocol, dataset construction, and per-condition
operational notes are in Appendix E.
                                                 Pair pass rate                                                            Per-pair wallclock
                                                                                                                   Meta-Agent




                                                                                  Wallclock per pair (min)
                                 60                                       57.2%                                                                       28.43




            Pair pass rate (%)
                                                              54.7%
                                                                                                             40                            24.18
                                                45.3%                                                             19.84         21.20
                                 40
                                      28.8%
                                                                                                             20
                                 20


                                  0                                                                           0
                                      Coop    + Sonnet 4.6   + Opus 4.7   Solo                                    Coop    + Sonnet 4.6   + Opus 4.7   Solo
                                               meta-agent    meta-agent                                                    meta-agent    meta-agent


Figure 3: Runtime supervision experiments on CooperBench, with Claude Haiku 4.5 as worker. Left
(Pair pass rate): Sonnet 4.6 and Opus 4.7 meta-agents close most of the gap from coop (28.8%) to
the solo ceiling (57.2%). Right (Per-pair wall-clock): mean wall-clock minutes per pair. Solid bars
are the worker wall-clock; the hatched overlay is the additional meta-agent overhead.

Results. On the full 479-pair set, the coop baseline lands at 28.8% pair pass rate, reproducing
CooperBench’s documented coordination penalty against the solo ceiling of 57.2%, showing a 28.4-
point gap. A Sonnet meta-agent recovers 45.3%, and an Opus meta-agent reaches 54.7%, closing
91% of the curse-of-coordination gap (Figure 3, left). In the naive coop baseline, each worker sees
only what the other chose to send, which is filtered through the sender’s imperfect view of the shared
state. The supervisor, by contrast, subscribes directly to both workers’ effect streams, observing
their actions completely without perturbing them and steering them accordingly. Appendix E shows
that the supervisor prefers the lightweight inject action while still taking handoff and discard
actions when necessary.
The wall-clock cost is modest: solo takes 28.4 min per pair on average, while the supervised
conditions stay close to the parallel coop baseline (19.8 min). Sonnet finishes in 21.2 min (1.4 min
meta overhead) and Opus in 24.2 min (4.3 min meta overhead), running at roughly 75% and 85%
of solo time respectively (Figure 3, right). This is because the meta-agent only observes worker
agents once every few seconds, and does not interfere with them unless an interception is required
(Appendix E). We treat this as a proof of existence that S HEPHERD enables effective runtime
supervision; the supervision token-cost vs. task-execution-cost trade-off is discussed in Appendix A.

5.2   Meta-Agent for Meta-Optimization: Counterfactual Replay Optimization (CRO)

Motivation. When an agentic workflow fails, the failure usually traces to a small set of faulty or miss-
ing agent calls [51, 4]. Counterfactual analysis [37] provides standard machinery for diagnosing such
failures: would a localized change to a suspect set of calls have fixed the outcome? Answering this in
a standard agentic runtime is difficult – workflow re-runs reintroduce stochastic and environmental


                                                                                  8
Table 4: Test-set performance and meta-optimization wall-clock time across datasets and methods.
HoVer/MATH/IFBench/LiveCodeBench report mean ± std, and Terminal-Bench 2.0 report aver-
age@5 on the test split (Test) over three evaluations and meta-optimization wall-clock in minutes
(Wall). Best test mean per dataset in bold; second-best underlined.
                                                HoVer                    MATH                            IFBench                 LiveCodeBench         Terminal-Bench 2.0
 Method                                       Test         Wall         Test        Wall           Test                 Wall       Test       Wall          Test     Wall
 Baseline                                43.7 ± 0.0          —       60.7 ± 1.2        —     42.4 ± 1.8                  —      30.7 ± 2.1      —           31.2      —
 GEPA                                    43.7 ± 0.0          67      74.0 ± 3.5        20    50.1 ± 1.2                  50     48.7 ± 1.5      73          31.2     157
 MetaHarness                             77.8 ± 0.4         235      79.3 ± 1.2       101   52.3 ± 1.4                  126     40.0 ± 3.6     217          31.2     173

 CRO                                     79.4 ± 0.2         120      80.0 ± 2.0       42    51.3 ± 1.1                   82     51.0 ± 1.7     117         35.2       73



variation unrelated to the edit, and flat transcripts give little structure to localize failures against. CRO
sidesteps both problems by replaying counterfactuals through forks of S HEPHERD’s execution trace
rather than re-executing changed workflows from scratch.

Method. CRO maintains a pool of agentic workflow variants together with their S HEPHERD
execution traces when run on the training set. At each step, the proposer analyzes these traces to
identify failure modes, picks a parent candidate and emits a set of candidate edits as counterfactual
experiments to patch these failure modes. Every edit is paired with a fix set of training examples
it should repair and a guard set whose performance must not regress. S HEPHERD validates these
edits through counterfactual replay on the combined fix and guard set: for each edit, it forks the
parent’s execution trace at the first commit that would be affected by the edit and replays the suffix
with the edited workflow. Candidates that outperform their parent on this combined set are evaluated
on the dev set and added to the candidate pool; after a set number of iterations CRO returns the
highest-scoring member on the dev set as the selected candidate (Algorithm 1, Appendix F).

Setup. We evaluate on subsets of HoVer [14], MATH [9], IFBench [31], LiveCodeBench [12],
and Terminal-Bench 2.0 ( [25]), comparing CRO against the baseline workflow, GEPA (optimizing
workflow code) [2], and MetaHarness [20]. The executor is GPT-5.4-mini and meta-optimizers
use GPT-5.4 (in the Codex harness for MetaHarness and GEPA). We stop each algorithm after 20
candidates on HoVer, MATH, IFBench, and LiveCodeBench, and after 10 on Terminal-Bench 2.0.
Per-dataset settings, baselines, and full results are in Appendix F.

                                                        Baseline               GEPA           MetaHarness                         CRO
                                     Test pass-rate vs.\ wallclock — LiveCodeBench                            Dev-set trajectory vs.\ wallclock — LiveCodeBench
                                  0.55
                                                                                                              0.6




        Held-out test pass-rate
                                  0.50




                                                                                              Dev pass-rate
                                  0.45
                                                                                                              0.5
                                  0.40

                                  0.35                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                                                     per-iter best
                                  0.30                                                                                                               best-so-far
                                                                                                              0.3
                                          0           50       100       150        200                             0      50        100       150         200
                                                     Optimization wallclock (min)                                          Optimization wallclock (min)

Figure 4: LiveCodeBench comparison. Left: held-out test pass-rate versus optimization wall-clock.
Right: dev-set trajectory for each method across optimization wall-clock. CRO subtask-cache reuse
is reported separately in Figure 5.


Results. CRO obtains the best performance on four of five datasets (Table 4). It has higher held-out
test score and lower wall-clock simultaneously compared to MetaHarness across these datasets, with
savings ranging 27–58%. Notably, on Terminal-Bench 2.0, the most execution-bound benchmark in
the suite, GEPA and MetaHarness both fail to improve over the baseline on the subset under study,
while CRO improves performance by 4 pts while also needing the least wall-clock. On IFBench,
MetaHarness edges CRO by 1.0 pt on test (within a standard deviation) but still takes 37% longer.


                                                                                             9
                                                               Computation reused (cache hit %)
We attribute CRO’s downstream performance gains to two             CRO computation reuse — LiveCodeBench
sources. First, CRO’s counterfactual experiments hold the       80
unaffected part of the computation constant, letting the                                       62%
                                                                60                                 51%
model isolate and patch failures, compared to the noise                        45%
introduced by MetaHarness’s full-pipeline reruns; we find       40                 33%
qualitatively that the generated hypotheses are high-quality               20%                          22%
                                                                20     17%
(Appendix F). Second, S HEPHERD’s Git-like execution                                       12%

trace lets the LLM navigate prior executions more natu-             1%                  1%
                                                                 0
rally than the flat logs used by other methods. On the other         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
hand, CRO’s wall-clock savings come from three sources:                CRO iteration (proposer session)
counterfactual replay re-executes only the suffix down- Figure 5: Computation reuse on Live-
stream of each edit’s first effect via S HEPHERD rather CodeBench with CRO.
than the full pipeline, the byte-identical prefixes allow for
KV-cache reuse from the LLM, and target-set gating evaluates each candidate against a small subset
of the training set before committing to a full dev-set evaluation. On LiveCodeBench, computation
reuse rises from ∼1% on the first cold proposer session to over 60% later in the run (Figure 5).

5.3   Meta-Agent for Training: Meta-Agent-Guided Tree-RL

Motivation. RLVR for long-horizon tasks suffers from sparse, episode-level rewards: an agent that
takes dozens of steps receives a single binary signal at the end [5, 40, 36]. For fine-grained reward
signals, one approach is Tree-search RL [11, 13], which derives step-level advantages from outcome
rewards alone via sibling rollouts. In stateless environments, this is trivial [48]. However, with agent
tasks that modify real filesystems and services, exact and cheap state-forking is required to make this
approach feasible, which is provided by S HEPHERD.

Method. GRPO-style training for long-horizon agents samples G trajectories per prompt and
assigns each one a single outcome reward, distributed uniformly across all actions [33]. We recover
finer-grained credit by tree-searching intermediate states [35, 58]: along each root rollout, a meta-
agent picks a fork turn t and we sample K sibling branches forward from that state, yielding G(K+1)
trajectories per task at the cost of only K extra branch rollouts (forking is exact and cheap, Table 3).
Credit assignment operates at two levels: prefix actions before t inherit the standard inter-root GRPO
advantage across the G roots, while suffix actions take an intra-tree advantage computed within each
(K+1)-member fork group, surfacing per-step outcome differences without a learned value function
or process reward model. The full procedure is given as Algorithm 2 in Appendix F.6, with qualitative
examples of the meta-agent’s branching decisions in Section F.7.

Setup. We use both Qwen3.5-35B-A3B and Nemotron-3-Super-120B-A12B as the base mod-
els [32, 27], training via tinker [19]. We train on a filtered subset of the Endless Terminals corpus [8]:
starting from the 2,492-task pool, we drop tasks where the base policy passes all 8 sampled rollouts
(pass@8=1.0), leaving 442 tasks for Qwen3.5 and 530 for Nemotron-3. We hold out Terminal-
Bench 2.0 [25] as an out-of-distribution test set evaluated every 10 training steps. We compare two
RL setups at matched generation compute: Flat GRPO, independent root rollouts only, one group
baseline across G=8 roots; and Meta-Agent Guided Tree-RL (Tree-GRPO): root rollouts plus K=4
sibling branches forked at a meta-agent-chosen turn, with the two-level baseline from Algorithm 2.
The full configuration for training is deferred to Section F.6.

Results. The results are in Table 5. Meta- Table 5: Held-out Terminal-Bench 2.0 avg@5 (89 tasks,
Agent Guided Tree-RL is the strongest set- 5 seeds). Settings in Section F.6.
ting on both base models. First, the up-
lift of Tree-GRPO over Flat GRPO is con- Method                Qwen3.5-35B-A3B Nemotron-3-Super-120B-A12B

sistent across model scale: a ∼3B-active- Flat  Base              26.1%±4.21           30.3%±3.62
                                                    GRPO          34.2%±4.05           33.8%±3.41
parameter and a ∼12B-active-parameter           Tree-GRPO         39.4%±3.87          37.2%±3.19
model gain 5.2 and 3.4 points respectively.
This improvement is the consequence of a training-time pattern: Tree-GRPO’s produces higher
reward variance on both models (Figure 19). Flat GRPO assigns each action in a trajectory the same
outcome-derived advantage. Tree-GRPO’s intra-tree baseline instead isolates the suffix actions taken
after the fork point: K + 1 siblings sharing a prefix differ only in what happened after the fork point,
so the per-step advantage there reflects local choice quality rather than global trajectory outcome.


                                                   10
S HEPHERD makes this affordable, and we find that the intra-tree baseline produces more informative
gradient steps as well. This behavior transfers to the Endless Terminals validation split (Figure 18,
deferred to Section F.6).

6   Conclusion
We presented       S HEPHERD, a substrate that lets a meta-agent hold, inspect, fork, and modify an-
other agent’s execution as a first-class object, like functions in functional programming. Meta-agents
in S HEPHERD are higher-order agents over agentic execution, as we show across three applications:
runtime supervision of parallel coding agents, counterfactual replay for workflow optimization, and
Tree-GRPO for finer-grained credit assignment in long-horizon RL. More broadly, S HEPHERD opens
a path toward meta-agent systems that are active operators over agentic execution. Future agents could
use the substrate to compress execution traces into reusable workflows, run counterfactual agentic
interpretability probes, safely gate irreversible actions, or learn policies for managing agentic execu-
tion. As agentic systems become longer-lived, more stateful, and more consequential, we believe this
execution-level control will become a core abstraction for effective meta-agents. S HEPHERD is a
step toward making that abstraction readily available and programmable.

References
 [1] https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/managed-agents. URL https://www.anthropic.
     com/engineering/managed-agents.
 [2] Lakshya A. Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-
     Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J. Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts,
     Koushik Sen, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab.
     GEPA: Reflective Prompt Evolution Can Outperform Reinforcement Learning, July 2025. URL
     http://arxiv.org/abs/2507.19457. arXiv:2507.19457 [cs].
 [3] Parth Asawa, Alan Zhu, Abby O’Neill, Matei Zaharia, Alexandros G. Dimakis, and Joseph E.
     Gonzalez. How to Train Your Advisor: Steering Black-Box LLMs with Advisor Models,
     October 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.02453. arXiv:2510.02453 [cs].
 [4] Mert Cemri, Melissa Z. Pan, Shuyi Yang, Lakshya A. Agrawal, Bhavya Chopra, Rishabh
     Tiwari, Kurt Keutzer, Aditya Parameswaran, Dan Klein, Kannan Ramchandran, Matei Zaharia,
     Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Why do multi-agent llm systems fail?, 2025. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.13657.
 [5] Wentse Chen, Jiayu Chen, Hao Zhu, and Jeff Schneider. Context-lite multi-turn reinforcement
     learning for LLM agents. In ES-FoMo III: 3rd Workshop on Efficient Systems for Foundation
     Models, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=6CE5PLsZdW.
 [6] Ching-An Cheng, Allen Nie, and Adith Swaminathan. Trace is the Next AutoDiff: Generative
     Optimization with Rich Feedback, Execution Traces, and LLMs, June 2024. URL https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2406.16218. arXiv:2406.16218.
 [7] Matthias Felleisen. The theory and practice of first-class prompts. In Proceedings of the 15th
     ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL), pages
     180–190, San Diego, California, USA, 1988. ACM. doi: 10.1145/73560.73576.
 [8] Kanishk Gandhi, Shivam Garg, Noah D. Goodman, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Endless
     Terminals: Scaling RL Environments for Terminal Agents, January 2026. URL https://
     arxiv.org/abs/2601.16443. arXiv:2601.16443.
 [9] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn
     Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset,
     2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.03874.
[10] Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiaqi Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Jinlin
     Wang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng


                                                  11
     Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. MetaGPT: Meta Programming for A Multi-
     Agent Collaborative Framework, August 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.00352.
     arXiv:2308.00352.
[11] Zhenyu Hou, Ziniu Hu, Yujiang Li, Rui Lu, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. Treerl: Llm rein-
     forcement learning with on-policy tree search, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.
     11902.
[12] Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Ar-
     mando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. Livecodebench: Holistic and contamination
     free evaluation of large language models for code, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2403.07974.
[13] Yuxiang Ji, Ziyu Ma, Yong Wang, Guanhua Chen, Xiangxiang Chu, and Liaoni Wu. Tree search
     for llm agent reinforcement learning, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.21240.
[14] Yichen Jiang, Shikha Bordia, Zheng Zhong, Charles Dognin, Maneesh Singh, and Mohit
     Bansal. Hover: A dataset for many-hop fact extraction and claim verification, 2020. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.03088.
[15] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and
     Karthik R Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?
     In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
     //openreview.net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
[16] Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri
     Vardhamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller,
     Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. DSPy: Compiling Declarative Language Model Calls
     into Self-Improving Pipelines, October 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.03714.
     arXiv:2310.03714.
[17] Arpandeep Khatua, Hao Zhu, Peter Tran, Arya Prabhudesai, Frederic Sadrieh, Johann K.
     Lieberwirth, Xinkai Yu, Yicheng Fu, Michael J. Ryan, Jiaxin Pei, and Diyi Yang. CooperBench:
     Why Coding Agents Cannot be Your Teammates Yet, January 2026. URL https://arxiv.
     org/abs/2601.13295. arXiv:2601.13295.
[18] Joongwon Kim, Wannan Yang, Kelvin Niu, Hongming Zhang, Yun Zhu, Eryk Helenowski, Ruan
     Silva, Zhengxing Chen, Srinivasan Iyer, Manzil Zaheer, Daniel Fried, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
     Sanjeev Arora, Gabriel Synnaeve, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Anirudh Goyal. Scaling Test-Time
     Compute for Agentic Coding, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.16529.
[19] Thinking Machines Lab. Tinker, 2025. URL https://thinkingmachines.ai/tinker/.
[20] Yoonho Lee, Roshen Nair, Qizheng Zhang, Kangwook Lee, Omar Khattab, and Chelsea
     Finn. Meta-Harness: End-to-End Optimization of Model Harnesses, March 2026. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.28052. arXiv:2603.28052.
[21] Yoonsang Lee, Howard Yen, Xi Ye, and Danqi Chen. Agentic Aggregation for Parallel Scaling
     of Long-Horizon Agentic Tasks, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.11753.
[22] Hanchen Li, Runyuan He, Qizheng Zhang, Changxiu Ji, Qiuyang Mang, Xiaokun Chen,
     Lakshya A. Agrawal, Wei-Liang Liao, Eric Yang, Alvin Cheung, James Zou, Kunle Oluko-
     tun, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. Combee: Scaling Prompt Learning for Self-
     Improving Language Model Agents, April 2026. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2604.04247.
     arXiv:2604.04247 [cs].
[23] Yang Li, Siqi Ping, Xiyu Chen, Xiaojian Qi, Zigan Wang, Ye Luo, and Xiaowei Zhang. AgentGit:
     A Version Control Framework for Reliable and Scalable LLM-Powered Multi-Agent Systems,
     November 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.00628. arXiv:2511.00628.
[24] Fulin Lin, Shaowen Chen, Ruishan Fang, Hongwei Wang, and Tao Lin. Stop wasting your
     tokens: Towards efficient runtime multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.26585, 2025.
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26585.


                                               12
[25] Mike A. Merrill, Alexander G. Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich,
     Lin Shi, Jeong Yeon Shin, Thomas Walshe, E. Kelly Buchanan, Junhong Shen, Guanghao Ye,
     Haowei Lin, Jason Poulos, Maoyu Wang, Marianna Nezhurina, Jenia Jitsev, Di Lu, Orfeas Menis
     Mastromichalakis, Zhiwei Xu, Zizhao Chen, Yue Liu, Robert Zhang, Leon Liangyu Chen,
     Anurag Kashyap, Jan-Lucas Uslu, Jeffrey Li, Jianbo Wu, Minghao Yan, Song Bian, Vedang
     Sharma, Ke Sun, Steven Dillmann, Akshay Anand, Andrew Lanpouthakoun, Bardia Koopah,
     Changran Hu, Etash Guha, Gabriel H. S. Dreiman, Jiacheng Zhu, Karl Krauth, Li Zhong,
     Niklas Muennighoff, Robert Amanfu, Shangyin Tan, Shreyas Pimpalgaonkar, Tushar Aggarwal,
     Xiangning Lin, Xin Lan, Xuandong Zhao, Yiqing Liang, Yuanli Wang, Zilong Wang, Changzhi
     Zhou, David Heineman, Hange Liu, Harsh Trivedi, John Yang, Junhong Lin, Manish Shetty,
     Michael Yang, Nabil Omi, Negin Raoof, Shanda Li, Terry Yue Zhuo, Wuwei Lin, Yiwei
     Dai, Yuxin Wang, Wenhao Chai, Shang Zhou, Dariush Wahdany, Ziyu She, Jiaming Hu,
     Zhikang Dong, Yuxuan Zhu, Sasha Cui, Ahson Saiyed, Arinbjörn Kolbeinsson, Jesse Hu,
     Christopher Michael Rytting, Ryan Marten, Yixin Wang, Alex Dimakis, Andy Konwinski, and
     Ludwig Schmidt. Terminal-bench: Benchmarking agents on hard, realistic tasks in command
     line interfaces, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.11868.
[26] Alexander Novikov, Ngân Vũ, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt
     Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian,
     M. Pawan Kumar, Abigail See, Swarat Chaudhuri, George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian
     Nowozin, Pushmeet Kohli, and Matej Balog. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and
     algorithmic discovery, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13131.
[27] NVIDIA. Nvidia nemotron 3: Efficient and open intelligence, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
     org/abs/2512.20856. White Paper.
[28] Chris Okasaki. Purely Functional Data Structures. Cambridge University Press, 1999. ISBN
     978-0-521-66350-2.
[29] Gordon Plotkin and John Power. Algebraic Operations and Generic Effects. Applied Categorical
     Structures, 11(1):69–94, 2003. doi: 10.1023/A:1023064908962.
[30] Gordon Plotkin and Matija Pretnar. Handlers of Algebraic Effects. In Giuseppe Castagna,
     editor, Programming Languages and Systems, volume 5502 of Lecture Notes in Computer
     Science, pages 80–94, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/
     978-3-642-00590-9_7.
[31] Valentina Pyatkin, Saumya Malik, Victoria Graf, Hamish Ivison, Shengyi Huang, Pradeep
     Dasigi, Nathan Lambert, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Generalizing verifiable instruction following,
     2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02833.
[32] Qwen Team. Qwen3.5: Towards native multimodal agents, February 2026. URL https:
     //qwen.ai/blog?id=qwen3.5.
[33] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
     Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of
     mathematical reasoning in open language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2402.03300.
[34] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
     Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning, March 2023.
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366. arXiv:2303.11366.
[35] RS Sutton and AG Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction 1st edition. Exp. Psychol.
     Learn. Mem. Cogn, 30:1302–1321, 1998.
[36] Hui-Ze Tan, Xiao-Wen Yang, Hao Chen, Jie-Jing Shao, Yi Wen, Yuteng Shen, Weihong Luo,
     Xiku Du, Lan-Zhe Guo, and Yu-Feng Li. Hindsight credit assignment for long-horizon llm
     agents, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.08754.
[37] Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Counterfactual explanations without open-
     ing the black box: Automated decisions and the gdpr. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology,
     31(2):841–887, 2018.


                                                13
[38] Cong Wang and Yusheng Zheng. Fork, Explore, Commit: OS Primitives for Agentic Exploration,
     February 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.08199. arXiv:2602.08199.
[39] Pengcheng Wang, Jerry Huang, Jiarui Yao, Rui Pan, Peizhi Niu, Yaowenqi Liu, Ruida Wang,
     Renhao Lu, Yuwei Guo, and Tong Zhang. AgentSPEX: An Agent SPecification and EXecution
     Language, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.13346.
[40] Ruiyi Wang and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. A practitioner’s guide to multi-turn agentic reinforce-
     ment learning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.01132.
[41] Xingyao Wang, Jiayi Pan, Binyuan Hui, et al. OpenHands V1: Event-sourced state management
     for multi-agent coding systems. MLSys, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.03690.
     arXiv:2511.03690.
[42] Yiping Wang, Shao-Rong Su, Zhiyuan Zeng, Eva Xu, Liliang Ren, Xinyu Yang, Zeyi Huang,
     Xuehai He, Luyao Ma, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, Shuohang Wang,
     Simon Shaolei Du, and Yelong Shen. ThetaEvolve: Test-time Learning on Open Problems,
     2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.23473.
[43] Tianxin Wei, Noveen Sachdeva, Benjamin Coleman, Zhankui He, Yuanchen Bei, Xuying Ning,
     Mengting Ai, Yunzhe Li, Jingrui He, Ed H. Chi, Chi Wang, Shuo Chen, Fernando Pereira, Wang-
     Cheng Kang, and Derek Zhiyuan Cheng. Evo-Memory: Benchmarking LLM Agent Test-time
     Learning with Self-Evolving Memory, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.20857.
[44] Zhaotian Weng, Antonis Antoniades, Deepak Nathani, Zhen Zhang, Xiao Pu, and Xin Eric
     Wang. Group-Evolving Agents: Open-Ended Self-Improvement via Experience Sharing, 2026.
     URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.04837.
[45] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun
     Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger,
     and Chi Wang. AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via Multi-Agent Conversation,
     August 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08155. arXiv:2308.08155.
[46] Li-yao Xia, Yannick Zakowski, Paul He, Chung-Kil Hur, Gregory Malecha, Benjamin C.
     Pierce, and Steve Zdancewic. Interaction trees: representing recursive and impure programs in
     Coq. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 4(POPL):51:1–51:32, 2020. doi:
     10.1145/3371119.
[47] Peng Xia, Kaide Zeng, Jiaqi Liu, Can Qin, Fang Wu, Yiyang Zhou, Caiming Xiong, and Huaxiu
     Yao. Agent0: Unleashing Self-Evolving Agents from Zero Data via Tool-Integrated Reasoning,
     2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.16043.
[48] Yuxi Xie, Anirudh Goyal, Wenyue Zheng, Min-Yen Kan, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Kenji Kawaguchi,
     and Michael Shieh. Monte carlo tree search boosts reasoning via iterative preference learning,
     2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.00451.
[49] Alex L. Zhang, Tim Kraska, and Omar Khattab. Recursive language models, 2025. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.24601.
[50] Alex L. Zhang, Zhening Li, and Omar Khattab. The Mismanaged Geniuses Hypothesis, 2026.
     URL https://alexzhang13.github.io/blog/2026/mgh/. Blog post.
[51] Guibin Zhang, Junhao Wang, Junjie Chen, Wangchunshu Zhou, Kun Wang, and Shuicheng
     Yan. Agentracer: Who is inducing failure in the llm agentic systems?, 2025. URL https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2509.03312.
[52] Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Lange, and Jeff Clune. Darwin Gödel Machine:
     Open-Ended Evolution of Self-Improving Agents, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2505.22954.
[53] Jenny Zhang, Bingchen Zhao, Wannan Yang, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, Minqi Jiang, Sam
     Devlin, and Tatiana Shavrina. Hyperagents, March 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2603.19461. arXiv:2603.19461.


                                                14
[54] Jiayi Zhang, Simon Yu, Derek Chong, Anthony Sicilia, Michael R. Tomz, Christopher D.
     Manning, and Weiyan Shi. Verbalized sampling: How to mitigate mode collapse and unlock
     LLM diversity. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01171, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2510.01171.
[55] Qizheng Zhang, Changran Hu, Shubhangi Upasani, Boyuan Ma, Fenglu Hong, Vamsidhar
     Kamanuru, Jay Rainton, Chen Wu, Mengmeng Ji, Hanchen Li, Urmish Thakker, James Zou,
     and Kunle Olukotun. Agentic Context Engineering: Evolving Contexts for Self-Improving
     Language Models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04618.
[56] Shengtao Zhang, Jiaqian Wang, Ruiwen Zhou, Junwei Liao, Yuchen Feng, Zhuo Li, Yujie
     Zheng, Weinan Zhang, Ying Wen, Zhiyu Li, Feiyu Xiong, Yutao Qi, Bo Tang, and Muning Wen.
     MemRL: Self-Evolving Agents via Runtime Reinforcement Learning on Episodic Memory,
     2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.03192.
[57] Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang.
     Language Agent Tree Search Unifies Reasoning Acting and Planning in Language Models,
     October 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.04406. arXiv:2310.04406.
[58] Maciej Świechowski, Konrad Godlewski, Bartosz Sawicki, and Jacek Mańdziuk. Monte
     carlo tree search: a review of recent modifications and applications. Artificial Intelligence
     Review, 56(3):2497–2562, 2022. ISSN 1573-7462. doi: 10.1007/s10462-022-10228-y. URL
     http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10462-022-10228-y.


A     Limitations and Future Works
A.1   Limitations

Proof-of-existence framing. Each of our three case studies is reported as a proof of existence: the
substrate primitives suffice to drive a meaningful uplift on a representative dataset, given a meta-agent
we wrote for that case. We do not claim optimality of the meta-agent policies, robustness across
model families and benchmarks at scale, or that the headline numbers cannot be matched without
S HEPHERD. Establishing a full burden of proof, in the sense of head-to-head comparisons against
every plausible alternative substrate and policy, is outside the scope of this work, which primarily
serves to introduce S HEPHERD as a framework.

Supervision and proposer cost. The live-supervision and CRO results assume access to a meta-
agent strong enough to act usefully (Sonnet 4.6 / Opus 4.7 in §5.1; GPT-5.4 in §5.2). For short tasks,
the meta-agent’s token cost can exceed the worker’s, just as for existing meta-optimisers [2, 20]. We
report total dollar cost per arm in Appendix F.4; the regime where this trade-off is favourable depends
on task length and on the cost ratio between the worker and the meta-agent.

Counterfactual replay assumes weak coupling between edits and side effects. CRO replays a
candidate edit’s suffix from the first event whose dependencies are affected by the edit. When an edit
touches a component whose effects propagate widely (e.g. the system prompt of a tool used in every
step), the suffix is the entire trajectory and the cache buys nothing. We observe this regime on the
cold first proposer session of every dataset (Appendix F.4); it amortises away within two to three
sessions on the benchmarks we study.

A.2   Future Works

Agent interpretability. Mechanistic interpretability of agentic systems today is largely observa-
tional: a transcript is annotated, a probe is fit, conclusions are drawn. S HEPHERD’s coupled fork turns
these into testable counterfactual interventions. Editing a single component (a tool, a system-prompt
span, a sub-task definition) and replaying the suffix from the first commit it affects holds every other
source of variance fixed, isolating the contribution of that component to the eventual outcome. CRO’s
propose-and-replay machinery is one instance of this loop driven by a task-success objective; a
natural next step is to run the same loop under an interpretability objective, e.g. minimal edits that
flip a specific decision, or the smallest prompt span whose removal preserves task success, turning
CRO into a tool for explanation rather than optimisation.


                                                   15
Reversible environments for continual learning. The Tree-GRPO results in §5.3 work because
forking the agent’s filesystem and processes is essentially free. The same primitive applies to any
domain whose state lives on disk or in a sandboxed process tree: computer-use, web browsing,
and large-codebase edit tasks all fit. Once forks are cheap, a single agent can train over weeks of
interaction rather than a single rollout episode, with the execution trace maintaining a coherent history
of every revisit, every backtrack, and every retried tool call. Continual learning then becomes a
question of scheduling reads against this graph rather than re-engineering the substrate.

Post-training agents to use the substrate. The case studies in §5 fix the meta-agent and let it
govern a base worker. The dual question is whether the worker itself can be post-trained to use
S HEPHERD’s primitives natively: an action space that includes fork, discard, and replay over its
own typed effect stream, not just tool calls into the environment. This is strictly harder than tool-use
post-training because the model has to learn when to back up, when to retry, and when to spawn a
sibling, not just which tool to invoke. The substrate provides exactly the typed state needed to define
these actions and to compute exact returns over them.

Reversible sandboxes as a safety property. Every effect on the substrate carries a reversibility tier
(§3.2): reversible filesystem mutations, compensable side effects, and irreversible external calls each
have a different rollback contract. This makes S HEPHERD a candidate substrate for safety-critical
agent deployments: an external override can preempt the materialisation of any irreversible effect,
downstream checks can fire a rollback up to the last materialisation point, and the execution trace
gives auditors a content-addressed record of what actually happened rather than what the agent
reported. The substrate does not solve the alignment problem, but it makes the standard halt-and-
inspect loop something a deployment system can implement against a stable interface rather than
bespoke per-agent plumbing.

B    Mechanized Core and Proof Envelopes
S HEPHERD separates the production runtime from the semantic object that is mechanized in Lean.
The production framework executes ordinary Python tasks, provider SDK calls, shell commands,
sandbox operations, retries, scheduling, and carrier storage. Those executions are not themselves
verified. The verified artifact is a small algebraic-effects trace machine, together with proof-backed
profiles for static fragments whose lowered traces fall inside its boundary.

Claim tiers. Each inspectable run may carry a proof envelope with a profile and an explicit strength.
The profile is one of runtime_only, reference_core_a, core0, core_a, core0h, or extension;
the strength is one of runtime_only, reference_validated, forward_simulation, or
semantic_adequacy. Ordinary Python runs default to runtime_only. A trace becomes
reference_core_a when it is accepted by the executable kernel-v3 reference validator but does not
yet claim Lean theorem coverage. A trace becomes core0 or core_a only when the static lowering
evidence, generated-trace validation, and Lean-side fragment assumptions all match the completed
generated trace. Core-0H is sidecar-gated: it can receive a forward_simulation envelope only
when a validated content-addressed Core-0H sidecar manifest is attached, and the classifier does not
infer it from arbitrary structured handlers. Core-0/Core-A envelopes claim semantic_adequacy.
Core-A proof-backed envelopes currently require exactly one selected direct abort capture, no selected
abort-path resume/return, and no selection-closure suffix; handler-side effects, sequencing before
abort, multiple abort captures, or unused abort-only handler definitions remain reference-validatable.
Incomplete or live prefixes remain reference-validatable unless a future prefix certificate is attached.
Publication controls such as forwarding, terminal delay/fork, and replay remain extension unless a
future proof envelope names a stronger theorem.

Lean theorem surface. The Lean development builds with lake build in the kernel-v3 proof
artifact. The current theorem surface used by the proof envelope is:

Executable reference boundary. The Python agentic-kernel-v3-reference package in the
submitted code package sits between the production runtime and the Lean development. It validates
Core-0/Core-A trace lifecycles, reruns a static KernelProgram to check exact generated-trace
agreement, and emits an explicit ProofEnvelope. Public Run[T] values carry a proof field; current


                                                   16
                 Table 6: Mechanized theorem surface used by the proof-envelope claim.
  Profile                   Representative Lean theorem               Meaning
  Core-0                    source_eval_to_machine;                   Forward source-to-machine simulation and re-
                            core0_machine_                            stricted reverse simulation for the ordinary
                            eval_to_source                            callable-resumption fragment.
  Core-A                    source_eval_to_machine;                   Core-0 plus the direct abort-without-resume
                            coreA_machine_                            handler boundary currently admitted by the en-
                            eval_to_source                            velope.
  Core-0H                   core0h_source_                            Forward simulation for deterministic two-phase
                            eval_to_machine                           handler bodies with matching evidence; this
                                                                      profile is currently forward-only.
  Trace monotonicity        trace_monotonic; core0h_trace_monotonic   Machine execution extends traces by appending
                                                                      records rather than rewriting prior trace prefixes.
  Branch replay skeleton    single_child_branch_                      One-child structural replay soundness for an ex-
                            replay_sound                              act suffix replay model; this is not a production
                                                                      replay refinement proof.



production Python executions default to runtime_only. The envelope records a content-addressed
evidence identifier over the proof authority, validator, program digest, and trace digest. Kernel
envelopes derive proof_backed from proof_strength, so profile names alone do not upgrade a
trace. Runtime metadata is carrier metadata: non-runtime strengths must cite kernel-v3 reference
provenance and a proof-evidence:sha256 identifier, but public Run[T] metadata exposes such
imports as claimed_proof_backed rather than runtime-verified proof authority. Lean theorem ids
are centralized in a proof-surface ABI table checked by a Lean module with #check commands
and typed signature wrappers, so stale theorem names or materially changed theorem statements
fail the artifact build. Live prefixes and structured handler bodies without validator-issued Core-0H
two-phase sidecar manifests are classified as reference-validatable rather than proof-backed. The
artifact gate is make verify-proof-envelope-claim. This makes the formal claim inspectable
without implying that all executable Agentic programs are proof-backed.

Non-claims. The proof envelope does not verify arbitrary Python control flow, provider SDK
behavior, model outputs, prompt-cache state, shell commands, filesystem mutation correctness,
Docker or sandbox implementations, meta-git carrier storage, scheduling, cancellation, retries,
recovery, or multi-branch replay. The meta-agent applications in the main paper rely on the production
substrate plus empirical validation; the Lean artifact supplies the semantic core and the boundary
discipline for proof-backed fragments.

C     Framework Performance: Extended Results
This appendix groups all extended results that support Section 4: the measurement protocol (Ap-
pendix C.1), the mutation-size sweep that defuses the large-file concern (Appendix C.2), the agent-turn
latency reference behind the “2–3% of one turn” claim (Appendix C.3), depth scaling under stacked
overlay layers (Appendix C.4), the effect-stream observation overhead (Appendix C.5), the KV-cache
reuse breakdown (Appendix C.6), and the cross-backend portability check (Appendix C.7).

C.1    Measurement Protocol

Hardware. The Table 3 measurements for S HEPHERD, docker commit, and full rootfs copy
run on the same Vultr cloud instance (2 vCPU, 16 GB RAM, SSD, Ubuntu 22.04, Docker 29.3.1,
overlay2 storage driver on extfs). Modal numbers come from Modal’s hosted gVisor runtime (separate
hardware) and are reproduced from a fresh benchmark whose latency, therefore, additionally includes
network round-trip from the host-side agent. The Table 8 measurements use E2B Firecracker micro-
VMs. Cross-backend numbers (Appendix C.7) use E2B (Firecracker), Modal (gVisor), and Daytona
(managed Linux containers).

Workloads. Table 3 uses three real Terminal-Bench 2.0 Docker images spanning two orders of
magnitude: openssl-selfsigned-cert (42 MB), caffe-cifar-10 (200 MB), and pytorch-model-recovery
(5.8 GB). Full copy tars the entire container rootfs, excluding /proc, /sys, /dev, and /tmp, and is
O(n) in image size. docker commit, Modal snapshot_filesystem(), and S HEPHERD’s overlay
delta are all O(1) in image size on the overlay2 driver. Table 8 additionally uses three synthetic


                                                          17
working directories: small (10 files, 30 KB), medium (100 files, 100 MB), large (100 files, 1 GB).
KV-cache experiments use real Terminal-Bench 2.0 tasks with a Haiku 4.5 agent.

Per-step mutation pattern. The agent’s writes inside the workdir are simulated with a fixed 5+3
random-file pattern: 5 baseline writes establish the parent state before the checkpoint, then each of
the K−1=3 sibling branches adds 1 more random write after the fork, all written into the measured
workdir. Each write defaults to 10,KB. Table 3’s storage columns count only the post-fork branch
deltas: the Storage column reports a single sibling’s overlay delta (1 write = 10,KB); the Disk @
K=4 column reports the sum of the three siblings’ overlay deltas (3 × 10, KB = 30, KB). The 5
baseline writes (50,KB) sit in the parent’s overlay and are not counted there. Table 7 in Section C.2
reports the full overlay upper directory (baseline + branches, 8 × 10, KB ≈ 80, KB at this default
size) and sweeps the per-write size from 1,KB to 100,MB to verify the substrate scales 1:1 with what
the agent writes and adds no multiplier on top.

Pattern A: agent-on-host, sandbox-in-container. The fork/revert latencies in Table 3 measure
agent-perceived wall-clock under Pattern A, which matches how production agents (mini-swe-agent,
SWE-Agent, smolagents) use sandboxes today. A Python agent process on the host imports litellm
+ tenacity (matching Terminus-2’s startup), warms an OpenAI gpt-5.4-mini client with one call,
then drives the sandbox container through a tmux session. Each operation is timed from "operation
issued" until the new sandbox’s tmux returns to a probe bash command (echo READY_<uuid> +
capture-pane until the marker appears). Method-specific operations:
• docker commit: Fork = docker commit + docker run -d new container + tmux ready in new
  container. Revert = docker rm -f + docker run -d from saved image + tmux ready. Both ops
  are required; measuring only docker run understates by the rm/commit cost.
• Modal: Fork = snapshot_filesystem() + Sandbox.create(image=snap) + tmux ready.
  Revert = terminate() + Sandbox.create(image=snap) + tmux ready.
• S HEPHERD: Fork = overlay-layer fork (in-container, same tmux session). Revert = overlay
  umount/remount of saved layer (in-container, same tmux session).
• BranchFS [38]: BranchFS daemon runs on the host with a FUSE mount; the TB2 image is bind-
  mounted into a Docker container at /workspace so the agent’s tmux can read/write through the
  FUSE layer. Fork = branchfs create, which creates a copy-on-write branch and auto-switches
  the mount, then tmux probe. Revert = branchfs abort, which discards the leaf branch’s delta
  and switches the mount back to the parent, then tmux probe. BranchFS branch ops are O(1) in base
  directory size, so fork/revert latency is image-independent (confirmed across 42 MB / 200 MB /
  5.8 GB images: ~270 ms fork, ~358 ms revert).
• Full copy: latency reported in Table 3 is computed (not measured) as rootfs tar/restore (Vultr)
  plus an empirically observed ∼340 ms container-startup + tmux-probe overhead. Running the full
  agent-revert protocol takes hours per cell on the 5.8 GB image (each fork moves the full rootfs tar
  across two docker cp boundaries), so we report the computed values.

Disk and RAM at K=4. Disk @ K=4 is the host disk delta over K−1 added branches: commit-
layer deltas for docker commit, full rootfs tars for full copy (computed = (K−1)× per-branch
tar size), overlay-layer files for S HEPHERD, BranchFS storage tree (/var/lib/branchfs) over K
branches. RAM @ K=4 is summed RSS via docker stats –no-stream over the alive containers
(K for docker commit / full copy, where each branch needs a separate restarted container; 1
container reading for S HEPHERD, which forks the worker process per branch but reuses one host
container as the overlay-layer host (the K forked worker processes are aggregated under that one RSS
reading); 1 container + BranchFS daemon RSS for BranchFS). Modal’s per-sandbox host RAM/disk
is hidden behind Modal’s runtime, so its K=4 cells are marked —.

Protocol. Each benchmark begins with 2–3 warm-up iterations (discarded) to prime filesystem
caches and JIT paths. Measurements are wall-clock time.monotonic() around the operation under
test. For Table 3 fork/revert latency: 10 repetitions per cell for S HEPHERD / docker commit /
Modal, 5 repetitions for full-copy storage measurements; 3 repetitions for the K=4 resource columns.
Error bars are ±1σ. Storage is measured via du -sb on the overlay upper directory (for S HEPHERD)
or the checkpoint artifact (for baselines). Bench code is shared under exp/framework-perf, please
refer to the readme.


                                                 18
C.2   Substrate scaling under varying mutation size

A natural reviewer concern about the 10 KB delta in Table 3 is whether the substrate stays small when
the agent writes large files. We sweep the per-step write size from 1 KB to 100 MB on the 5.8 GB
pytorch-model-recovery image, keeping the same 5+3 mutation pattern but changing how many bytes
each write puts into the workdir. Table 7 reports the resulting overlay disk delta and fork latency
across three repetitions per size.
Two findings: (a) the disk delta tracks what the agent writes 1:1 (8 KB at 1 KB/step up to 800 MB at
100 MB/step), so the substrate adds zero overhead beyond the agent’s actual emissions; (b) fork and
revert latency stay flat at ∼340 ms across all sizes, since both operations only swap overlay metadata,
not file contents. We additionally verify revert correctness across the same sweep: in 12 reps spanning
all four sizes, the workdir after revert exactly matches the pre-fork state (5 baseline files preserved,
3 post-fork branch files cleanly discarded; 12/12 PASS). Absolute latencies here are about 200 ms
higher than Table 3 because this sweep ran on Mac/Docker Desktop’s Linux VM, which adds docker
exec overhead per call; the scaling shape is what the table claims.

Table 7: Substrate scaling under varying per-step mutation size on the 5.8 GB pytorch-model-recovery
image (5+3 random-write pattern, K=4 branches, 3 reps; medians). The disk delta scales 1:1 with
what the agent writes; fork and revert latency stay flat. Revert correctness (post-revert workdir
matches pre-fork state) is 12/12 PASS across the four sizes.
             Per-step write   Total written   Disk delta ↓   Fork (ms) ↓    Revert (ms) ↓
                      1 KB            8 KB          8.4 KB            339             348
                     10 KB           80 KB         80.4 KB            386             346
                      1 MB            8 MB          8.0 MB            331             385
                    100 MB          800 MB         800 MB             343             366


C.3   Agent per-turn latency reference

To anchor the claim that S HEPHERD’s fork is small relative to a typical agent turn, we instrumented
the bench harness with per-turn wall-clock timing and ran two Terminal-Bench 2.0 tasks for up to 20
turns each (Anthropic Claude Haiku 4.5, E2B sandbox). Across 17 measured turns we observe:
• LLM call (Anthropic API round-trip): mean 5.36 s, median 5.56 s, p10/p90 = 2.69 / 7.64 s.
• Tool call (sandbox bash execution): mean 0.20 s, median 0.17 s, p10/p90 = 0.08 / 0.61 s.
• Per-turn total: mean 5.50 s, median 5.81 s, p10/p90 = 2.70 / 7.77 s.
The LLM call dominates ( 98% of per-turn wall-clock); the tool call is small here because Terminal-
Bench tasks involve mostly light bash (file reads, package installs). Heavier tool actions (compilation,
training) push per-turn time well above the median. S HEPHERD’s 134–143 ms fork (Table 3) is
therefore around 2–3% of a typical Haiku 4.5 turn and well below the noise floor of one LLM call’s
response-time variance.

C.4   Scaling Behaviour

Table 8 reports how checkpoint/revert latency behaves as the number of stacked overlay layers grows
(left) and as the effect stream accumulates events (right). S HEPHERD’s overlay checkpoint remains
in the 157–252 ms band (on E2B) through 50 stacked layers; docker commit is roughly constant as
well but at a 2.8× higher baseline (451–558 ms). The OverlayFS lower-directory chain is bounded
by the kernel’s page-size limit at approximately 60 layers; trajectories exceeding this depth require
periodic compaction of frozen layers.
Per-event effect-stream overhead (record and observe) is constant at approximately 120 ms on E2B
(network-dominated) through 200 steps. Stream size grows linearly at ∼130 B/event.

C.5   Observe Overhead Detail

Table 9 compares effect-stream recording throughput on a local Docker host (no network roundtrip)
versus E2B Firecracker (remote API). The local overhead is 3.1 ms per event (5%); the E2B figure


                                                  19
Table 8: Left: Checkpoint/revert latency (ms) as overlay layers stack (E2B), compared to docker
commit (Vultr). Right: Per-event effect-stream overhead (E2B) as trajectories grow.
                Agentic         Docker commit
                                                             Steps    Record     Observe    Stream
      Depth   Ckpt Revert      Commit Revert
                                                                 1      106 ms    107 ms      134 B
          1    173      255           451      300
                                                                10      127 ms    178 ms     1.3 KB
          5    157      170           524      255
                                                                50      109 ms    177 ms     6.5 KB
         10    252      167           481      258
                                                               100      197 ms    117 ms    13.1 KB
         25    179      170           558      260
                                                               200      171 ms    115 ms    26.4 KB
         50    237      167           503      297



(113 ms, 87%) is dominated by the network roundtrip for each exec call and does not reflect
framework serialization cost. We separately verified that subscribing a supervisor to the effect stream
adds exactly zero tokens to the worker’s context by comparing the worker’s message list with and
without a supervisor attached: the two lists are byte-identical across a 10-step trajectory.

Table 9: Left: Effect-stream recording throughput, local vs. remote. Right: Context inflation test:
supervisor subscription adds 0 tokens to the worker.
  Metric                      Local             E2B         Condition                Worker context
  Raw throughput           17 evt/s           8 evt/s       Without supervisor   21 msgs, 1449 chars
  Logged throughput        16 evt/s           4 evt/s       With supervisor      21 msgs, 1449 chars
  Overhead / event     3.1 ms (5%)     113 ms (87%)
  Observe latency            64 ms           104 ms         Context inflation         0 chars (0.0%)



C.6    KV-Cache Reuse Detail

Table 10 reports the per-task, per-fork-depth view behind the §3 summary. Each task is run once on
the Anthropic API with Claude Haiku 4.5 to generate an initial trajectory, with checkpoints saved at
fork depths step 10, step 25, and step 50 (the third only fires when the trajectory reaches that depth).
At each saved fork point we then run K branches: each branch reverts the sandbox to the checkpoint,
restores the LLM message prefix with cache_control: {"type": "ephemeral"} on the last
prefix message, and continues sampling. The provider’s prompt cache (5-minute TTL) charges 0.10×
the input-token rate for resolved-prefix tokens and 1.25× the rate for the first branch’s cache write;
branches 2 through K amortise the write across additional reads, which is why savings climb sharply
K=1 → K=2 and stabilise after.
All Anthropic measurements use cache_control: {"type": "ephemeral"} on the last prefix
message; the provider’s prompt cache (5-minute TTL) serves the prefix at 10% of the normal
input-token price. Tasks whose initial-prompt prefix falls below Haiku 4.5’s 4,096-token minimum
cacheable threshold are excluded; in our Terminal-Bench 2.0 sample this filter drops one task (fix-git,
157-character instruction).

C.7    Realization across Sandbox Backends

The primitives of Section 3 are realized over the overlay-filesystem and checkpoint facilities exposed
by modern containerized sandboxes. A single device-layer interface abstracts backend differences; ap-
plication code written against the abstraction runs unchanged across providers. Table 11 summarizes
compatibility and measured fork latency where available.

Docker (local / Vultr). Privileged containers with kernel OverlayFS on tmpfs. Checkpoint un-
mounts the overlay, freezes the upper directory as a named layer, and remounts with the frozen layer
in the lower stack. Measured at 72 ms median (50 reps, 2 vCPU / 4 GB).

E2B Firecracker. Micro-VM sandboxes with OverlayFS via sudo. Semantics are identical to
local Docker; measured latency is higher (159–169 ms) due to the remote API roundtrip. The
metacopy=on mount option avoids full-file copy-up on chown.


                                                     20
Table 10: Per-task KV-cache reuse on the Anthropic API (Claude Haiku 4.5) across 8 Terminal-
Bench 2.0 tasks. Each cell reports savings% / hit% for K branches forked and replayed from a
checkpoint at the listed step depth. The hit rate is the substrate-fidelity check (does revert restore
the LLM message prefix byte-for-byte); the plateau at ∼95% from K=2 onwards is within 5% of
the 100% ceiling. Savings climb sharply K=1 → K=2 as the cache-write penalty amortises across
one extra branch, then stabilise as per-branch suffix generation grows linearly in K. Empty cells are
fork-depth/K combinations not reached within the per-task wall-clock budget.
                                                                     Branching factor K
       Task                                Fork       K=1         K=2       K=4        K=8       K=16
       openssl-selfsigned-cert            step 10     61 / 83     72 / 96   70 / 95   72 / 96    71 / 95
                                          step 25     60 / 79     79 / 98   79 / 97   79 / 98    80 / 98
       nginx-request-logging              step 10     59 / 87     61 / 93   63 / 93   62 / 93    62 / 93
                                          step 25     66 / 88       —         —         —          —
       build-cython-ext                   step 10     60 / 87     67 / 95   67 / 95   67 / 95    67 / 94
                                          step 25     68 / 89     78 / 97   77 / 97   77 / 97      —
       configure-git-webserver            step 10     62 / 88     68 / 94   67 / 94   68 / 95    68 / 95
                                          step 25     62 / 82     76 / 97   79 / 97   77 / 97      —
       feal-differential-cryptanalysis    step 10     57 / 86     63 / 93   63 / 93   63 / 93      —
       llm-inference-batching-scheduler   step 10     55 / 83     63 / 92   63 / 92   64 / 93    64 / 93
       make-doom-for-mips                 step 10     56 / 84     68 / 93   64 / 93   59 / 91    62 / 92
                                          step 25     64 / 88     73 / 96   75 / 97   74 / 97    74 / 97
                                          step 50     74 / 89     84 / 99   85 / 99   84 / 99      —
       pytorch-model-recovery             step 10     58 / 86     65 / 93   64 / 92   64 / 92    64 / 93
                                          step 50     67 / 85     82 / 98   82 / 98     —          —
       Mean                                           62 / 86     71 / 95   71 / 95   70 / 95    68 / 94



Modal (gVisor). gVisor blocks mount/umount syscalls, so checkpoint uses Modal’s
snapshot_filesystem() API (935–1137 ms). Revert terminates the sandbox and spawns a new
one from the snapshot image (75–79 ms).

Daytona. Cloud development environment with root access. OverlayFS works without sudo.
Preliminary validation confirms all scope operations pass. Since the underlying primitive is identical
to local Docker’s OverlayFS (72 ms, size-independent in our local_overlay bench), Daytona’s
measured fork latency is dominated by the remote API roundtrip; we estimate ∼150 ms by analogy
with E2B’s measured +91 ms RTT (Table 11).

Prime Intellect (gVisor). umount is blocked even though mount succeeds, so the framework falls
back to cp -a copies. This is O(n) in working-directory size: from our real_docker_images
bench, a small workdir (≤5 MB) takes ∼100 ms to clone, and the same primitive scales to 2.3 s on a
44 MB rootfs and 57 s on a 6 GB rootfs (storage_fix bench). The fallback is therefore usable for
small repositories but unsuitable for large ones.


Table 11: Cross-backend compatibility. All backends support the same scope API. Latency is
wall-clock median for Scope.fork; 50 reps except where noted.
 Backend           Mechanism                   Fork      Revert    Notes
 Docker (local)    OverlayFS on tmpfs         72 ms       70 ms    Primary benchmark platform
 E2B Firecracker   OverlayFS + sudo          163 ms      157 ms    +90 ms network roundtrip
 Modal             snapshot_filesystem()     935 ms       79 ms    gVisor; no OverlayFS
 Daytona           OverlayFS (root)          150 ms      140 ms    Validation passed; remote managed container
 Prime Intellect   cp -a fallback            100 ms      110 ms    gVisor; O(n) in workdir size




                                                    21
D                     Trajectory Compression: Extended Results
Motivation. Many real-world agent tasks are repeatable: a class of bug fixes, a class of data-
processing scripts, a class of build-environment errors. The first solution an agent finds is typically
full of exploration it did not, in retrospect, need: redundant probes, dead-end hypotheses, trial-and-
error before convergence. We ask whether a meta-agent reading the completed trajectory through the
effect stream can identify a fork point and a hint such that the worker, restored to the S HEPHERD
scope at that point and given the hint as a system-prompt addendum, reaches the same task outcome
in strictly fewer steps; i.e., compresses the trajectory. S HEPHERD’s per-step snapshots make this
cheap: the meta-agent need not commit to a fork point at trajectory-collection time, and the rerun
pays only the suffix cost. Whether a compressed trajectory generalises to a reusable workflow for
future invocations of the same task class is a follow-up question we leave open.

                                                                                           Sonnet 4.6                             GPT-5.4 high
                                                                      Steps                                                                      Compression rate

                                      30                  Baseline               Shepherd                                       100




    trajectory length (model calls)
                                                                                                                                                                       82%
                                      25                                                                                                77%




                                                                                                         compression rate (%)
                                                                              21.4                                               80
                                                                                           19.0                                                  68%          68%
                                      20
                                            15.8                                                                                 60
                                      15
                                                         11.4
                                                                                     8.9          8.8
                                                                                                                                 40
                                      10           7.1
                                                                5.2
                                       5                                                                                         20

                                       0                                                                                         0
                                           Terminal-Bench v2.0            SWE-Bench Verified                                          Terminal-Bench v2.0   SWE-Bench Verified

Figure 6: Trajectory compression across two worker model families and two benchmarks. The same
worker is rerun from a forked S HEPHERD scope with the meta-agent’s hint prepended to its system
prompt; the resulting trajectory is the compressed one. A baseline is compressed when its rerun also
passes the verifier and uses strictly fewer model calls. Left: mean trajectory length on the compressed
trajectories, baseline (solid) versus rerun (hatched). Right: the compression rate (the fraction of
passing baselines that admit a compression).


Setup. We evaluate on full Terminal-Bench v2.0 (88 tasks) [25] and SWE-Bench Verified (500 in-
stances) [15]. Two base workers cross two model families: Claude Sonnet 4.6 (non-thinking) and
GPT-5.4 (reasoning_effort=high); the meta-agent is GPT-5.4 with reasoning_effort=xhigh
for both cells. The meta-agent reads the full effect stream of a completed worker trajectory and emits
a JSON object with a fork_step, a free-form natural-language hint, and a brief rationale. The rerun
forks the S HEPHERD scope to the snapshot taken right before fork_step, restores the worker’s
message list up to that step, prepends the hint to the system prompt, and resumes the worker loop.
A baseline trajectory counts as compressed when the rerun also passes the verifier and uses strictly
fewer model calls than the baseline; otherwise the rerun is discarded. We measure two quantities,
conditional on the baseline having passed. The compression rate is the fraction of passing baselines
that admit a compression. On the compressed trajectories themselves, we report the mean baseline
length and the mean rerun length over the same set, so the average step reduction is the gap between
the two.

Most trajectories admit a shorter passing rerun. Figure 6 reports the two quantities. On SWE-
Bench Verified, 68% of Sonnet’s passing baselines and 82% of GPT-5.4’s admit a strictly shorter
passing rerun under the meta-agent’s hindsight; on Terminal-Bench v2.0 the corresponding fractions
are 77% and 68%. The mean baseline length on the compressed trajectories drops from 21.4 to
8.9 model calls (Sonnet) and from 19.0 to 8.8 (GPT-5.4 high) on SWE-Bench Verified, and from
15.8 to 7.1 and 11.4 to 5.2 on Terminal-Bench v2.0; the single largest individual compression is
on sphinx-doc/sphinx-8459, which Sonnet’s 80-step passing baseline shortens to 7. A no-meta-
agent control that selects the shortest passing baseline among N =5 independent samples recovers
a small fraction of this gap on the same tasks (see below), which rules out within-task baseline


                                                                                                        22
variance as the explanation. The absolute reduction per compressed trajectory is larger for the
stronger Sonnet 4.6 worker on SWE-Bench Verified (12.5 model calls saved on average) than for
GPT-5.4 high (10.2): the longer baselines that the stronger worker produces contain more excisable
exploration, so hindsight has more to remove.
The remainder of this appendix reports (i) the four-cell aggregate table behind Figure 6, (ii) the
per-task top compressions, (iii) hint examples drawn verbatim from the meta-agent’s emissions,
(iv) the no-meta-agent best-of-N control, (v) the distribution of fork steps the meta-agent chose, and
(vi) the meta-agent’s span-proposal prompt and verification protocol.


D.1   Aggregate results

Table 12 reports, for each (worker model, substrate) cell, the number of tasks attempted, the count of
passing baselines, the count of compressed trajectories, the count of rescues (baseline failed but rerun
passed; not used in the main-text figure), the compression rate, and the mean trajectory length on the
compressed trajectories before and after. The mean reduction ∆ is taken over the compressed set
only, so the average is not diluted by tasks where the meta-agent had nothing to shorten.


Table 12: Trajectory pruning, four-cell summary. Counts are over all attempted tasks. Means B, R,
and ∆ are restricted to the compressed set per cell.
   Substrate              Worker             n    nbpass   ncompress   nrescue   rate     B     R      ∆
   Terminal-Bench v2.0    Sonnet 4.6        88      31           24        12    77%    15.8   7.1    8.6
   Terminal-Bench v2.0    GPT-5.4 high      88      40           27        13    68%    11.4   5.2    6.2
   SWE-Bench Verified     Sonnet 4.6       500      79           54        10    68%    21.4   8.9   12.5
   SWE-Bench Verified     GPT-5.4 high     500     110           90        13    82%    19.0   8.8   10.2


A small fraction of attempted tasks did not complete due to E2B sandbox resource exhaus-
tion during the heaviest baselines (filesystem-intensive tasks like install-windows-3.11,
pytorch-model-recovery, video-processing); concretely, 6 of 88 tasks per cell on Terminal-
Bench v2.0 and 66 (Sonnet) / 68 (GPT-5.4 high) of 500 instances on SWE-Bench Verified. We
classify these as baseline-fail throughout: their baseline never reached the verifier, the meta-agent
never read a trajectory for them, and they cannot count toward the compression rate.
The pattern is consistent across cells: the compression rate is well above 60% in every cell, the
mean baseline length drops by roughly half on the compressed set, and the absolute reduction is
largest for the worker that produces the longest baselines (Sonnet on SWE-Bench Verified, where
the average compressed trajectory loses 12.5 model calls). The weaker worker exhibits the larger
absolute reduction precisely because its baselines contain more excisable exploration; the stronger
worker is already closer to the shortest passing prefix it can reach in one shot.


D.2   Top compressions

The meta-agent’s largest individual reductions are concentrated on tasks whose passing baseline
contains an obvious-in-hindsight diagnostic prefix: searches that the worker performed and discarded,
library-version probes that did not pay off, and incorrect first hypotheses. Table 13 lists the top five
compressions per cell, ordered by absolute steps saved.


Two qualitative shapes recur. A from-scratch restart (f =0, e.g. sphinx-8459, xarray-2905,
cobol-modernization): the worker explored, eventually identified the right code site, but the path
there was discardable; the meta-agent recognises that the diagnosis is in the trajectory but not on the
path, and writes a hint that puts the rerun at the right file on its first edit. A mid-trajectory cut (f >0,
e.g. pylint-7277 at f =8, xarray-6599 at f =8): the worker’s early exploration was substantively
useful (it located the buggy module and the failing test), but the second half of the baseline was a
thrash through wrong fixes; the meta-agent keeps the useful prefix and rewrites the rest of the plan.


                                                    23
Table 13: Top five trajectory compressions per cell. Each row is one task; B and R are the baseline
and rerun trajectory lengths in model calls; f is the fork step the meta-agent chose; ∆ = B − R.
       Substrate     Worker           Task                                         B     R    f    ∆
       TB v2.0       Sonnet 4.6       db-wal-recovery                             34    11    7    23
       TB v2.0       Sonnet 4.6       cobol-modernization                         28     8    0    20
       TB v2.0       Sonnet 4.6       tune-mjcf                                   24     5    2    19
       TB v2.0       Sonnet 4.6       bn-fit-modify                               30    15    6    15
       TB v2.0       Sonnet 4.6       crack-7z-hash                               22     8    1    14
       TB v2.0       GPT-5.4 high     code-from-image                             22      4   0    18
       TB v2.0       GPT-5.4 high     db-wal-recovery                             18      2   0    16
       TB v2.0       GPT-5.4 high     cobol-modernization                         20      5   1    15
       TB v2.0       GPT-5.4 high     qemu-startup                                20      7   4    13
       TB v2.0       GPT-5.4 high     build-pmars                                 16      7   3     9
       SWE-V         Sonnet 4.6       sphinx-doc/sphinx-8459                      80     7    0    73
       SWE-V         Sonnet 4.6       pydata/xarray-6599                          53    18    8    35
       SWE-V         Sonnet 4.6       pydata/xarray-2905                          32     5    0    27
       SWE-V         Sonnet 4.6       scikit-learn/scikit-learn-14087             33     7    0    26
       SWE-V         Sonnet 4.6       astropy/astropy-13579                       30     8    0    22
       SWE-V         GPT-5.4 high     pylint-dev/pylint-7277                      49    13    8    36
       SWE-V         GPT-5.4 high     scikit-learn/scikit-learn-25973             38     5    0    33
       SWE-V         GPT-5.4 high     astropy/astropy-14508                       35     5    1    30
       SWE-V         GPT-5.4 high     pytest-dev/pytest-6197                      33     6    2    27
       SWE-V         GPT-5.4 high     sphinx-doc/sphinx-8638                      38    13    1    25



D.3   Hint examples

We reproduce three meta-agent hints verbatim, drawn from the compressed set above. Each illustrates
one of the recurring patterns in the meta-agent’s output: target-file disambiguation (hint A), library-
detail correction with a no-detour instruction (hint B), and an explicit “do not do X” instruction that
prunes a wrong-environment thrash (hint C).

Hint A (psf/requests-1142, GPT-5.4 high, B=25, R=6, f =3).

         You already narrowed it to the right spot: edit /testbed/requests/models.py,
         in PreparedRequest.prepare_content_length. The bug is the unconditional
         self.headers[’Content-Length’] = ’0’ at the top of that method; make the min-
         imal change so Content-Length is only set when body actually exists / has a measurable
         length. Don’t keep re-reading the file, and don’t detour into /app, system site-packages, or
         urllib3 MutableMapping compatibility—those imports/tests are unrelated to the verifier for
         this bug.

Hint B (astropy/astropy-7671, Sonnet 4.6, B=17, R=7, f =5).

         The only code you need to touch is /testbed/astropy/utils/introspection.py:
         in minversion, switch away from distutils.version.LooseVersion and use
         pkg_resources.parse_version for both comparisons. After making that minimal
         edit, skip importing top-level astropy or trying pytest/py.test here—the container’s
         numpy/pytest setup causes unrelated failures and will waste time. If you want one cheap
         sanity check, load introspection.py directly with importlib.util.

Hint C (pydata/xarray-6599, Sonnet 4.6, B=53, R=18, f =8).

         Don’t      chase  the      datetime_to_numeric        offset  alone.       Compare
         xarray/core/computation.py:polyval with the pre-6fbeb131 version:                 old
         polyval used get_clean_interp_index(coord, coord.name, strict=False),
         i.e. the named dimension coordinate/index, not coord.data. Fix _ensure_numeric (or
         polyval just before it) so that for a DataArray with x.name in x.coords, you evaluate
         on x.coords[x.name].data before converting to numeric.


                                                     24
The hints share three traits: they name a specific file path on /testbed, they describe the change as a
code-level intent rather than a diff, and the hindsight content is what the worker wishes it had known
going in (which library import to avoid, which previous version of a function to compare against,
which detours not to take). The hints do not contain solutions in code form; they are guidance the
rerun worker must still translate into edits.

D.4   Best-of-N control

To rule out the hypothesis that “a shorter passing baseline already exists in the worker’s distribution
and the meta-agent is merely sampling it,” we ran an independent best-of-N control: for each task
with at least one passing baseline, we sample N =5 additional fresh baseline rollouts of the same
worker (no meta-agent, no fork, identical system prompt and provider-default temperature), and select
the shortest passing rollout among the resulting samples. We then compare the shortest-passing-of-N
length against the meta-agent rerun length on the same task.

Coverage. The control was run on the 20-task pilot subset of SWE-Bench Verified and the 7-task
pilot subset of Terminal-Bench v2.0 for which we had budget for the full N =5 resampling. Among
the SWE-Bench tasks, the within-task variance was high enough that for many tasks no rollout passed
in five samples, leaving us a comparable subset of 8 tasks; on Terminal-Bench v2.0 the success rate
was higher and 7 tasks had at least two passing rollouts. We do not extend the control to all 588 tasks
because the cost is 5× the headline run with no marginal scientific value once the gap is clear.

Result. On the comparable subset, the shortest-passing-of-5 length is on average within 1–2 model
calls of the per-task baseline mean and is essentially never shorter than the meta-agent rerun on
the same task. Concretely, on the seven Terminal-Bench v2.0 tasks with ≥ 2 passing rollouts,
the shortest-passing-of-5 length is 5.6 calls and the per-task baseline mean is 5.7; the meta-agent
rerun length on the same set is 4.4 calls. The control therefore recovers a small fraction of the gap
relative to the mean baseline, but does not close the gap to the meta-agent rerun, which is what the
compression-rate claim relies on. The cost decomposition for an N =5 best-of-N run versus one
meta-agent rerun (per task, on the compressed set) is 5 B vs. R model calls; on SWE-Bench Verified
for the Sonnet cell that is 5×21.4 = 107.0 baseline calls vs. 8.9 rerun calls, an order-of-magnitude
difference even before accounting for the prefix-cache reuse on the rerun.

D.5   Fork-step distribution

Figure 6 hides where in the trajectory the meta-agent chose to fork. We summarise the distribution
here. On both substrates and across both worker cells, roughly one third of compressed trajectories
are forked at f =0 (full restart from the original system prompt and task with the hint prepended),
one third are forked in the first half of the trajectory (early-prefix retention), and one third are
forked at or beyond the midpoint (late-prefix retention). The choice tracks the qualitative shapes of
Section D.2: full restarts when the entire baseline path was discardable; early forks when only the
opening exploratory turns were useful; and late forks when the worker’s diagnostic was substantively
right but the second half of the trajectory thrashed. We did not constrain the fork-step choice in the
prompt; the spread is what the meta-agent produced.

Cost note. Because the rerun starts from a forked S HEPHERD scope and a restored prefix, its API
cost is the cost of the suffix calls only, plus the cost of the meta-agent’s one diagnostic call to read
the trajectory and emit the JSON. On the Sonnet SWE-Bench Verified cell, the median rerun cost
is roughly one-third of the median baseline cost on the same task, before considering provider-side
prefix caching. We omit a precise cost table because the meta-agent’s xhigh-reasoning diagnostic call
dominates the per-task cost variance in our sample, but the qualitative claim that the rerun is cheaper
than re-executing from scratch is robust across both substrates.

D.6   Meta-agent prompt and output schema

The meta-agent reads the worker’s completed trajectory and emits a single JSON object specifying
where to fork the rerun and what hint to prepend. We give the prompt and schema below; the released
codebase lives at exp/trajprune.


                                                  25
System prompt.       The system prompt for the meta-agents:
 1   You are a code - review and trajectory - pruning expert . You will read a
 2   completed agent trajectory : the agent attempted a coding task by issuing
 3   one bash command per turn and observing the result . Your job is to
 4   identify wasted exploration and produce ONE concise natural - language
 5   hint that , if given to the agent on a fresh retry of the same task ,
 6   would let it solve the task with strictly fewer steps .
 7
 8   What counts as wasted work
 9   - Listing the same directory multiple times .
10   - Reading files that turned out to be unrelated to the solution .
11   - Trial - and - error syntax debugging that converged on an obvious answer .
12   - Cycles where the agent tried - failed - tried - failed before noticing a
         pattern .
13   - Defensive over - testing that the success criterion does not require .
14
15   What does NOT count as wasted
16   - Reading the success criterion .
17   - Initial workdir inspection ( one ls is fine ) .
18   - Verification of the final answer once .
19
20   Output format . You MUST emit exactly one JSON object and nothing else .
21   Every JSON object you emit must include ‘ fork_step ‘: an integer in
22   [0 , n_calls ]. fork_step =0 means restart from scratch with the hint ;
23   fork_step = k means the worker will be restarted from the state RIGHT
24   BEFORE step k ’s command was executed ( it will keep its memory of
25   steps 0.. k -1) .



User message. Per-trajectory, the user message contains: the task description; the verifier command;
the baseline trajectory’s exit status, submitted flag, pass/fail, length (model calls and bash steps), token
usage; and the rendered turn list (assistant turn = thought + command; observation = stdout/stderr).


Output schema.       The meta-agent returns one of two shapes:
 1   {
 2       " no_prune " : false ,
 3       " fork_step " : < int in [0 , n_calls ] > ,
 4       " hint " : " < single paragraph , max ~1500 chars , addressed to the agent
 5                    about to retry : name the right file path , the right approach ,
 6                    the dead end to skip ; do NOT include the entire solution > " ,
 7       " rationale " : " < one paragraph , max ~1000 chars , for human inspection > "
 8   }


If the meta-agent decides the trajectory is already efficient, it emits {"no_prune": true,
"rationale": ...} and the rerun is skipped. The runner also treats a missing fork_step
as no_prune=true. Out-of-range fork_step values are clamped to [0, ncalls − 1]. The verifier is
the same pytest harness used to score the baseline; a baseline counts as compressed when the rerun
also passes the verifier and uses strictly fewer model calls than the baseline.


E        Runtime supervision: protocol, tools, and meta-agent prompt

Dataset. We use the full structurally-conflicting split of CooperBench: every (repo, task, feature-
pair) tuple from the public release whose two ground-truth patches produce a git merge conflict when
applied independently. After dropping the two Go-specific repos that opencode does not currently
install on (Alpine/musl ABI mismatch), the split is 479 pairs across 25 repositories. The same set is
used for solo, coop, and the two supervised conditions; pair identity is held constant so comparisons
are paired. Per-pair patches are evaluated with CooperBench’s published harness: the two patches
are merged via git merge-file (with a Qwen 1.5B trivial-conflict resolver), the merged tree is
checked out, and the per-feature pytest harness is run; a pair passes iff both feature tests pass.


                                                    26
Sandbox layout, harness, and timeouts. Each pair runs on three E2B Linux sandboxes: one
per worker (separate OverlayFS, so the two workers cannot see each other’s edits) and one shared
relay sandbox that hosts an HTTP message-bus and the optional MCP coop-server used by the coop
baseline. Workers run the opencode harness (pinned to latest after debugging an empty-response
regression in v1.4.0) against an OpenRouter-routed Anthropic Haiku 4.5 model, and the orchestrator
polls each opencode session over HTTP every 10 s, treating a session as “settled” when the latest
assistant message is byte-identical for three consecutive polls. Per-pair wall-clock budget is 3,300 s
(just under E2B’s 3,600 s sandbox lifetime cap), with a per-worker inner budget of 3,000 s; sessions
exceeding either budget are recorded as failures.

Coordination tool API. The meta-agent acts on the worker pair through three tools, presented
in Section 3.4 as inject/handoff/discard; in the released codebase the per-agent tools are still
named steer/redirect/revert respectively, and handoff is implemented as a separate scope-
handoff path that the meta-agent can request via the same decision channel. The semantics, in order
of cost:

        • inject (code: steer). The worker’s opencode session is left untouched; the orchestrator
          appends one new user message containing the meta-agent’s guidance string. Conversation
          history, tool-call trail, and system prompt all stay intact, so the LLM provider’s prompt
          cache continues to hit on every subsequent worker turn. The worker reads the message on
          its next loop iteration and treats it as a supervisor nudge.
        • handoff (code: redirect when applied to a single agent; scope-handoff when re-
          rooting the follower from the leader). The target worker’s current session is aborted and a
          fresh opencode session is created on the same agent identity; guidance is delivered as the
          first user message. The agent loses its in-session memory of what it explored, but files it has
          already written remain on disk (and, in the cross-agent variant, the leader’s scope is forked
          as the follower’s new root so the follower starts from the leader’s working tree).
        • discard (code: revert, implemented via Scope.discard). Same effect as handoff on
          the LLM side (new session, lost in-session memory) plus the worker’s OverlayFS is rolled
          back to the pre-run snapshot via S HEPHERD, so all files the worker wrote since the start of
          the pair are dropped before the fresh session begins.

The meta-agent issues these decisions through a JSON-mode response constrained by the schema
below; none is a fourth, no-op decision used to skip an agent on a tick:
 1   { " decisions " : [
 2       { " agent " : " agent - f0 " ,
 3         " action " : " none " | " inject " | " handoff " | " discard " ,
 4         " reason " : " <= 20 words " ,
 5         " guidance " : " <= 60 words , only for inject / handoff " }
 6   ]}


Observation cadence. Every 5 s the orchestrator builds one combined snapshot covering all agents
in the pair and calls the meta-agent LLM once per tick (batched across agents to keep supervisor token
cost flat in worker count). For each agent the snapshot includes: the feature description (truncated
to 350 characters), cumulative event count, consecutive-error count, the agent’s modified-file set,
the meta-agent’s most recent action on that agent and how many ticks ago it was issued, and the
trailing 25 tool-call summaries (tool name, status, primary target file or command, short error if any).
Trimmed to roughly 150 bytes per call, the per-tick prompt stays under 3K tokens even with 10 agents
in flight. Tool calls are ingested from opencode’s SSE event stream; only message.part.updated
events with a tool payload are kept, with text deltas and lifecycle events filtered out at the source.

Per-strategy coverage by meta-agent. The strategy-coverage panel of Figure 3 (right) gives the
headline; the precise numbers are: Sonnet inject 26.4%, handoff 18.7%, discard 7.9%; Opus
inject 39.2%, handoff 31.5%, discard 4.6%. Coverage is independent per strategy, so the values
within a meta-agent do not sum to 100%, and a sizeable share of pairs are passed through with no
interception at all (workers coordinate cleanly enough that the meta-agent stays out of the way).
When Sonnet would give up, Opus is more likely to issue a handoff instead, which explains both its
higher pair pass rate and its lower discard share.


                                                   27
Meta-agent prompt (verbatim, v1). The locked supervisor system prompt is reproduced below as it
appears in prompts/meta_prompt_v1.txt; the labels steer/redirect/revert are the codebase
synonyms for the paper’s inject/handoff/discard.
      Meta-agent system prompt (v1)

      You are a meta-agent supervising several coding agents working in parallel on the same repository. Each agent is implementing a
      different feature in its own isolated sandbox (separate OverlayFS per agent), and their patches will be merged afterwards via git.
      Every few seconds you receive a snapshot of every agent: the last few tool calls it made, what files it touched, whether it’s erroring,
      and how long since you last intervened on it.
      For EACH agent, pick exactly one of four actions. The cost order is steer ≪ redirect = revert, so match the action to the severity of
      what you see.
               1. “none” — everything is fine, let the agent keep working. This should be the default for the vast majority of agents on
                  most ticks. Over-intervention destroys progress.
               2. “steer” — CHEAPEST intervention. The agent’s conversation is kept intact; we only append a new user message with
                  your guidance so the agent sees it as “oh, the supervisor is nudging me”. Full conversation history and tool call context
                  are preserved, KV cache is reused. Use this when:
                       • the agent is broadly on task but drifting or about to make a minor wrong turn
                       • you just need to tell the agent something it didn’t know (e.g. another agent is editing the same area)
                       • the agent’s reasoning is fine but needs a small course correction
               3. “redirect” — EXPENSIVE. The agent’s current session is aborted and a fresh opencode session starts with your
                  guidance as message 1. The agent loses ALL memory of what it has explored, read, tried, or learned — it starts from
                  scratch (but the files it already edited are still there on disk). Use this when:
                       • the agent is stuck in an obvious loop (same tool, same target, same error, 5+ times)
                       • the agent’s conversation has gone off the rails and a nudge is not enough — its memory needs to be wiped
                       • the agent is confused about the task and the best fix is a clean re-read with new framing
               4. “revert” — EXPENSIVE and destructive. Same as redirect on the LLM side (new session, lost memory) PLUS the
                  sandbox filesystem is rolled back to the pre-run checkpoint. All files the agent edited are discarded. Use this ONLY
                  when:
                       • the agent wrote files that corrupt the repo (overwrote core code with garbage, introduced unrelated changes,
                         broke syntax)
                       • the agent ran destructive commands (rm -rf, git reset –hard, git push –force) that you want to undo
                       • the filesystem state is so broken that the agent cannot continue, and you cannot explain-your-way-out via
                         steer/redirect
      Decision heuristics, not hard rules — trust your judgement:
                • Default to “none”. Most agents on most ticks need no intervention. Coding agents take 2–5 minutes per feature; you
                  will see them read files, edit, run pytest, fix, run pytest again. That’s normal iteration, not a problem. If you see varied
                  tool use (read/edit/bash mixed) and the agent isn’t erroring, the answer is “none”.
                • “Stuck in a loop” means 10+ identical tool calls with no progress (same tool, same target, same error). 3–5 retries is
                  normal iteration, not a loop.
                • Prefer “steer” over “redirect”. Redirect throws away context; steer preserves it. If the agent can understand a nudge,
                  don’t wipe its memory.
                • Prefer “redirect” over “revert”. Revert throws away filesystem work; redirect preserves it. If the files are salvageable,
                  don’t roll back.
                • Do not intervene on an agent you already acted on in the last tick or two unless the agent clearly did not comply with
                  your guidance. Give it time to react.
                • Different agents editing the same file is USUALLY fine — they are in separate sandboxes and their patches will be
                  merged by git afterwards. Only call this a conflict if the edits would be irreconcilable at merge time (same lines,
                  different intent).
                • If you only have evidence about ONE agent and the others look fine, return only that one decision. Don’t pad the list
                  with no-op entries.
      Respond with a single JSON object. Only include decisions for agents you have a concrete observation about — agents you don’t list
      are treated as “none” automatically. Keep the “reason” field under ~20 words and the “guidance” field under ~60 words when present.




F      CRO
F.1     The CRO algorithm

CRO maintains a single execution trace M that grows across optimization. Every workflow variant
CRO has produced is a node in M, alongside its source and its execution traces; every execution
trace contains the per-example outcomes the workflow’s metric produced when it ran. The graph is
seeded with the baseline workflow W0 and its execution traces on the train and dev splits. CRO also
maintains a parent pool C of variants eligible to be edited as parents in subsequent iterations; the pool
starts at {W0 }.


                                                                       28
Algorithm 1 Counterfactual Replay Optimization (CRO)
Require: Train/dev splits Dtrain , Ddev ; proposer P; baseline workflow W0 ; iterations N ; proposals
   per iteration k.
Ensure: Optimized workflow c⋆ .

 1: M ← execution trace initialized by running W0 over Dtrain ∪ Ddev
 2: C ← {W0 }                                                   ▷ candidates eligible to be edited
 3: for t = 1, . . . , N do
 4:     p, {(∆i , Ti+ , Ti− )}ki=1 ← P(M, C)
                                    ▷ P reads M to pick parent and propose edits with fix/guard sets
 5:     for i = 1, . . . , k do
 6:         ci ← p ⊕ ∆ i
 7:         for x ∈ Ti+ ∪ Ti− do
 8:              fork p’s trace on x at the first event affected by ∆i
 9:              resume under ci and write the result to M
10:         end for
11:         if ci improves over p on Ti+ ∪ Ti− in M then
12:              run ci on Ddev , writing traces and outcomes to M
13:              C ← C ∪ {ci }
14:         end if
15:     end for
16: end for
17: return c⋆ ← arg maxc∈C dev score of c in M




At each iteration, the proposer P reads from M holistically – past candidates, the edits that produced
them, their training-set outcomes, their fix/guard outcomes if any, and the rationales attached to prior
proposals (failed and successful alike). P selects a parent p ∈ C and emits k candidate edits. Each
edit ∆i is paired with two example sets the proposer reads from p’s training traces: a fix set Ti+ of
training examples the edit is meant to repair, and a guard set Ti− of examples whose behavior must
not regress. The pairing turns each edit into a falsifiable hypothesis the substrate can verify cheaply.
Each candidate ci = p ⊕ ∆i is verified by counterfactual replay (lines 7-9 of Algorithm 1): for every
example in Ti+ ∪ Ti− , S HEPHERD forks p’s trace at the first event whose causal dependencies ∆i
changes and resumes execution under ci , writing the outcome into M. Two consequences follow.
First, the comparison between ci and p on each example is held fixed in everything except the
edit itself, eliminating the stochastic and environmental variation that contaminates the signal in
re-execution-based optimizers. Second, the cost drops from a full rollout to suffix-only, letting CRO
afford more candidate edits per unit wall-clock.
Candidates that improve over their parent on Ti+ ∪ Ti− graduate: they are run on Ddev – again writing
into M – and added to the parent pool. Failed candidates remain in M as evidence the proposer
can read on subsequent iterations, but are not eligible as parents. After N iterations CRO returns
the graduated candidate with the highest dev score. The full procedure is given as Algorithm 1 in
Appendix F.
The CRO meta-agent optimizes S HEPHERD workflows through failure attribution and repair grounded
in execution traces. A S HEPHERD store M versions workflow variants {W0 , c1 , c2 , . . .} along with
their training execution traces and aggregated dev set outcomes. A parent pool C ⊆ M holds
variants eligible for further editing, where c⋆ is the best-scoring variant on the dev set. At each step
of optimization, the CRO meta-agent P inspects M, selects a parent p ∈ C, and uses verbalized
sampling [54] to generate k localized failure hypotheses. A hypothesis is a triple (∆i , Ti+ , Ti− ): a
source edit ∆i , together with a fix set Ti+ of training examples the edit is meant to repair and a guard
set Ti− of examples it must not regress on.
Each candidate ci = p ⊕ ∆i , where ⊕ denotes application of ∆i to p’s source, is evaluated by
counterfactual replay. For each example in Ti+ ∪ Ti− , S HEPHERD retrieves p’s corresponding
trace on the train set, locates the first event whose dependencies were affected by the edit, forks
the corresponding S HEPHERD commit, and resumes execution under ci . All edits that improve
performance on {Ti+ ∪ Ti− } are evaluated on the dev split and admitted to C for later optimization


                                                   29
steps. At the end, we choose the candidate with the best observed performance on the dev set. The
full procedure is given as Algorithm 1 in Appendix F.

F.2     Implementation Details

CRO is a coding-agent meta-optimiser. Given a baseline workflow expressed as a Python task graph,
training and dev splits, and a metric callable, it produces an optimised workflow that scores higher
on dev. From an implementation standpoint, CRO sits in the same family as MetaHarness [20] and
Trace [6]: the proposer is a coding agent with shell, read, and edit tools operating on a real Python
source tree, rather than a prompt-rewriting LLM with a fixed schema. Because every workflow
execution is recorded in S HEPHERD’s effect stream, the proposer has typed, queryable read access to
prior runs — per-example LLM I/O, per-task source snapshots, ledgers of prior candidates and their
accept/archive decisions — and grounds each proposal in what previous attempts actually did, rather
than re-deriving hypotheses from scratch on each iteration. In this section, we provide more details
regarding CRO’s implementation.

F.2.1    Scratchpad, Host Handoff, and the Proposer Loop
Scratchpad layout. CRO does not pass state to the proposer LLM through context messages.
Per-run state lives on disk in a scratchpad directory the proposer reads and writes through file tools:
 1    scratchpad /
 2      README . md                          SYSTEM_PROMPT + worked example ;
 3                                           read once via read_file , cache - stable .
 4      ORIENTATION . md                     run - specific parameters ; read once
 5                                           per session .
 6      brief . md                           per - turn live state ; regenerated by
 7                                           the host every session .
 8      workflow /                           live workflow source the proposer
 9                                           edits in place
10          pipeline . py
11          _imports . py
12          < subtask >. py                       one . py per @agent class
13      variants / session_NNN / v ??/ workflow /            sibling variants the
14                                                           proposer stages .
15      history / run_NNN /                       host - written , read - only per - experiment
16                                                archive
17          workflow /                            source snapshot ; any prior run can be a
18                                                branch parent .
19          metrics . json                        train + dev scores , per - example
20                                                feedback , dollars .
21          trace . md                            per - example task trace .
22          effects / < example >.{ effects . json , llm_io . md }
23      c a n d i d a t e _ c a t a l o g . json  every candidate ’ s role , parent ,
24                                                decision , dev score .
25      h y p o t h e s i s _ l e d g e r . json  per - variant mechanism , targeted lift ,
26                                                regressions , evidence paths .
27      f a i l u r e _ c l u s t e r s . json    baseline failure clusters seeded for
28                                                session 1.
29      trace_index . json                        batch - - trace - - candidate index .
30      hypotheses / hNNN_ *. md                  proposer - written hypothesis files .
31      observations / oNNN . md                  proposer - written post - experiment notes .
32      h y po th e si s_ l og s / session_NNN . md     proposer ’ s per - session log .
33      j o ur na l _p en d in g / session_NNN . md     proposer ’ s session - fragment for
34                                                      the journal .
35      p e nd in g _b at c he s / session_NNN . json     proposer ’ s batch manifest ;
36                                                        the handoff payload .
37      expe riment _log . md                     consolidated journal , host - merged
38                                                from jo u rn al _ pe n di ng /.


The split between live state (brief.md, workflow/) and immutable history (history/run_NNN/)
is what allows the proposer to revisit any past state: branch(from_ref="run_NNN") resets
workflow/ to that snapshot without losing later work. Files outside the proposer’s editable surface
(history/, the JSON indices, brief.md) are written exclusively by the host.


                                                  30
Per-turn proposer protocol. A single CRO step is one proposer session: the host dispatches a
fresh LLM session with a constant system prompt and constant user prompt, and the proposer reads
per-turn state through file tools. The contract is fixed:

        1. (turn 1, session 0 only) Read README.md for the search policy, mechanism axes, and loop
           hard rules; read ORIENTATION.md for the run parameters.
        2. (turn 1, every session) Read brief.md for the session index, frontier candidate, remaining
           budget, and the exact pending-batch and journal-pending file names this session must
           produce.
        3. (working turns) Use the read-only inspection tools (§F.2.3) to inspect prior runs; pick a
           base reference (frontier, baseline, promoted, a run_NNN, a cand-XXX, or a Meta-Git
           scope ref); construct sibling variants with stage_variant, or by writing files directly under
           variants/session_NNN/vXX/workflow/; attach targeted_examples = {improve,
           protect, invariant} to each.
        4. (handoff turn) Write hypothesis_logs/session_NNN.md with ### Findings, ###
           Hypotheses, ### Considered & Rejected, and ### Selected Batch sections; drop
           a session-fragment into journal_pending/session_NNN.md; write the manifest to
           pending_batches/session_NNN.json; call finish_session.

When finish_session returns control to the host, the proposer’s LLM session terminates and no
chat-history context survives across sessions. The cache prefix (system prompt, tool catalog, and the
README.md read on the first turn of each session) is identical across sessions, so the prefix-cache hit
rate stays high while every session reads its current state through brief.md.

Host-side handoff. On finish_session the host (i) parses the hypothesis log and pending
batch against the reflection contract (§F.2.5); (ii) runs the targeted preflight on every variant in
parallel; (iii) archives variants that fail the preflight; (iv) advances surviving variants to dev evalu-
ation under counterfactual replay (§F.2.4); (v) merges journal_pending/session_NNN.md into
experiment_log.md and appends the realised ### Outcomes table; (vi) regenerates brief.md
and the JSON indices for the next session; (vii) launches the next proposer session. The proposer
never invokes the executor, never runs evaluation, and never edits history/ or any *.json index;
all mutations to authoritative state pass through the host.

F.2.2    Controlling prompts
The proposer is controlled by two cacheable surfaces, both constant across sessions and across
datasets.

Session header. Each LLM session is opened with a short protocol prompt
(SESSION_SYSTEM_PROMPT) sent as the system role, plus a constant user message that points at
README.md and brief.md. The session header carries no domain-specific control content; its
purpose is to pin the session to the file-mediated handoff contract:
 1   You are running a cou nterfa ctual experimentation - based meta - optimization
 2   session for a Python workflow .
 3
 4   Please run the following flow :
 5   1. Read ‘ brief . md ‘ first . It is the host ’ s compact projection of
 6      candidates , failures , prior logs , and the handoff contract .
 7   2. Choose a set of prior sources as the batch base : ‘ frontier ‘ ,
 8      ‘ baseline ‘ , ‘ promoted ‘ , a run id , a candidate id , or a Meta - Git
 9      scope ref / name .
10   3. Create sibling variants from that set of bases using
11      ‘ stage_variant ‘ , or by passing full ‘ files ‘/ ‘ workflow_dir ‘ entries
12      in a batch manifest .
13   4. Every variant must include explicit targeted examples with improve ,
14      protect , and invariant intent . These targeted checks are the
15      preflight before hidden aggregate dev scoring .
16   5. Call ‘ run_counterfactual_batch ‘ or ‘ submit_counterfactual_batch ‘.
17   6. Inspect aggregate outcomes , write the required
18      ‘ e xp er i me nt _ lo gs / eXXX . md ‘ with ‘## Outcome ‘ and ‘## Next ‘ , then


                                                   31
19       call ‘ finish_session ‘.
20
21   Rules : fix failure classes , not literal train examples ; preserve the
22   Agentic task shape ; use valid train ids from brief . md ,
23   c a n d i d a t e _ c a t a l o g . json , or traces / metrics ; avoid near - duplicate prompt
24   tweaks ; treat the initial workflow as a baseline , not a design
25   boundary . If local edits plateau , add or split tasks , change control
26   flow , introduce specialized agents , run best - of - N / critic / editor
27   loops , or recombine a useful archived mechanism with the current
28   frontier .


The user message is a constant boilerplate that points the proposer at ORIENTATION.md (run parame-
ters) and brief.md (live state). Any per-turn substitution into the user message would invalidate the
prompt cache before the first tool call, so the live values that change every session — session index,
frontier, remaining budget, the exact filename to write — live entirely in brief.md, which is read
after the cached prefix.

Substantive control surface. The proposer’s substantive instructions live in README.md, a file
written into the scratchpad at run init and read by the proposer on the first turn of each session.
README.md consists of the SYSTEM_PROMPT string followed by a worked example of adding a new
@agent subclass. We reproduce SYSTEM_PROMPT in abridged form below.
 1   You are a research engineer optimizing a multi - task Python workflow .
 2
 3   The workflow is a top - level task under ‘ workflow / ‘ that composes
 4   subtasks ( one file each ) . Your default optimization move is to propose
 5   a batch of co unterf actual workflow variants and call
 6   run_counterfactual_batch .
 7
 8   ## The only rule you must follow : generalize , don ’ t overfit
 9   - Fix CLASSES of errors , not instances . A root cause must explain >=
10     2 -3 failing train examples through the same mechanism .
11   - Dual - guard any structural edit : a new rule must fire only when both
12     a semantic cue in the problem text AND a structural pattern match .
13   - Never pattern - match on literal train - problem phrases .
14   The DEV ( aggregate , no per - example ) line is your gen eraliz ation signal .
15
16   ## Workspace
17   [ scratchpad layout , abridged here ; reproduced in section above ]
18
19   ## Tools
20   - show_history / s h o w _ b a t c h _ h i s t o r y / s h o w _ m e t a g i t _ h i s t o r y /
21     s h o w _ e x a m p l e _ h i s t o r y -- read - only ledgers over prior runs .
22   - diff_runs ( run_a , run_b ) -- unified diff of two snapshots ’ workflow /.
23   - branch ( from_ref ) -- reset workflow / to a prior snapshot .
24   - check _workf low -- dry - run recons tructi on .
25   - r u n _ c o u n t e r f a c t u a l _ b a t c h ( base_ref , variants ) -- the load - bearing
26     evaluation tool .
27   - stage_variant ( variant_id , t a r g e t e d _ e x a m p l e s =...) -- snapshot live
28     workflow / as a named sibling under variants / session_NNN / v ??/.
29   - r e a d _ e f f e c t _ t r a c e / g r e p _ e f f e c t _ t r a c e s / diff_traces -- per - example
30     effect - level inspection of prior runs .
31   - finis h_sess ion (...) / stop ( summary ) .
32
33   ## Loop ( HARD rules the dispatcher enforces )
34   1. ANALYZE .      show_history ; read one trace . md of an interesting prior
35                     run ; identify a failure CLASS ( >=2 examples ) .
36   2. HYPOTHESIZE . Required before every batch . Write
37                     hypotheses / hNNN_ *. md with Branch from / Claim / Proposed
38                     change / Expected outcome / Why this differs from
39                     previous attempts / Cache consequence sections .
40   3. BRANCH .       branch ( from_ref =...) to reset workflow /.
41   4. EDIT + chec k_work flow .
42   5. Prefer r u n _ c o u n t e r f a c t u a l _ b a t c h with several staged siblings .
43      Provide explicit t a r g e t e d _ e x a m p l e s for every variant .
44   6. OBSERVE .      Required between runs . Write observations / oNNN . md .


                                                         32
                         Table 14: Proposer tools exposed by the CRO dispatcher.
 Tool                                                   Purpose
 Filesystem (scoped to scratchpad root)
 bash                                                   Shell command.
 read_file, write_file, edit_file                       File I/O.
 Ledger inspection
 show_history                                           Table of every prior experiment.
 show_batch_history                                     Compact per-batch ledger.
 show_candidate(candidate_id)                           Single-candidate row inspection.
 show_metagit_history                                   Meta-Git candidate scopes and decisions.
 show_example_history(example_id)                       Per-example outcome history.
 diff_runs(run_a, run_b)                                Unified diff of two snapshots’ workflow/.
 Effect-level introspection (per-example)
 show_trace(run_id)                                     Run-level trace.
 list_effect_traces(run_id)                             Index of available per-example effect dumps.
 read_effect_trace(run_id, example_id)                  LLM I/O and effects for one example.
 grep_effect_traces(run_id, pattern)                    Regex search across one run’s effects.
 diff_traces(run_a, run_b, example_id)                  Effect-level diff for one example.
 Workflow editing
 branch(from_ref)                                       Reset live workflow/ to a prior snapshot.
 check_workflow                                         Dry-run reconstruction; catches syntax/import/type errors.
 stage_variant(variant_id, targeted_examples=...)       Snapshot live workflow/ as a sibling.



45   7. Repeat until budget exhausted . Flat dev is not a stop condition ;
46      switch to a structurally different move .


F.2.3   Proposer tool surface
The proposer’s tools fall into four groups: filesystem inspection and editing, ledger inspection, effect-
level introspection, and host-mediated evaluation. Table 14 lists the live surface; full JSON-Schema
specifications are in _cbo_tools.py.
Three tools warrant elaboration. stage_variant snapshots the current state of workflow/ to a
sibling directory and registers a variant_id with the dispatcher; the proposer typically branches
back to the same parent and stages two-to-eight siblings before any evaluation runs, so the eventual
batch is a fan-out from one common ancestor. run_counterfactual_batch accepts those staged
siblings together with their targeted_examples = {improve, protect, invariant} and an
expected_base_hash guard on the parent’s source bundle; the host then executes the targeted
preflight, the reflection contract, and the dev evaluation downstream of it. The trace-introspection
group (read_effect_trace, grep_effect_traces, diff_traces) is the substrate-level hook
into S HEPHERD’s effect stream that lets the proposer inspect prior runs at the model-call level rather
than at the metric-aggregate level; this is what grounds the ### Findings sections required by the
reflection contract.

F.2.4   Counterfactual replay
A counterfactual dev evaluation re-executes only the subtree of the task DAG affected by the variant’s
edits; the rest is reused from the parent’s trace. The mechanism is a typed cache rather than a diffing
heuristic. Each @agent class is keyed by a pair (source-hash, inputs-hash); the source-hash captures
the task class’s source plus the imports it transitively pulls in, and the inputs-hash captures the
typed input bundle the task is invoked with. The top-level pipeline’s cache key is a composite of its
own source-hash and every subtask’s source-hash, so any source edit reaches the pipeline-level key.
Editing one subtask therefore invalidates that subtask’s cache and the pipeline’s cache, but leaves
sibling subtasks hit-eligible; their inputs are unchanged unless the edited task lies on a path to them
in the DAG. Editing pipeline.py itself invalidates the pipeline-level cache but leaves all subtask
caches hit-eligible.
For each example in a variant’s targeted set, the host hydrates the replay store with the parent’s
per-task outputs, swaps in the variant’s edited source for the affected subtask(s), and re-executes the
pipeline. Subtasks whose composite key still matches a cached entry return their recorded output
without an LLM call; only the affected subtree incurs fresh execution. The targeted preflight is


                                                   33
therefore strictly cheaper than a full re-run, and adding a new @agent between two existing ones
is the cheapest structural move available, since both neighbours’ caches survive the edit. CRO’s
main-text cache-hit-rate figure (Figure 4) plots the realised reuse percentage averaged over a proposer
session.

F.2.5     Reflection contract and targeted-eval gate
CRO does not let the proposer self-grade. Two host-side checks gate every batch.

Reflection contract. Three rules apply to the proposer’s hypothesis_logs/session_NNN.md
and are enforced before any variant runs (_cbo_validators.py).

         1. Cite prior runs. Once any variant has been archived, the ### Findings block must cite at
            least one run_NNN[-slug] label drawn from the candidate catalogue.
         2. No unexplained redundancy. Each new variant’s mechanism string is compared (Jaccard to-
            ken similarity ≥ 0.85) against archived ledger rows; on a near-duplicate of an archived mech-
            anism, the case-folded ### Findings block must contain both the matching run_label
            and the literal phrase differs by:. Near-duplicates of a promoted mechanism pass silently;
            recombination is encouraged.
         3. Verbalised-sampling floor. ### Hypotheses and ### Considered & Rejected together
            must enumerate at least twelve mechanisms with explicit priors, and at least one selected
            variant must carry a prior strictly below 0.20. This audacious-arm floor discourages collapse
            to greedy local edits.

A batch that violates any rule is rejected before evaluation; the validator output is appended to the
session log and the proposer continues the same session to repair it.

Targeted-eval gate. Each variant declares improve, protect, and invariant train examples.
The host evaluates the variant against just these (typically 4–8) examples, compares per-example
scores against the parent candidate’s, and computes a verdict (evaluate_targeted_verdict in
_cbo_metagit.py). The defaults used across all five datasets are:

          • targeted_min_score_lift = 0.0 — aggregate score on the union must be at least the
            parent’s;
          • targeted_max_score_drop = 0.02 — no single protect or invariant example may
            regress by more than 0.02;
          • targeted_improve_threshold = 0.67 — at least 67% of improve examples must
            score strictly above the parent.

Variants that fail the verdict are archived without dev evaluation; only survivors with positive net
targeted lift are sent to the full dev split. Promotion sits one level downstream: a survivor is
promoted (and becomes a candidate base for future sessions) when its dev aggregate is within
promote_dev_epsilon = 0.05 of the current promoted candidate’s dev score, and frontier selec-
tion is then by raw dev score with the promoted candidate as a tie-breaker.

F.2.6     Handoff manifest example
The pending_batches/session_NNN.json manifest is the central host-handoff artefact. It
carries a base_ref, optional expected_base_hash guard, and a list of staged variants; each
variant carries a variant_id, the path to its staged workflow_dir, a free-text rationale, a
structured mechanism_axis (one of prompt, structural, hybrid, config), and the explicit
targeted_examples triple. Listing 1 reproduces a representative session-1 manifest from the
IFBench bundle.
 1   {
 2       " session_index ": 1 ,
 3       " base_ref ": " cand - baseline " ,
 4       " variants ": [
 5          {
 6            " variant_id ": " v01 " ,


                                                    34
Table 15: CRO benchmarks: splits, metric, baseline pipeline shape, and selected CRO workflow
shape.
 Dataset                          Train/Dev/Test    Metric
 HoVer                              150/300/300     FullCoverage on retrieved gold titles
 MATH (L5)                           100/50/50      Exact match (canonical MATH normaliser)
 LiveCodeBench                      100/100/100     Pass-all-tests (public ∪ private, capped 8)
 IFBench                            150/300/294     Per-constraint pass rate (best-of-8 normalised responses)
 Terminal-Bench 2.0 (Stable25)       25/25/25       avg@5 on Terminus-2 test suite (overlapping splits, MetaHarness protocol)



 7                 " workflow_dir ": " variants / session_001 / v01 / workflow " ,
 8                 " m echani sm_axi s ": " prompt " ,
 9                 " rationale ": " Strengthen the existing 2 - stage prompts , remove
10                     the trailing f inal_r espons e marker , and let the second pass
11                     rewrite from scratch against a compliance checklist ." ,
12                 " t a r g e t e d _ e x a m p l e s ": {
13                     " improve ":              [" ifbench_train -12098" ,
14                                                 " ifbench_train -11049" ,
15                                                 " ifbench_train -11657"] ,
16                     " protect ":              [" ifbench_train -9382"] ,
17                     " invariant ": [" ifbench_train -2220"]
18                 }
19            },
20            {
21                 " variant_id ": " v02 " ,
22                 " workflow_dir ": " variants / session_001 / v02 / workflow " ,
23                 " mechan ism_ax is ": " structural " ,
24                 " rationale ": " Add a plan - extraction stage so drafting and
25                     repair operate from an explicit objective plus constraint
26                     checklist instead of raw prompt text alone ." ,
27                 " t a r g e t e d _ e x a m p l e s ": {
28                     " improve ":              [" ifbench_train -3698" ,
29                                                 " ifbench_train -10681" ,
30                                                 " ifbench_train -17429"] ,
31                     " protect ":              [" ifbench_train -9190"] ,
32                     " invariant ": [" ifbench_train -17704"]
33                 }
34            }
35        ]
36    }

Listing 1: Excerpt of pending_batches/session_001.json from the IFBench CRO bundle. Two
of the four variants are shown.


F.3       Per-dataset settings and optimised workflows

Table 15 consolidates the experimental setting (split sizes, metric, baseline workflow shape, CRO-best
workflow shape) for the five benchmarks evaluated.

HoVer. 150/300/300 from the GEPA reproduction split of HoVer; metric is binary FullCoverage –
the retrieved title set is scored 1.0 only when it contains every gold title for the claim. Each example
exposes the upstream TF-IDF top-100 candidate titles. The baseline is a 3-task pipeline that issues
two LLM-generated queries, deterministically reranks the candidate list against each query, and
selects the final title set:
 1    @agent ( cacheable = False )
 2    class H o v e r M u l t i H o p P i p e l i n e ( BaseModel ) :
 3        claim : Input ( str )
 4        candid ate_do cs : Input ( list [ dict [ str , str ]])
 5        retrie ved_do cs : Output ( list [ str ])
 6        def execute ( self ) -> None :
 7              titles = _ c a n d i d a t e _ t i t l e s ( self . can didate _docs )
 8              first = H o v e r I n i t i a l Q u e r y W r i t e r ( claim = self . claim ,


                                                             35
 9                                                                      can didate _docs = self . can didate _docs )
10               f i rs t_ r et ri e ve d = _merge_titles (
11                       first . titles , _rank_titles ( first . query , titles , limit =8) ,
12                       limit =8)
13               second = H o v e r F o l l o w u p Q u e r y W r i t e r ( claim = self . claim ,
14                                                                          cand idate_ docs = self .
                                                                                 candidate_docs ,
15                                                                          first_titles = fi rs t _r et r ie ve d )
16               s e c o n d _ r e t r i e v e d = _merge_titles (
17                       second . titles , _rank_titles ( second . query , titles , limit =8) ,
18                       limit =8)
19               retrieved = _merge_titles ( first_retrieved , second_retrieved ,
20                                                               _rank_titles ( self . claim , titles , limit
                                                                       =8) ,
21                                                               limit =16)
22               selector = H o v e r D o c u m e n t S e l e c t o r (
23                       claim = self . claim , cand idate_ docs = self . candidate_docs ,
24                       r e t r i e v e d _ t i t l e s = retrieved )
25               self . re trieve d_docs = selector . selected_docs


The selected CRO workflow extends the baseline two-hop retrieve-and-select loop with
a per-hop document summariser, a bridge resolver that names gold pages absent from
the candidate list, a deterministic local-wiki grounder for surface-form mentions in sum-
maries, a recursive relation-aware bridge expansion, and a third hop that closes any remain-
ing evidence gap. The full source contains seven @agent files (query1.py, query2.py,
summary1.py, bridge_resolver.py, gap_resolver.py, selector.py, pipeline.py) plus
deterministic helpers in _imports.py (_resolve_open_titles, _collect_snippet_bridges,
_collect_recursive_bridges, _RELATION_CUES); the top-level orchestration is:
 1   @agent ( cacheable = False )
 2   class H o v e r B e n c h M u l t i H o p P i p e l i n e ( BaseModel ) :
 3       def execute ( self ) -> None :
 4             # hop 1: query , retrieve , summarise , mine bridges
 5             first = H o v e r B e n c h I n i t i a l Q u e r y W r i t e r ( claim , ca ndidat e_docs )
 6             f i rs t_ r et ri e ve d = _merge_titles ( first . titles ,
 7                     _ r a n k _ c a n d i d a t e _ d o c s ( first . query , candidate_docs , limit =20) ,
 8                     _ r a n k _ c a n d i d a t e _ d o c s ( claim ,                 candidate_docs , limit =20) ,
 9                     limit =28)
10             first_summary = H o v e r B e n c h D o c u m e n t S u m m a r i z e r (
11                     claim = claim , r e t r i e v e d _ t i t l e s = f i rs t_ r et ri e ve d [:8])
12             first_bridges = _ c o l l e c t _ s n i p p e t _ b r i d g e s ( claim , fi rs t _r e tr ie v ed )
13             bridge = H o v e r B e n c h B r i d g e T i t l e R e s o l v e r (
14                     claim = claim , r e t r i e v e d _ t i t l e s = first_retrieved ,
15                     e v i d e n c e _ s u m m a r y = first_summary . summary )
16             bridge_titles                     = _ r e s o l v e _ o p e n _ t i t l e s ( bridge . titles ,
17                                                                                            claim , first_summary )
18             bridge_expansion = _collect_recursive_bridges (
19                     claim ,
20                     _merge_titles ( bridge_titles , first_bridges , limit =12) ,
21                     fi r st _r e tr i ev ed )
22             # hop 2: re - query conditioned on hop -1 evidence
23             second = H o v e r B e n c h F o l l o w u p Q u e r y W r i t e r ( claim , candidate_docs ,
24                     r e t r i e v e d _ t i t l e s = first_retrieved ,
25                     e v i d e n c e _ s u m m a r y = first_summary . summary )
26             s e c o n d _ r e t r i e v e d = _merge_titles (
27                     _ r e s o l v e _ o p e n _ t i t l e s ( second . titles , claim , first_summary ) ,
28                     bridge_titles , first_bridges , bridge_expansion ,
29                     _ r a n k _ c a n d i d a t e _ d o c s ( second . query , candidate_docs , limit =24) ,
30                     limit =28)
31             seco nd_sum mary = H o v e r B e n c h D o c u m e n t S u m m a r i z e r (
32                     claim = claim , r e t r i e v e d _ t i t l e s = s e c o n d _ r e t r i e v e d [:8])
33             # hop 3: explicit gap resolver + late recursive expansion
34             gap = H o v e r B e n c h M i s s i n g E v i d e n c e R e s o l v e r (
35                     claim = claim ,
36                     r e t r i e v e d _ t i t l e s = _merge_titles ( first_retrieved ,
37                                                                                   second_retrieved , limit =48) ,



                                                           36
38                    e v i d e n c e _ s u m m a r y = first_summary . summary
39                                                    + " \ n \ n " + sec ond_su mmary . summary )
40             third = H o v e r B e n c h F o l l o w u p Q u e r y W r i t e r (...) # 3 rd - hop query
41             t h ir d_ r et ri e ve d = _merge_titles ( gap . titles , third . titles , ...)
42             late_bridges = _ c o l l e c t _ r e c u r s i v e _ b r i d g e s (
43                    claim , _merge_titles (...) , max_depth =1 , max_new =6)
44             retrieved = _merge_titles ( first_retrieved , first_bridges ,
45                    bridge_titles , bridge_expansion , second_retrieved ,
46                    gap . titles , third_retrieved , late_bridges , limit =64)
47             selector = H o v e r B e n c h D o c u m e n t S e l e c t o r (
48                    claim = claim , candi date_d ocs = candidate_docs ,
49                    r e t r i e v e d _ t i t l e s = retrieved ,
50                    summaries =[ first_summary . summary , seco nd_sum mary . summary ])
51             self . re trieve d_docs = _merge_titles (
52                    _ r e s o l v e _ o p e n _ t i t l e s ( selector . selected_docs , ...) ,
53                    retrieved , _ c a n d i d a t e _ t i t l e s ( candi date_d ocs ) )


The mechanism is a sequence of three structural additions, each addressing a distinct failure cluster
traced through CRO’s effect ledger: an LLM bridge resolver that surfaces gold pages outside the TF-
IDF candidate list; a deterministic snippet grounder that uses a local Wikipedia DB to disambiguate
surface-form mentions exposed by the hop-1 summary (Case 2); and a recursive relation-aware bridge
expansion that mines second-order bridge pages from grounded first-order pages (Case 3).


MATH. 100/50/50 from the L5 subset of the MATH dataset, sampled uniformly at random; metric
is exact match against the canonical MATH normaliser. The baseline is a three-task solver–runner–
verifier loop with up to two revisions:
 1   @agent ( cacheable = False )
 2   class MathPipeline ( BaseModel ) :
 3       problem : Input ( str ) ; answer : Output ( str )
 4       def execute ( self ) -> None :
 5             max_revisions , hint = 2 , " "
 6             for attempt in range ( max_revisions + 1) :
 7                  solver = Solver ( problem = self . problem , hint = hint )
 8                  runner = Runner ( code = solver . code )
 9                  check = Verifier ( problem = self . problem , code = solver . code ,
10                                       runner_stdout = runner . stdout ,
11                                       runner_error = runner . error ,
12                                       answer = runner . answer )
13                  if check . verdict == " accept " and not runner . error : break
14                  hint = check . hint or (
15                       f " Previous run errored : { runner . error } "
16                       if runner . error else " " )
17             self . answer = runner . answer


The selected CRO workflow replaces the single solver branch with a plan-conditioned dual-solver
fan-out followed by a repair pass and an LLM selector. The full source consists of seven @agent files
(planner.py, solver.py, alternate_solver.py, repairer.py, runner.py, selector.py,
verifier.py); the top-level orchestration is:
 1   @agent ( cacheable = False )
 2   class MathPipeline ( BaseModel ) :
 3       def execute ( self ) -> None :
 4             for attempt in range ( max_revisions + 1) :
 5                 plan = Planner ( problem = self . problem , hint = hint ) . plan
 6                 code_a = Solver ( problem , plan , hint )
 7                 runner_a = Runner ( code = code_a . code )
 8                 code_b = A lt e rn at e So l ve r ( problem , plan , hint )
 9                 runner_b = Runner ( code = code_b . code )
10                 if ( runner_a . error or not runner_a . answer
11                      or not runner_a . compliant ) :
12                      code_a = Repairer ( problem , plan , code_a . code ,
13                                                 runner_a . stdout , runner_a . error ,
14                                                 runner_a . answer , hint )
15                      runner_a = Runner ( code = code_a . code )


                                                      37
16                      # symmetric repair on code_b
17                      picked = Selector ( problem , plan ,
18                                           code_a , runner_a ,
19                                           code_b , runner_b )
20                      check = Verifier ( problem , plan , picked . code ,
21                                          picked . stdout , picked . error ,
22                                          picked . answer , picked . compliant )
23                      if check . verdict == " accept " and not check . error : break
24                      hint = check . hint or picked . hint
25                 self . answer = picked . answer


The mechanism is structural: a planner produces a plan-shared prefix, a second AlternateSolver
branches off the same plan, a Repairer runs only when a branch produces a non-compliant or
errored output, and an LLM Selector compares the two finalised branches against the plan before
the verifier runs. Edits to individual subtasks beyond the structural change (the FINAL_ANSWER:
contract enforced in _imports.py, the compliant flag on Runner) reflect later sessions tightening
the dual-branch contract.

LiveCodeBench. 100/100/100 sampled uniformly at random from the LiveCodeBench v6 release.
The metric is binary pass-all-tests: the candidate program is graded against the union of public and
private test cases (capped at eight tests per problem); the run is scored 1.0 only when every test passes.
The seed workflow is a four-task pipeline – one LLM solver, a deterministic public-test runner, an
LLM checker over the public-test feedback, and a single revision attempt if the checker requests one.
Note that the metric grades the final emitted code against the union of public and private tests; the
pipeline only consults public-test feedback during the solve. The seed source is:
 1   @agent ( cacheable = False )
 2   class LCBPipeline ( BaseModel ) :
 3       problem : Input ( str )
 4       starter_code : Input ( str )
 5       p u b l i c _ t e s t s _ j s o n : Input ( str )
 6       code : Output ( str )
 7       revisions : Output ( int )
 8       def execute ( self ) -> None :
 9               first           = Solver ( problem = self . problem ,
10                                             starter_code = self . starter_code , hint = " " )
11               runner = P u b l i c T e s t R u n n e r ( code = first . code ,
12                                                          p u b l i c _ t e s t s _ j s o n = self . p u b l i c _ t e s t s _ j s o n
                                                                   )
13               checker = Checker ( problem = self . problem ,
14                                              code = first . code ,
15                                              n_passed = runner . n_passed ,
16                                              n_total = runner . n_total ,
17                                              ru nner_s ummary = runner . summary )
18               if checker . verdict == " revise " and checker . hint :
19                       second = Solver ( problem = self . problem ,
20                                                 starter_code = self . starter_code ,
21                                                 hint = checker . hint )
22                       self . code = second . code
23                       self . revisions = 1
24               else :
25                       self . code = first . code
26                       self . revisions = 0


The selected CRO workflow replaces the single-solver call with a public-test-graded fan-out
and a single repair-planned retry. The full source has nine @agent files (analyzer.py,
analysis_critic.py, solver.py, public_test_runner.py, selector.py, checker.py,
repair_planner.py, pipeline.py, plus _imports.py); the top-level orchestration is:
 1   @agent ( cacheable = False )
 2   class LCBPipeline ( BaseModel ) :
 3       def execute ( self ) -> None :
 4             analysis = P r ob le m An al y ze r ( problem , starter_code ,
 5                                                    public_tests_json )
 6             critique = Anal ysisCr itic ( problem , analysis . analysis ,


                                                                   38
 7                                                                public_tests_json )
 8              primary           = Solver ( problem , starter_code ,
 9                                               analysis . execution_contract ,
10                                               analysis . analysis , critique . critique ,
11                                               strategy = " primary " , hint = " " )
12              prim ary_ru nner = P u b l i c T e s t R u n n e r ( code = primary . code ,
13                                                                              p u b l i c _ t e s t s _ j s o n =...)
14              alternate = Solver (... , strategy = " alternate " , hint = " " )
15              a l t e r n a t e _ r u n n e r = P u b l i c T e s t R u n n e r ( code = alternate . code ,
16                                                                                  p u b l i c _ t e s t s _ j s o n =...)
17              selected = DraftSelector ( primary , primary_runner ,
18                                                              alternate , a l t e r n a t e _ r u n n e r )
19              checker = Checker ( problem , selected . selected_code ,
20                                                selected . selected_passed ,
21                                                selected . selected_total ,
22                                                critique . critique ,
23                                                s e l e c t i o n _ r e a s o n = selected . s e l e c t i o n _ r e a s o n )
24              if checker . verdict == " revise " and checker . hint :
25                      repair = RepairPlanner ( problem , analysis , critique ,
26                                                                  selected , checker . hint )
27                      repaired = Solver (... , strategy = repair . retry_strategy ,
28                                                      hint = repair . repair_plan or checker . hint )
29                      self . code = repaired . code
30              else :
31                      self . code = selected . selected_code


The mechanism is again structural: the proposer separated understanding (ProblemAnalyzer
+ AnalysisCritic) from generation (two Solver invocations with disjoint strategy hints),
grounded selection in the deterministic public-test pass count via DraftSelector, and gated revision
on a Checker whose hint is consumed by an explicit RepairPlanner rather than fed directly to the
next Solver. The optimised pipeline issues at most one revision attempt; the entire fan-out runs
concurrently inside the top-level scope.

IFBench. 150/300/294 vendored from the GEPA paper. The 294-instance test split is the full
IFBench out-of-distribution constraint set (58 OOD constraint identifiers); train and dev are slices
of IFBench_train.jsonl. The metric is per-constraint pass rate computed as the fraction of the
eight normalised response variants that satisfy the IFBench reference verifier, averaged across the
constraints declared on the example. The baseline is the IFBenchCoT2StageProgram:
 1   @agent ( cacheable = False )
 2   class I FB e nc hP i pe li n e ( BaseModel ) :
 3       prompt : Input ( str ) ; response : Output ( str )
 4       def execute ( self ) -> None :
 5             stage1 = G e n e r a t e R e s p o n s e ( query = self . prompt )
 6             stage2 = E n s u r e C o r r e c t R e s p o n s e ( query = self . prompt ,
 7                                                                  response = stage1 . response )
 8             self . response = stage2 . fina l_resp onse


GenerateResponse is prompted with "Respond to the query."; EnsureCorrectResponse is
prompted with "Ensure the response is correct and adheres to the given constraints. Your response
will be used as the final response."
The selected CRO workflow extends the baseline two-stage compound with a constraint audit, a
repair pass, and a last-chance rewrite. The full source adds five @agent files on top of the baseline
(audit.py, ensure.py, finalize.py, generate.py, repair.py), with a new pipeline.py:
 1   @agent ( cacheable = False )
 2   class I FB e nc hP i pe li n e ( BaseModel ) :
 3       def execute ( self ) -> None :
 4             stage1 = G e n e r a t e R e s p o n s e ( query = self . prompt )
 5             stage2 = E n s u r e C o r r e c t R e s p o n s e ( query = self . prompt ,
 6                                                                  response = stage1 . response )
 7             audit_1 = AuditResponse ( query = self . prompt ,
 8                                                    response = stage2 . fi nal_re sponse )
 9             if audit_1 . verdict . strip () . upper () . startswith ( " PASS " ) :


                                                                 39
10                 self . response = stage2 . fi nal_re sponse ; return
11            stage4 = R epairR espons e ( query = self . prompt ,
12                                                   response = stage2 . final_response ,
13                                                   verdict = audit_1 . verdict )
14            audit_2 = AuditResponse ( query = self . prompt ,
15                                                   response = stage4 . f inal_r espons e )
16            if audit_2 . verdict . strip () . upper () . startswith ( " PASS " ) :
17                 self . response = stage4 . fi nal_re sponse ; return
18            stage5 = F i n a l i z e R e s p o n s e (
19                 query = self . prompt ,
20                 initial_draft = stage1 . response ,
21                 response = stage4 . final_response ,
22                 first_verdict = audit_1 . verdict ,
23                 s econd_ verdic t = audit_2 . verdict )
24            self . response = stage5 . fina l_resp onse


The mechanism is the introduction of an explicit, gated audit-and-repair stage: AuditResponse
reads the constraints in the original prompt and emits a structured verdict over the candidate response;
on a FAIL, RepairResponse rewrites the response in light of the verdict before a second audit; on
a second FAIL, FinalizeResponse performs a constrained rewrite conditioned on both the audit
history and the original draft.

Terminal-Bench 2.0. We follow the MetaHarness protocol verbatim: the 25-task Stable25 subset
(scripts/upstream_terminus2/_examples.py) is used as both the optimisation split and the
reporting split. The deliberate overlap is the canonical apples-to-apples comparison to MetaHarness
on this benchmark; any difference between methods is attributable to the optimiser rather than to a
held-out generalisation gap. The metric is avg@5 on the canonical Terminus-2 test suite: each task is
replayed five times under the executor model and the per-task pass rate is averaged across the five
trials before averaging across the 25 tasks.
The baseline workflow is the Terminus-2 agent reproduced as a S HEPHERD task graph:
a single UpstreamTerminus2Pipeline task that delegates the per-task agent run to
harbor_runner.run_one_task, with seven mutable surfaces of the agent exposed as
cacheable @agent subtasks (TerminusPromptTemplate, TerminusCompletionChecklist,
TerminusAgentConfig,            TerminusVariantAgent,              TerminusTimeoutTemplate,
TerminusSummarizationPrompts, TerminusBootstrapContext).                    The pipeline reads
each subtask’s output, hands the rendered surfaces to harbor_runner, and replays harbor’s
per-episode logs as effects on the active scope so S HEPHERD’s trace bundle picks them up
automatically. The seed prompt template, checklist, and agent config are taken verbatim from the
Terminus-2 release.
The selected CRO workflow leaves the pipeline graph unchanged from the seed: the seven
Terminus-2 surfaces remain the only mutable subtasks. The proposer’s session-1 failure taxon-
omy on this dataset (cbo_batch/analysis/failure_taxonomy.md) names five failure clus-
ters: verifier-gated false acceptance (representative train ids cancel-async-tasks, regex-log,
query-optimize, password-recovery); search without compression (gcode-to-text,
adaptive-rejection-sampler, password-recovery, winning-avg-corewars); interactive
state drift (git-multibranch, build-pmars, sanitize-git-repo); destructive rewrite without
rollback (largest-eigenval, adaptive-rejection-sampler, build-pmars); and constraint
register drift (gcode-to-text, password-recovery, dna-insert, constraints-scheduling).
The selected candidate’s edits to TerminusCompletionChecklist, TerminusPromptTemplate,
and TerminusBootstrapContext correspond to those clusters: an explicit grader-facing verifica-
tion command before completion, a compact execution ledger that preserves verified facts and dead
ends, and a running checklist of external state transitions that must be re-probed after irreversible
setup.

F.4   Per-dataset CRO results

For each evaluated dataset we report the same two views as the main paper’s HoVer figure (Figures 4
and 5): a Pareto plot of held-out test pass-rate against optimization wall-clock paired with the
per-iteration dev-set trajectory, and a separate bar chart of CRO’s subtask-cache reuse per proposer
session. Final test scores are loaded directly from each run’s score_table.csv; per-method wall-


                                                    40
clock budgets match Table 4. Datasets where MetaHarness or GEPA log a degenerate trajectory
(single point or no improvement) still receive markers, only the connecting line is dropped.




HoVer. CRO reaches the highest dev pass-rate (0.797) ahead of MetaHarness (0.783) and well
ahead of GEPA, which rejects every proposed edit on this run. The cache-reuse profile is the canonical
one (climbing from 7% on session 1 to ∼70% by session 3) shown in the main paper.




                                                               Baseline                                   GEPA                           MetaHarness                  CRO

                                    Test pass-rate vs. wallclock — HoVer                                                                           Dev-set trajectory vs. wallclock — HoVer


                          0.8                                                                                                      0.8




Held-out test pass-rate
                                                                                                                   Dev pass-rate
                          0.7                                                                                                      0.7


                          0.6
                                                                                                                                   0.6

                          0.5
                                                                                                                                   0.5                                                    per-iter best
                                                                                                                                                                                          best-so-far
                          0.4
                                0   50         100                                      150         200     250                          0          50          100         150          200
                                         Optimization wallclock (min)                                                                                    Optimization wallclock (min)

Figure 7: HoVer: held-out test pass-rate vs. optimization wall-clock (left) and per-iteration dev-set
trajectory (right).




                                                Computation reused (cache hit %)
                                                                                                   CRO computation reuse — HoVer
                                                                                   80                                                                        73%
                                                                                                           68%                      69%
                                                                                                                                             62%     62%
                                                                                   60                             56%
                                                                                                    49%

                                                                                   40

                                                                                   20
                                                                                              7%

                                                                                    0
                                                                                              1      2    3    4     5   6     7    8
                                                                                                   CRO iteration (proposer session)
                                         Figure 8: HoVer: subtask cache reuse per CRO proposer session.




IFBench. MetaHarness edges out CRO by 1.0 pts on the held-out test split (0.523 vs. 0.512), but
CRO reaches that frontier in 82 minutes against MetaHarness’s 126. Cache reuse climbs from 0% on
the cold first session to ∼50% by session 5.


                                                                                                                  41
                                               Baseline                                          GEPA                        MetaHarness                            CRO
                                 Test pass-rate vs.\ wallclock — IFBench                                                                          Dev-set trajectory vs.\ wallclock — IFBench

                          0.55                                                                                                          0.950




Held-out test pass-rate
                                                                                                                      Dev pass-rate
                                                                                                                                        0.925
                          0.50
                                                                                                                                        0.900

                                                                                                                                        0.875
                          0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                        per-iter best
                                                                                                                                        0.850                                           best-so-far
                          0.40
                                     0     25                50                           75        100         125                               0          25     50       75       100           125
                                          Optimization wallclock (min)                                                                                       Optimization wallclock (min)

                                         Figure 9: IFBench: test pass-rate vs. wall-clock and dev-set trajectory.




                                                  Computation reused (cache hit %)
                                                                                               CRO computation reuse — IFBench
                                                                                     80

                                                                                     60                                                               53%
                                                                                                                                                                  48%

                                                                                     40                                        37%


                                                                                                            19%
                                                                                     20
                                                                                               0%
                                                                                      0
                                                                                               1      2        3       4        5
                                                                                                CRO iteration (proposer session)
                                          Figure 10: IFBench: subtask cache reuse per CRO proposer session.



LiveCodeBench. CRO achieves 0.510 on the held-out test split, +11 pts over MetaHarness (0.400)
and +2.3 pts over GEPA (0.487), at roughly half MetaHarness’s wall-clock. Both CRO and GEPA
produce non-trivial dev trajectories on this benchmark.



                                            Baseline                                             GEPA                 MetaHarness                                 CRO
                             Test pass-rate vs.\ wallclock — LiveCodeBench                                                              Dev-set trajectory vs.\ wallclock — LiveCodeBench
                          0.55
                                                                                                                                        0.6




Held-out test pass-rate
                          0.50




                                                                                                                        Dev pass-rate
                          0.45
                                                                                                                                        0.5
                          0.40

                          0.35                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                    per-iter best
                          0.30                                                                                                                                                      best-so-far
                                                                                                                                        0.3
                                 0        50                    100                        150            200                                 0             50      100       150         200
                                         Optimization wallclock (min)                                                                                   Optimization wallclock (min)

                                     Figure 11: LiveCodeBench: test pass-rate vs. wall-clock and dev-set trajectory.


                                                                                                                      42
                                                Computation reused (cache hit %)
                                                                                         CRO computation reuse — LiveCodeBench
                                                                                   80
                                                                                                                                                       62%
                                                                                   60                                                                        51%
                                                                                                               45%
                                                                                   40                                 33%

                                                                                                        20%                                                        22%
                                                                                   20             17%
                                                                                                                                                 12%
                                                                                             1%                                         1%
                                                                                    0
                                                                                             1     2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                                                                                  CRO iteration (proposer session)
                                      Figure 12: LiveCodeBench: subtask cache reuse per CRO proposer session.


MATH (Level 5). On the hardest split of MATH, CRO matches MetaHarness’s dev pass-rate (0.80)
while taking ∼42 wall-clock minutes against MetaHarness’s ∼100. We include this dataset for
completeness; it is not currently part of the main results table because the GEPA harness’s dev-history
was empty on this run.

                                           Baseline                                               GEPA                 MetaHarness                             CRO
                            Test pass-rate vs.\ wallclock — MATH (Level~5)                                                           Dev-set trajectory vs.\ wallclock — MATH (Level~5)
                          0.85
                                                                                                                                     0.85
                          0.80




Held-out test pass-rate
                                                                                                                                     0.80



                                                                                                                     Dev pass-rate
                          0.75
                                                                                                                                     0.75
                          0.70

                          0.65                                                                                                       0.70
                                                                                                                                                                                per-iter best
                          0.60
                                                                                                                                     0.65                                       best-so-far
                          0.55
                                  0       20       40                                   60        80     100                                 0         20      40        60   80       100
                                        Optimization wallclock (min)                                                                                   Optimization wallclock (min)

                                 Figure 13: MATH (Level 5): test pass-rate vs. wall-clock and dev-set trajectory.




                                                Computation reused (cache hit %)
                                                                                        CRO computation reuse — MATH (Level~5)
                                                                                   80

                                                                                   60
                                                                                                          49%                        46%
                                                                                                                                                   43%
                                                                                   40
                                                                                             20%
                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                               9%

                                                                                    0
                                                                                                 1      2        3       4        5
                                                                                                  CRO iteration (proposer session)
                                  Figure 14: MATH (Level 5): subtask cache reuse per CRO proposer session.


Terminal-Bench 2.0. On the hardest benchmark in the suite, all three optimizers converge to
the same single-pass dev rate (0.40) but only CRO’s candidate generalizes to 0.352 avg@5 on the
held-out split (vs. 0.312 for MetaHarness, GEPA, and the baseline). MetaHarness and GEPA do not
log per-iteration dev evaluations on this run, so only CRO’s trajectory is drawn. Cache reuse on TB2


                                                                                                                     43
saturates near 100% within three proposer sessions because each candidate’s evaluation set is only 25
tasks.

                                          Baseline                                         GEPA               MetaHarness                          CRO
                           Test pass-rate vs.\ wallclock — TerminalBench~2.0 Dev-set trajectory vs.\ wallclock — TerminalBench~2.0
                                                                                                                            0.45
                          0.40




Held-out test pass-rate
                                                                                                                            0.40
                          0.35



                                                                                                            Dev pass-rate
                                                                                                                            0.35
                          0.30
                                                                                                                            0.30
                          0.25
                                                                                                                            0.25                                    per-iter best
                          0.20                                                                                                                                      best-so-far
                                                                                                                            0.20
                                  0        50                                       100         150                                0          50          100         150
                                       Optimization wallclock (min)                                                                        Optimization wallclock (min)

                                 Figure 15: Terminal-Bench 2.0: test pass-rate vs. wall-clock and dev-set trajectory.




                                                Computation reused (cache hit %)
                                                                                     CRO computation reuse — TerminalBench~2.0
                                                                                                      100% 100%                          100% 100% 100%
                                                                                   100

                                                                                    75
                                                                                                50%
                                                                                    50                                             43%


                                                                                    25                                      20%

                                                                                          0%
                                                                                    0
                                                                                          1      2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
                                                                                               CRO iteration (proposer session)
                                   Figure 16: Terminal-Bench 2.0: subtask cache reuse per CRO proposer session.


F.5                          Case Studies: Interpretable Counterfactual Workflow Edits on HoVer

We summarize three counterfactual workflow edits discovered by CRO on HoVer. The metric is
dev-set gold-document coverage over 300 examples. The baseline retrieval workflow scored 0.447
dev accuracy (134/300).

F.5.1                            Case 1: The Workflow Was Accidentally Candidate-Closed
Diagnosis. The baseline was not primarily failing because the model could not reason over multi-
hop claims. Instead, it often identified or implied a missing bridge entity but then discarded it because
later stages were constrained to select only from the upstream TF-IDF candidate list. This produced
systematic “missing requirement” failures, e.g. cases where the gold evidence contained pages such
as Billy Idol, Collide (film), or Saul Metzstein that were not preserved by the candidate-only selector.

How the LLM arrived at the diagnosis. The CRO proposer inspected baseline traces and observed
that summaries often contained enough semantic evidence to name a missing bridge page, while
the workflow contract still required “exact candidate titles only.” It therefore hypothesized that the
bottleneck was not retrieval breadth alone, but a workflow-level type error: recovered Wikipedia titles
were being treated as inadmissible unless they appeared in the original candidate list.

Generated patch. CRO added a bridge-title recovery stage and relaxed the selector so it could
retain grounded Wikipedia titles recovered during the workflow:


                                                                                                              44
  bridge_titles = BridgeTitleResolver(
      claim=claim,
      retrieved_titles=first_retrieved,
      evidence_summary=first_summary,
  ).titles

  second_retrieved = merge_titles(
      second_query_titles,
      bridge_titles,
      rank_candidate_docs(second_query),
  )

  allowed_titles = candidate_titles + retrieved_titles
  selected_docs = selector.select(claim, allowed_titles, summaries)


The key change is that retrieved non-candidate titles became first-class evidence candidates rather
than being discarded before final selection.

Lift. This patch raised dev coverage from 0.447 to 0.693 (134/300 to 208/300), a +24.7 percentage
point improvement.

F.5.2   Case 2: The Workflow Could Diagnose Its Own Missing Evidence

Diagnosis. After open-world bridge recovery, many residual failures were no longer first-hop
retrieval failures. The workflow had accumulated enough context after two summaries to describe
what was still missing, but no stage converted that self-diagnosis into grounded page titles. Examples
included missing evidence pages such as Huainan, Howea, Bulbophyllum, and Saul Metzstein.

How the LLM arrived at the diagnosis. The proposer compared traces from successful and failed
candidates and noticed that the summaries repeatedly used phrases like “missing bridge fact” or
named the unresolved entity directly. It inferred that the workflow needed a late audit step: after
enough evidence had accumulated, ask explicitly what documents were still missing, then ground
those short surface forms against the local Wikipedia title database.

Generated patch. CRO inserted a missing-evidence resolver between the second summary and the
third retrieval hop:

  gap_titles = MissingEvidenceResolver(
      claim=claim,
      retrieved_titles=merge_titles(first_retrieved, second_retrieved),
      evidence_summary=first_summary + "\n\n" + second_summary,
  ).titles

  third_retrieved = merge_titles(
      gap_titles,
      third_query_titles,
      rank_candidate_docs(third_query),
  )


The resolver was prompted to return short surface forms rather than guessed parenthetical titles, and
the workflow then deterministically grounded those surfaces to exact local Wikipedia pages.

Lift. Relative to the previous bridge-recovery frontier, this patch raised dev coverage from 0.737 to
0.787 (221/300 to 236/300), a +5.0% improvement. Relative to the original baseline, the resulting
workflow was +34.0% higher.


                                                 45
F.5.3    Case 3: Recovered Bridge Pages Needed to Become New Evidence Sources
Diagnosis. The most surprising discovery was that the all-targeted-pass candidate was not the best
dev candidate. A candidate that solved all targeted training examples scored 0.787 on dev, but CRO
found a more general mechanism: recovered bridge pages should themselves be re-read as evidence
sources. In one persistent failure, the workflow recovered Volkswagen CrossBlue but still failed to
recover the second-order comparison page Honda Pilot.

How the LLM arrived at the diagnosis. The proposer inspected the trace and saw that the
workflow treated recovered bridge pages as endpoints. It also observed that earlier recursive bridge
attempts failed when they replaced the late missing-evidence resolver. The successful hypothesis
was therefore compositional: keep the late resolver, but add recursive reading over relation-bearing
sentences from newly recovered pages.

Generated patch.     CRO added relation-cue filtering and recursive bridge expansion over recovered
titles:
  relation_cues = [
      "competed", "introduced", "based on", "inspired by",
      "starred", "founded", "won", "record"
  ]

  def relation_sentences(claim, title, snippet):
      return [
          sent for sent in split_sentences(snippet)
          if has_relation_cue(sent, relation_cues)
          or token_overlap(sent, claim + " " + title) >= 4
      ]

  bridge_expansion = collect_recursive_bridges(
      claim=claim,
      seed_titles=merge_titles(bridge_titles, snippet_bridges),
      known_titles=first_retrieved,
      max_depth=2,
  )

  retrieved = merge_titles(
      first_retrieved,
      bridge_titles,
      bridge_expansion,
      second_retrieved,
      gap_titles,
      third_retrieved,
  )


This changed the workflow from “find a bridge page” to “find a bridge page and inspect it for the
next bridge.”

Lift. This patch raised dev coverage from 0.787 to 0.797 (236/300 to 239/300), a further +1.0%
improvement and +35.0% over baseline. Notably, its targeted-train score was lower than the previous
candidate (0.833 vs. 1.000), but its aggregate dev score was higher. CRO selected a more general
workflow mechanism rather than the edit that best fit the targeted training slice.

F.6     Meta-Agent Guided Tree-RL: full training configuration

Training is performed on Modal-managed 8×H100 nodes using SkyRL’s GRPO recipe with FSDP2,
gradient checkpointing, and torch.compile on the policy. Each training step uses a batch of 16
prompts with 8 samples per prompt for 128 rollouts per step. Each rollout caps at 8 turns, 1024 maxi-
mum generated tokens per turn, and 16,384 maximum input length; trajectories that would exceed


                                                 46
Algorithm 2 Meta-Agent Guided Tree-RL
Require: Policy πθ ; meta-agent P ; task pool D; group size G; branch factor K; iterations T
 1: for t ← 1 to T do
 2:     Sample prompt batch {qb }B          b=1 ∼ D.
 3:     (A) Root Rollouts:
 4:     for each qb in parallel, each g ∈ {1, . . . , G} in parallel do
 5:         Initialize a fresh sandbox σb,g .
             root
 6:         τb,g   = (o0 , a1 , o1 , . . . , aTb,g , oTb,g ) ∼ πθ (· | qb , σb,g )
              root                   root
 7:         Rb,g    ← G RADE(τb,g         )
 8:     end for
 9:     (B) Meta-Agent Branching:
                         root
10:     for each root τb,g    in parallel do
             ∗
11:                     root
            t ← P (τb,g )                                                          ▷ meta-agent picks fork step t∗
              ∗                   root ∗
12:         σ ← R EVERT(τb,g , t )                                  ▷ env state rolled back to right before step t∗
             pre
13:         τb,g ← (o0 , a1 , o1 , . . . , ot∗ −1 )                 ▷ shared trajectory prefix for all K branches
14:         for k ∈ {0, . . . , K−1} in parallel do
15:              σk ← F ORK(σ ∗ )                                                        ▷ isolated env per branch
                   (k)                         pre
16:              τb,g ∼ πθ (· | qb , σk , τb,g )                                        ▷ πθ rollout from t∗ in σk
                    (k)                (k)
17:               Rb,g ← G RADE(τb,g )
18:         end for
19:     end for
20:     (C) Credit Assignment:
21:     Inter-root advantage for prefix actions j < t∗ (shared by all branches of root g):
                                 1
                                   PG
22:        Ainter       root
             b,g ← Rb,g − G
                                            root
                                    g ′ =1 Rb,g ′                           ▷ G-root group baseline
                                                        ∗
23:     Intra-tree advantage for suffix actions j ≥ t on tree member k ∈ {root, 0, . . . , K−1}:
             intra,(k)       (k)    1      root
                                                  PK−1 (k′ )                             (root) root
24:        Ab,g        ← Rb,g − K+1       Rb,g  + k′ =0 Rb,g ▷ (K+1)-sibling baseline; Rb,g ≡ Rb,g
25:     Update πθ via clipped GRPO with {Aj }j pooled across all qb in the batch.
26: end for
27: return trained policy πθ




these caps are filtered via SkyRL’s overlong-filtering mode. The optimizer is Adam with learning rate
5×10−7 , weight decay 0.01, and gradient clipping at max-norm 0.1, with a 20-step linear warm-up fol-
lowed by constant schedule for ten epochs over the training set (1,120 total steps). KL loss is disabled;
advantages are GRPO-normalized and standardized per group. Inference uses vLLM with four engines
at tensor-parallel size 2, weight synchronization via NCCL, and gpu_memory_utilization=0.80.
Checkpoints and validation evaluations are taken every 10 training steps. The canonical launch script
is experiments/a4-reversible-rl/modal_smoke_train.py in the released codebase.


F.7   Meta-Agent Guided Tree-RL: meta-agent qualitative examples

The tree-search rollouts in Section 5.3 hand the fork choice to a stronger model (claude-opus-4-7).
Given the inner agent’s full transcript and final reward, it returns a turn t∗ ∈ [1, T −2] to fork at and
the bash command it would run there. We re-render the command through the policy’s renderer, so
the tokens match what the policy itself would emit, and inject it as one of the K branches at t∗ .
This subsection walks through three trajectory shapes that show the meta-agent’s behaviour: an early
single-cause failure, an ambiguous failure with multiple plausible branches, and a long trajectory
with a deeply-nested mistake. The trajectories are short enough to read end-to-end and were hand-
constructed so a careful reader has a strong prior over the “right” branch turn. We check whether the
meta-agent’s pick matches that prior, whether its emitted command actually addresses the failure,
and whether it stays well-behaved across trajectory lengths. (Three further cases in the released
probe set, omitted for space, cover clean-success no-ops, late-turn range clamping, and a redundant
tool-replacement variant of Case 1; results match the patterns shown here.)


                                                        47
                               Qwen3.5-35B-A3B: Baseline (flat GRPO) Qwen3.5-35B-A3B: Meta-Agent Guided Tree-GRPO
                    1.00




Group composition
                    0.75
                                                                      52%        56%
                                                    57%                                            76%                77%
                    0.50          44%


                    0.25

                    0.00
                    Nemotron-3-Super-120B-A12B: Baseline (flat GRPO)
                                                          Nemotron-3-Super-120B-A12B: Meta-Agent Guided Tree-GRPO
                    1.00




Group composition
                    0.75
                                                                      50%
                                  43%               52%                          63%               80%                72%
                    0.50

                    0.25

                    0.00
                           0            50          100         150         0          50          100          150
                                             rollout step                                    rollout step

                                     all-zero (no signal)         variance (useful)           all-one (no signal)

Figure 17: GRPO group composition over training (rows: base model; columns: setting). Tree-GRPO
keeps the informative (variance, green) fraction higher than Flat GRPO throughout, producing more
gradient signal at matched compute. Flat GRPO’s all-one share grows with training as easy tasks
saturate, eating the variance band. Purple double-headed arrows annotate the variance share at steps
20/90/160.




                                                                                        




Figure 18: Held-out Endless Terminals evaluation, sampled every 10 training steps (raw, unsmoothed).
Open circles plot the actual measured val/endless_mean_reward; solid line is a noise-preserving
fit. Tree-GRPO climbs to and stabilises at a higher held-out reward than Flat GRPO on both base
models. Final-policy Terminal-Bench 2.0 transfer is reported separately in Table 5.


Setup. For each case, we render the inner-agent trajectory (system prompt, user task, and the
alternating assistant tool calls and tool results) as a numbered turn list and send it to the meta-agent
along with the final reward. The meta-agent returns a JSON object {branch_turn, tool_call,
reason}, where tool_call.name = "bash" and tool_call.arguments.command is the bash
payload.

Headline. The meta-agent’s choices share two patterns uniform sampling cannot reproduce. First, it
prefers the earliest turn at which a downstream wrong choice was made, even when that turn was not
itself a syntactically obvious failure (Case 1: package-name typo; Case 3: target-file choice). Second,


                                                                            48
                                           Flat GRPO                 Tree-GRPO
                                Qwen3.5-35B-A3B                     Nemotron-3-Super-120B-A12B
                    1.0



     Train reward
                    0.5


                    0.0
                          0     50       100       150          0        50       100       150
                                  Rollout step                              Rollout step
Figure 19: Train raw reward (mean over G=8 roots) for both base models, panels are Qwen3.5-
35B-A3B (left) and Nemotron-3-Super-120B-A12B (right). Tree-GRPO (K=4, teal) reaches higher
reward than Flat GRPO (red) at every rollout step. Faint dots are observed steps from the flat-baseline
run; smooth lines are denoised trajectories.

    Case 1: Early mistake (T=4, reward=0.00)

    Task: Install the requests package and verify it imports.
    Trajectory:
                     • Turn 1: pip install request (typo: missing the s) → “Successfully installed request-
                       2025.10.0”
                     • Turn 2: python -c "import requests" → ModuleNotFoundError: No module
                       named requests
                     • Turn 3: python3 -c "import requests" → same error.
                     • Turn 4: prints sys.path, gives up.


    Meta-agent decision (obvious turn: 1)

    branch_turn: 1 ✓ (matches obvious)
    meta-agent        action:        pip install requests && python -c "import requests;
    print(requests.__version__)"
    reason: “Turn 1 installed the wrong package ‘request’ instead of ‘requests’; fixing the typo here
    resolves the entire failure.”


Figure 20: Early-mistake case. The wrong package name on turn 1 dooms the rest of the trajectory.
The meta-agent picks turn 1 and writes a one-liner that installs the right package and verifies the
import in the same command.


when the trajectory shows symptom-then-cause dynamics (Case 2: a defunct process surfaces at turn
5, traceable to a launch issue at turn 3), it follows the causal chain rather than picking the symptom
turn. Demanding an executable bash command, not just a turn index, forces the meta-agent past
hand-wavy diagnoses (Case 2: a specific nohup invocation, not “use proper launch flags”), and the
command round-trips through the same renderer the policy uses, so the injected branch’s tokens are
indistinguishable from the policy’s own emission at parse time.




                                                           49
   Case 2: Ambiguous failure (T=5, reward=0.30)

   Task: Serve the Flask app at /app/app.py on port 5000.
   Trajectory:
           • Turn 1: read the app source.
           • Turn 2: pip install flask (no python-version check).
           • Turn 3: python app.py & (background launch, no nohup).
           • Turn 4: curl localhost:5000/ → Connection refused.
           • Turn 5: ps aux reveals the process is <defunct>.


   Meta-agent decision (multiple plausible turns)

   branch_turn: 3
   meta-agent action: cd /app && nohup python app.py –host=0.0.0.0 > /tmp/flask.log
   2>&1 &
   reason: “The app.py has no __main__ block, so running it directly exits; need to bind to 0.0.0.0 with
   nohup to keep it alive.”


Figure 21: Ambiguous case. At least three turns offer plausible branches (skip-the-version-check,
pip-vs-pip3, the background launch). The meta-agent traces the symptom at turn 5 (<defunct>) back
to the launch on turn 3 and writes a concrete replacement: nohup with a log redirect and an explicit
host binding. Demanding a runnable command pushes the meta-agent past hand-wavy diagnoses to a
specific hypothesis we can run.



   Case 3: Long trajectory, deep mid-mistake (T=9, reward=0.20)

   Task: Fix the failing test in /app/test_utils.py.
   Trajectory:
           • Turns 1–3: explore, read utils.py (case mismatch in normalize), run pytest, see the
             failing assertion.
           • Turn 4: edits the test file with a fragile sed substitution (wrong file—fix belongs in utils.py).
           • Turns 5–7: doom-spiral—broken sed quotes, more sed patches, file syntax errors.
           • Turns 8–9: attempts git checkout to revert, but repo is not git-tracked.


   Meta-agent decision (obvious turn: 4)

   branch_turn: 4 ✓ (matches obvious)
   meta-agent action (multi-line heredoc):
     cat > /app/utils.py <<’EOF’
     def normalize(s):
          return s.strip()
     EOF
   reason: “Fix the implementation rather than the test, since the task is to fix the failing test by correcting
   the underlying code.”


Figure 22: Long-trajectory case. A 9-turn rollout with a wrong-file edit at turn 4 cascades into 5
turns of recovery thrash. The meta-agent picks turn 4 and writes a multi-line heredoc that rewrites
utils.py (the file the agent should have edited) cleanly. Uniform sampling has no way to prefer
turn 4 over the five recovery turns; only the meta-agent’s pick concentrates the branch budget where
it matters.



                                                        50
