                                                  Collective cooperation without individual fidelity
                                                                   in LLM agents

                                                         Henrique Ferraz de Arruda1,2 , Carlos Gracia Lázaro3 ,
                                                                  Alberto Aleta2,4 , Yamir Moreno2,4




arXiv:2606.30454v1 [physics.soc-ph] 29 Jun 2026
                                                                    1
                                                                    ARAID Foundation, Zaragoza, Spain.
                                                     2
                                                      Institute for Biocomputation and Physics of Complex Systems,
                                                                  University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.
                                                             3
                                                               Universidad San Jorge (USJ), Zaragoza, Spain.
                                                  4
                                                    Department of Theoretical Physics, University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza,
                                                                                   Spain.




                                                                                      Abstract
                                                   Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used as agents in simulations of
                                                   social systems, yet it remains unclear when their behavior can be interpreted as
                                                   a faithful proxy for human decision-making. Here we test LLM agents against a
                                                   direct empirical benchmark: a large-scale networked Prisoner’s Dilemma exper-
                                                   iment with human participants. Using the same interaction protocol, payoff
                                                   structure, and network topologies, we compare nine open-weight LLMs with
                                                   the human data. The selected model reproduces several macro-level features of
                                                   cooperation dynamics, including the early decline and later stabilization of coop-
                                                   eration. This aggregate agreement, however, does not extend uniformly to finer
                                                   levels of behavior. LLM populations underestimate individual-level heterogene-
                                                   ity and generate conditional cooperation patterns that differ from those observed
                                                   in humans. Adding a fraction of random agents improves some aspects of micro-
                                                   level agreement, but does not remove the mismatch in decision rules. These
                                                   findings reveal a macro–micro dissociation in LLM-based social agents: collective
                                                   outcomes can appear human-like even when the underlying behavioral distri-
                                                   butions and mechanisms are not. They suggest that validating LLM agents as
                                                   human surrogates requires comparisons across aggregate dynamics, individual
                                                   heterogeneity, and context-dependent decision rules, rather than outcome-level
                                                   agreement alone.

                                                   Keywords: Large Language Models; Networked Social Dilemmas; Prisoner’s
                                                   Dilemma; Conditional Cooperation; Behavioral Heterogeneity




                                                                                           1
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used as proxies for human agents in
simulations, evaluation settings, and collective decision-making environments [1–3].
This development is part of a broader shift in which language models are no longer
treated only as systems that generate text, but also as tools to build agents whose
behavior can be elicited, measured, and compared with that of humans. Recent work
has extended this approach to experimental and agent-based settings, where LLM
agents are used to simulate human-like behavior in social and strategic contexts [1, 4].
    The appeal of this approach is clear. If LLM agents could reproduce human
behavior at scale, they would provide a powerful tool for computational social sci-
ence, behavioral experimentation, and the construction of social simulations. Yet this
promise also raises a basic validation problem. Agreement with human outputs does
not necessarily imply that a model reproduces the behavioral patterns or decision
processes that generated those outputs. Several recent studies point in this direc-
tion. LLMs may reconstruct users through compressed behavioral representations that
introduce systematic biases in social simulations [5]; they may align with human eval-
uative judgments while relying more heavily on lexical associations and statistical
priors than on contextual reasoning [6]; and LLM-generated text can display statisti-
cal signatures, such as higher structural regularity and compressibility, that differ from
human language production [7]. These observations suggest that apparent behavioral
realism may be shallow if it is assessed only at the level of visible outcomes.
    This issue is especially important in social simulations and game-theoretic environ-
ments, where LLM agents are increasingly used as substitutes for human participants.
LLMs can participate effectively in repeated strategic interactions, particularly in
self-interested settings such as the iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma family, while show-
ing weaker performance in coordination problems [8]. Other work has shown that
LLM agents can develop collective conventions and shared behavioral patterns with-
out explicit programming [9]. At the same time, these agents remain distinguishable
from humans in interactive settings: in online debates, for example, LLM agents can
remain on topic and blend into conversations, while still being perceived as less con-
vincing and less confident than human interlocutors [4]. Related studies show that
LLM outputs can approach human benchmarks in some evaluative tasks and can be
systematically shaped through prompting and fine-tuning [10, 11].
    A further complication is that current LLMs are not primarily optimized to repro-
duce human behavior in experiments. They are generally trained and aligned to
function as helpful assistants in human-oriented tasks [12]. This distinction matters
because a model that is useful, compliant, or socially desirable need not be a faithful
model of human decision-making. Alignment procedures may also compress heteroge-
neous preferences into narrower sets of high-probability behaviors, as shown by Slocum
et al. [13], with related empirical evidence of mode collapse in aligned language mod-
els [14]. These concerns are consistent with recent commentaries emphasizing the lack
of empirical validation against real human behavioral data in LLM-based agent mod-
els [15], and with calls to calibrate scientific claims from LLM social simulations to
the strength of robustness checks and empirical benchmarks [16].



                                            2
    Here, we evaluate whether LLM agents can function as behavioral surrogates for
humans in repeated networked social dilemmas. We use as a benchmark the large-
scale Prisoner’s Dilemma experiment of Gracia-Lázaro et al. [17], in which human
cooperation converged to similar levels across network topologies, challenging the the-
oretical expectation that heterogeneous networks should promote cooperation. Using
the same network structures and interaction protocol, we compare nine open-weight
LLMs operating as autonomous agents in repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma games. Our
aim is not to ask whether LLMs play the game better than humans, but whether they
reproduce the empirical temporal dynamics, individual heterogeneity, and conditional
behavioral patterns observed in the experiment.
    This design allows us to test behavioral similarity at several levels. At the macro
level, we ask whether LLM agents reproduce the aggregate evolution of cooperation.
At the micro level, we ask whether they reproduce the distribution of individual
cooperation propensities. At the decision-rule level, we ask whether they reproduce
conditional cooperation, namely, the way in which participants adjust their actions to
the previous behavior of their neighbors. We find that the selected LLM reproduces
several macro-level regularities, including the early decay and later stabilization of
cooperation. However, this aggregate agreement does not fully extend to micro-level
signatures: simulated populations underestimate behavioral heterogeneity and gener-
ate conditional cooperation rules that differ quantitatively from the empirical data.
These results reveal a macro–micro dissociation in LLM-based social agents, with
direct implications for the validation of machine behavior and for the use of LLM
agents as human surrogates in experimental social science.

2 Results
We present the results in three steps. We first describe the empirical benchmark
and the simulation framework. We then assess whether LLM agents reproduce aggre-
gate cooperation dynamics, before turning to individual heterogeneity and conditional
cooperation. This ordering follows the central validation question of the study: whether
agreement at the collective level extends to finer behavioral levels.

2.1 Empirical benchmark and simulation framework
To evaluate whether LLM agents reproduce human cooperation dynamics, we simu-
lated a repeated multi-agent Prisoner’s Dilemma on network structures derived from
a human behavioral experiment. The simulation framework consists of an orchestra-
tion layer that manages autonomous agents, each controlled by an LLM. This work
builds on the experimental design of Gracia-Lázaro et al. [17], who examined human
cooperation in networked Prisoner’s Dilemma games. The original study found that
human cooperation converged to similar steady-state levels across network topolo-
gies, challenging theoretical expectations that heterogeneous networks should promote
cooperation. Using the same network structures and temporal dynamics as in the orig-
inal study, we test whether LLM-based agents reproduce the empirical cooperation
patterns or instead follow behavior closer to classical game-theoretic predictions.



                                           3
    The simulation environment is a repeated multi-agent game in which each net-
work node is occupied by an LLM-driven agent. The simulation proceeds in discrete
rounds that mirror the original experiment. In each round, after the introductory one,
agents receive a prompt summarizing the previous round, including their neighbors’
choices and normalized payoffs. Agents then return their choice for the new one which
effectively could be to cooperate or to defect. The underlying incentive structure is
a Prisoner’s Dilemma where payoffs are computed pairwise. The total payoff for an
agent is the sum of these pairwise interactions across all their network connections.
The specific values used to drive the agents’ goal of maximizing “ECUs” (Experimen-
tal Currency Units) are detailed in Table 1 and follow Grujic et al (2010) [18] as in the
original experiment. In this specific configuration, the rewards are designed such that
cooperation is theoretically expected to reach a high level [17, 18]. Implementation
details, model descriptions, and statistical procedures are provided in the Methods.


               Table 1: Pairwise payoff matrix (ECUs per neighbor).
                Your Choice / Neighbor Choice       Cooperate    Defect
                Cooperate                               7          0
                Defect                                 10          0




2.2 Macro-level cooperation dynamics
We first ask whether different LLMs produce comparable aggregate cooperation
dynamics when placed in the same experimental environment. For this initial bench-
mark, we fix the interaction structure to a regular lattice network (625 nodes, average
degree 4). Figure 1(a) shows the resulting cooperation trajectories across all models,
while Fig. 1(b) shows their average cooperation levels. The tested LLMs span several
model families, parameter scales, and training paradigms. Despite identical incentives
and network structure, they generate markedly different cooperation regimes. Notably,
qwen3:32b produces the highest cooperation levels across the simulation horizon.
Ablated variants derived from the same base checkpoints also display systematically
altered trajectories relative to their originals, indicating that collective outcomes are
sensitive to model choice and alignment. Among the models tested, llama4:16x17b
yields the closest aggregate match to the empirical data. We therefore use this model
as the primary agent in the remaining analyses, while treating the initial benchmark as
evidence that LLMs should not be regarded as interchangeable behavioral surrogates.
    With this LLM fixed for the remaining analyses, we next evaluate the two network
structures considered in [17]: a regular lattice and a heterogeneous network (604 nodes,
degrees ranging from k = 2 to k = 16). Fig. 2(a) shows the temporal evolution of
cooperation for one realization of the dynamics. As in the empirical experiment, both
structures yield similar cooperation levels that overlap closely over time. Compared
to the empirical data, the simulated trajectories align more closely in later iterations,
though they remain noisier overall.


                                           4
 a)                                                               b)




                                                       9
                                                       7
                                                      Empirical
                                                       4
                                                       8
                                                       5
                                                       6
                                                       3
                                                       2
                                                       1



Fig. 1: Comparison of cooperation outcomes across LLM models. The
numbers shown on the plot correspond to the following models: (1) BlackHillsIn-
foSec llama-3.1:8b-abliterated, (2) deepseek-llm:67b, (3) deepseek-llm:7b, (4) krith
meta-llama-3.1:70b-instruct-abliterated IQ4 XS, (5) llama3.1:70b, (6) llama3.1:8b, (7)
llama4:16x17b, (8) smolLM2.1:7b, and (9) qwen3:32b. Experiments performed for the
Lattice network. Panel (a) shows the mean cooperation rate per round (empirical) or
per iteration (simulation), and the error bars represent the standard error. Panel (b)
shows the average values of the simulation curves, with error bars representing the
standard deviation. The dashed horizontal line represents the empirical average, and
the shaded area represents one standard deviation around it.


    To perform a thorough comparison, we also test the control cases, which con-
sist of simulations on a time-varying network structure. Specifically, connections are
randomly rewired at each iteration while preserving the original degree sequence. To
match the original study, we do not generate a new rewiring sequence. Instead, we use
the exact sequence of network connections reported in [18], which was originally gener-
ated at random. Henceforth, we refer to the fixed-network simulations as the networked
condition, and to the time-varying simulations as the control condition. Figure 2(f)
shows the resulting cooperation trajectories over time. Notably, the heterogeneous
control case more closely matches the empirical data, whereas in the lattice control
case, agents tend to cooperate less. As in the networked simulations, the LLM-based
trajectories remain noisier overall.
    Upon closer inspection of the cooperation histograms, we observe that the empirical
experiments yield substantially broader distributions than those of the simulations
under the networked condition. Specifically, the empirical lattice case (Fig. 2b) has
mean cooperation µ = 0.368 with standard deviation σ = 0.170, and the empirical
heterogeneous case (Fig. 2c) has µ = 0.405 and σ = 0.158. By contrast, the simulated
lattice network (Fig. 2d) produces a more concentrated distribution (µ = 0.291, σ =
0.069), whereas the simulated heterogeneous network (Fig. 2e) yields µ = 0.314 and
σ = 0.148. While the lattice simulation more closely reproduces the empirical mean,
the heterogeneous simulation better captures the observed dispersion and therefore
provides a closer overall match.


                                          5
                                                                          b)          Emp.: Lattice   c)   Emp.: Heterogeneous
    a) 1.0                                                                 50
                                Emp.: Lattice
       0.8                      Emp.: Heterogeneous


Cooperation
       0.6                      Sim.: Lattice                                  0
                                Sim.: Heterogeneous                       d)                          e)
                                                                                      Sim.: Lattice        Sim.: Heterogeneous
       0.4
                                                                          100


                                                      Number of Players
       0.2
       0.0
              10    20     30     40       50                             g) 0       Emp.: Lattice    h) Emp.: Heterogeneous
    f) 1.0
                                                                           50
       0.8

Cooperation
       0.6                                                                     0
                                                                          i)         Sim.: Lattice    j) Sim.: Heterogeneous
       0.4
                                                                          200
       0.2
       0.0                                                                     0
              10    20      30     40      50                                  0.0      0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0
                         Iteration                                                   Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
  Fig. 2: Evolution and distribution of cooperation. Panels (a) and (f) show the
  temporal evolution of the mean cooperation rate per iteration for the networked and
  control experiments, respectively. Dashed lines represent empirical results, solid lines
  represent simulation results, and error bars indicate the standard error. Panels (b)-(e)
  and (g)-(j) display the histograms of individual cooperation propensities (cooperative
  rounds / total rounds). Specifically, Panels (a)-(e) show the results for the networked
  experiment, and Panels (f)-(j) show the results for the control case.


      To test the sensitivity of our results to agent variability, we repeated the lattice
  simulation with LLM temperatures sampled uniformly at random. The resulting dis-
  tributions were similar to those reported in the main text, showing that our findings
  are not affected by temperature variation (see Supplementary Material, Fig. S13). We
  also test three different “personas” for the LLMs. However, since the results are con-
  sistent across personas, we omitted them from the paper (see Supplementary Material,
  Section S3.2.1, for more details). Furthermore, to evaluate whether the reduced disper-
  sion observed in the simulated cooperation distributions is specific to llama4 16x17b,
  we repeated the analysis using qwen3:32b, the second-best-performing model accord-
  ing to Fig. 1. As shown in Supplementary Fig. S14, qwen3:32b reproduces the
  same qualitative pattern, in which the simulated cooperation distributions remain
  narrower than the corresponding empirical distributions. These results suggest that
  the tendency of LLM-based agents to generate less variable outcomes than human
  participants is not restricted to a single model.
      A similar pattern is observed in the control condition. The empirical lattice control
  (Fig. 2g) exhibits µ = 0.292 and σ = 0.209, and the empirical heterogeneous control
  (Fig. 2h) shows µ = 0.322 and σ = 0.209, again indicating wide distributions. In
  contrast, the simulated lattice control (Fig. 2i) remains narrowly concentrated (µ =
  0.238, σ = 0.047), while the simulated heterogeneous control (Fig. 2j) produces higher
  cooperation (µ = 0.361) but still substantially reduced variability (σ = 0.089). Thus,
  although the heterogeneous control simulation better matches the empirical mean


                                                6
cooperation level, both simulated control cases underestimate the dispersion observed
in human behavior.
    To evaluate the fidelity of the simulated temporal dynamics, we used metrics to
compare simulated and empirical cooperation trajectories. In addition to measuring
point-by-point error with Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) and Mean Absolute
Error (MAE), we used an autoregressive model (AR(1)) to evaluate the persistence of
cooperation. The difference in persistence coefficients (Diffϕ ) indicates whether sim-
ulated and empirical trajectories exhibit similar temporal persistence (i.e., a form of
aggregate “memory” in the cooperation series). The difference in implied mean incre-
ments (Diffµ ) identifies systematic biases in the average rate of change. Finally, to
measure the synchrony of cooperation trends, we calculated the Pearson correlation
coefficient for the raw levels (r) and the first differences (r∆ ), ensuring that the simu-
lated fluctuations were synchronized with the empirical observations. To ensure that
these results were not due to random chance, we established statistical significance
using a Monte Carlo null model that preserves marginal distributions while removing
temporal structure.
    Table S1 shows that the simulations reproduce the overall shape of the empirical
cooperation trajectories, but still deviate systematically in temporal structure. Point-
wise errors (RMSE and MAE) are lowest in the heterogeneous control condition and
highest in the heterogeneous networked condition. The AR(1) persistence compari-
son shows that lattice simulations differ strongly from humans in decision “memory,”
with large and significant Diffϕ values (0.217 and 0.464), whereas the heterogeneous
networked case shows the closest match in persistence (Diffϕ = 0.071). Differ-
ences in implied long-run means remain small across all conditions (Diffµ ≤ 0.004),
suggesting limited bias in average cooperation levels. Finally, correlations in raw
cooperation levels are consistently moderate and significant, but correlations in first
differences are weaker, indicating that the simulations capture broad trends better
than round-to-round fluctuations.
    As an exploratory test of whether non-strategic behavior contributes to human-
like variability, we introduced a fraction of random agents. This choice is motivated by
qualitative evidence from the original experiment suggesting that some participants
may have played without a stable strategy, or even at random [17]. To reproduce this
situation, we assign a fraction ρ of nodes to act as random agents. These agents do not
follow the LLM policy, but choose between cooperate and defect uniformly at random
in every round. The remaining fraction (1 − ρ) of nodes is controlled by the LLM-
driven decision rule. Based on a systematic sweep over values of ρ (Supplementary
Information, Table S3), we use ρ = 0.2 as an illustrative hybrid condition. This value
balances improved temporal alignment with the empirical cooperation trajectories,
particularly in terms of fluctuation synchrony (r∆ = 0.469), with preservation of the
overall trajectory shape (r = 0.690), while avoiding the stronger distortions observed
at higher random-agent fractions. Alternative trajectories for other values of ρ are
shown in Supplementary Information, Fig. S15.
    Figure 3 shows that introducing a fraction of random agents (ρ = 0.2) preserves the
overall qualitative shape of the empirical trajectories, with cooperation rapidly decay-
ing in early rounds and subsequently stabilizing. However, the inclusion of random



                                            7
   Experiment                RMSE         MAE           Diffϕ        Diffµ         r              r∆
   lattice                   0.098**      0.083**       0.217***     0.002         0.612***       0.276*
   lattice control           0.089***     0.074*        0.464***     0.002***      0.583***       0.214
   heterogeneous             0.107**      0.096         0.071        0.002         0.622***       0.151
   heterogeneous control     0.079***     0.051         0.359        0.004*        0.440***       0.362***
Table 2: Trajectory errors, autoregressive comparison, and correlation.
RMSE and MAE measure point-by-point deviations between empirical and simulated
cooperation rates. Diffϕ denotes the absolute difference between the AR(1) persistence
coefficients, and Diffµ denotes the absolute difference between the implied long-run
means of the simulated and empirical series. r denotes the Pearson correlation coefficient
between empirical and simulated trajectories. r∆ represents the Pearson correlation
coefficient using the first differences. For RMSE, MAE, Diffϕ , and Diffµ , statistical sig-
nificance is assessed using the Monte Carlo null model described in the text. For r
and r∆ , significance refers to the null hypothesis of zero correlation (H0 : r = 0). ∗∗∗
denotes p < 0.01, ∗∗ denotes p < 0.05, ∗ denotes p < 0.1, and no symbol indicates that
the result is not statistically significant.



  a) 1.0                                                b)
     0.8

Cooperation
     0.6
     0.4
     0.2
     0.0
  c) 1.0                                                d)
                                                                   Empirical
     0.8                                                           Hybrid Simulation (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)


Cooperation
     0.6                                                           Full LLM Simulation
                                                                   LLM Subset (within Hybrid)
     0.4
     0.2
     0.0
              10    20        30     40    50                   10       20      30     40        50
                           Iteration                                          Iteration
Fig. 3: Evolution of cooperation with a fraction of random agents (ρ =
0.2). Panels show cooperation over iterations for (a) lattice, (b) lattice control,
(c) heterogeneous, and (d) heterogeneous control network structures. Solid lines
denote the mean cooperation rate per round (empirical) or per iteration (simulation),
and error bars represent the standard error.


agents alters the quantitative agreement with human data in a condition-dependent
manner. In the lattice network, adding random agents increases the correlation with




                                                    8
the empirical trajectory and substantially improves synchrony in short-term fluctua-
tions (r∆ ), although pointwise errors increase slightly. A similar pattern holds for the
heterogeneous network, where the hybrid case yields stronger correlation (r = 0.743
vs. r = 0.622) and higher agreement in first differences (r∆ = 0.343 vs. 0.151), while
maintaining comparable error levels (RMSE = 0.109 vs. 0.107).
    In the control scenarios, the effect of random agents is more mixed. In the lat-
tice control case, the hybrid simulation slightly reduces RMSE (0.087 vs. 0.089) and
markedly lowers MAE (0.046 vs. 0.074), but decreases correlation with the empirical
trajectory (r = 0.509 vs. r = 0.583). In the heterogeneous control case, the hybrid
configuration yields the lowest RMSE across all conditions (0.070), but also produces
a weaker correlation (r = 0.325), compared to r = 0.440 in the scenario without
random agents. See Supplementary Material, Table S4, for more details on all the
trajectory errors. Together, these results indicate that random agents can improve
alignment with human temporal fluctuations in the networked condition, while in the
control condition, they primarily reduce absolute error without consistently improving
temporal synchrony.

2.3 Micro-level heterogeneity and decision rules
We next ask whether aggregate agreement is accompanied by individual-level fidelity.
To do so, we compare the distribution of cooperation propensities across agents,
rather than only the population mean. This distinction is important because two pop-
ulations can display similar average cooperation while differing substantially in the
diversity of individual behaviors. We quantify the distance between empirical and sim-
ulated propensity distributions using the first-order Wasserstein distance, W1 (E, S ).
Lower values indicate closer agreement in behavioral heterogeneity, whereas larger
values indicate that the simulated population differs from the empirical one in how
cooperation is distributed across individuals. Table 3 summarizes the results across
experimental scenarios.
    Table 3 shows that the simulations match empirical individual-level heterogeneity
with varying accuracy across experimental scenarios. The smallest distance is obtained
in the lattice network with mixed populations, where W1 (E, S ) = 0.081, indicating the
closest match to the empirical distribution of cooperation propensities. In contrast, the
lattice control condition with a fully LLM-driven population yields the largest discrep-
ancy, W1 (E, S ) = 0.136. Introducing random agents generally reduces the distance
relative to the corresponding fully LLM-driven case, with the strongest improvement
observed in the lattice control condition (from 0.136 to 0.095). In the heterogeneous
network, however, the mixed-population case slightly worsens the match under the
networked condition (from 0.091 to 0.095).
    For each network condition (lattice, lattice control, heterogeneous, heterogeneous
control), we quantified behavioral heterogeneity in the empirical data as the distribu-
tion of agent-level cooperation propensities (fraction of cooperative actions per agent).
We then generated a parametric null model in which each agent follows an independent
Bernoulli process with success probability equal to the network-level empirical mean
cooperation rate, while preserving each agent’s number of rounds. Across (B=10,000)



                                           9
   Experiment                                    W1 (E, S)   W1 (E, N ull)
   lattice (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)                 0.101       0.085 [95% CI: 0.082, 0.089]
   lattice (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)                 0.081       0.085 [95% CI: 0.082, 0.089]
   lattice control (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)         0.136       0.125 [95% CI: 0.123, 0.128]
   lattice control (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)         0.095       0.125 [95% CI: 0.123, 0.128]
   heterogeneous (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)           0.091       0.074 [95% CI: 0.071, 0.077]
   heterogeneous (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)           0.095       0.074 [95% CI: 0.071, 0.077]
   heterogeneous control (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)   0.109       0.126 [95% CI: 0.123, 0.129]
   heterogeneous control (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)   0.093       0.126 [95% CI: 0.123, 0.129]

 Table 3: Wasserstein distance between empirical and simulated dis-
 tributions of individual cooperation propensities across experimental
 scenarios. Lower values indicate better reproduction of behavioral heterogeneity.
 The null model assumes that each agent follows an independent, identically dis-
 tributed, Bernoulli process with the network’s empirical mean cooperation rate,
 all while maintaining the same number of rounds per agent.



null realizations, we computed W1 (E, Null) between empirical and null propensity dis-
tributions. We report the mean null distance and a 95% confidence interval of this
Monte Carlo distribution, providing a baseline for whether observed heterogeneity
departs from what is expected under homogeneous random behavior.
    To contextualize these values, we compare the results of Table 3 with the null-model
baseline. In the lattice network, the null model yields W1 (E, Null) = 0.085 (95% CI:
[0.082, 0.089]), which is close to the best-performing simulation (W1 (E, S ) = 0.081),
indicating that the empirical heterogeneity in this condition can largely be explained
by variation consistent with independent behavior around the population mean. In
the lattice control condition W1 (E, Null) = 0.125 (95% CI: [0.123, 0.128]), which is
not comparable to the full-LLM case (W1 (E, S ) = 0.136), while the mixed simula-
tion (W1 (E, S ) = 0.095) falls below the null baseline. In the heterogeneous network,
the null distance is smaller (W1 (E, Null) = 0.074, 95% CI: [0.071, 0.077]) than
both simulation cases (W1 (E, S ) = 0.091 and 0.095), suggesting that the simulated
populations exhibit less empirical-like heterogeneity than expected under the null
benchmark. Finally, in the heterogeneous control condition, the null distance is again
high (W1 (E, Null) = 0.126, 95% CI: [0.123, 0.129]), whereas both simulation scenarios
yield lower distances (W1 (E, S ) = 0.109 and 0.093), indicating improved agreement
with empirical heterogeneity compared to the null expectation.
    We then examine a stricter behavioral signature: conditional cooperation. This
measures the probability that an agent cooperates as a function of the fraction of
cooperating neighbors in the previous round, and according to whether the agent
cooperated or defected in the previous round. Conditional cooperation is important
because it probes the local decision rule, rather than only the resulting level of coop-
eration. As in the empirical study, we first analyze the networked condition, where
neighborhoods remain fixed. In the human experiment, this relationship is well approx-
imated by a linear trend with distinct responses following cooperation and defection.




                                          10
Across most simulated scenarios, we observe a qualitative dependence on neighbor-
hood cooperation, but the responses are quantitatively different and often steeper
than in the human data. The “after defection” response deviates most strongly from
the empirical pattern in the lattice network, exhibiting an inverted slope in both
the full-LLM and hybrid simulations. Moreover, unlike the empirical data, the sim-
ulated conditional-cooperation points do not consistently follow an approximately
linear relationship, making the linear-fit comparison used in the original study less
informative here. We therefore report the full curves in the Supplementary Material,
Section S3.2.2, highlighting an additional discrepancy between LLM-based agents and
empirical behavioral patterns.
    To extend this analysis, we examine conditional cooperation across network struc-
tures and experimental conditions. Figure 4 shows conditional cooperation across
experimental scenarios for a single execution of the dynamics. In each case, the curves
represent the estimated conditional probabilities of cooperation as a function of neigh-
borhood cooperation in the previous round. We repeated this conditional-cooperation
analysis over 20 independent executions of the dynamics and obtained consistent
curves with narrow confidence intervals, indicating that a single execution is suffi-
cient to capture the qualitative conditional-cooperation trends of the simulations (for
details see Supplementary Material, Figs. S22 and S23).
    The quantitative deviations reported in Table 4 are consistent with the qualita-
tive patterns shown in Fig. 4. Across most scenarios, errors are larger in the z = 1
case (after cooperation) than in the z = 0 case (after defection), reflecting stronger
discrepancies in how simulated agents condition their behavior on neighborhood coop-
eration following a cooperative move. The largest deviations are observed in the
lattice network under the networked condition, where the full-LLM population yields
RMSEz=1 = 0.397 and MAEz=1 = 0.388, matching the visibly distorted and non-
linear response in panel A. Introducing random agents reduces these discrepancies
in the lattice networked case (RMSEz=1 decreases to 0.255), although a substantial
mismatch remains.
    In contrast, the lattice control condition shows comparatively small error after
defection (RMSEz=0 = 0.046 in the full-LLM case), consistent with the flatter con-
ditional patterns visible under rewiring, while errors after cooperation remain large
(RMSEz=1 = 0.341). For the heterogeneous network, the mixed population reduces
deviations relative to the full-LLM case, particularly in the z = 1 regime (RMSEz=1
decreases from 0.355 to 0.232), which aligns with the closer agreement between
the empirical and simulated curves observed in the corresponding panels. Overall,
these results confirm that while simulations capture the qualitative dependence of
cooperation on local neighborhood behavior, the inferred conditional rules remain
quantitatively distinct from the empirical patterns, particularly following cooperative
actions.

3 Discussion
This study tested whether autonomous LLM agents can serve as behavioral surro-
gates for humans in a repeated networked social dilemma. The answer is mixed in a



                                          11
                 After Cooperation                        After Defection
 a)                                           b)




 c)                                           d)




 e)                                           f)




 g)                                           h)




Fig. 4: Conditional cooperation across network structures and experimen-
tal conditions. Each panel shows the estimated probability of cooperation as a
function of the fraction of cooperating neighbors in the previous round, computed
from a single execution of the dynamics. Panels (a) and (b) correspond to the lattice
network under the networked condition, (c) and (d) to the lattice network under the
control condition, (e) and (f) to the heterogeneous network under the networked con-
dition, and (g) and (h) to the heterogeneous network under the control condition. In
each case, empirical conditional cooperation patterns are compared with simulations
under different agent compositions, including fully LLM-driven and mixed populations
with random agents. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.


revealing way. The selected model, llama4:16x17b, reproduces several macro-level fea-
tures of the human experiment, including the early decline and later stabilization of
cooperation observed by Gracia-Lázaro et al. [17], as well as the absence of network


                                         12
 Experiment                                    RMSEz=0    MAEz=0     RMSEz=1     MAEz=1
 lattice (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)                 0.237**    0.217***   0.397***    0.388*
 lattice (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)                 0.180      0.165***   0.255***    0.246*
 lattice control (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)         0.046***   0.038***   0.341***    0.337***
 lattice control (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)         0.090*     0.086*     0.221***    0.211***
 heterogeneous (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)           0.177***   0.154      0.355***    0.320***
 heterogeneous (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)           0.161***   0.140      0.232**     0.214
 heterogeneous control (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)   0.107**    0.091***   0.217       0.196
 heterogeneous control (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)   0.190      0.124      0.173       0.161**

Table 4: Deviation between empirical and simulated conditional cooperation
rules across experimental scenarios. Errors are reported separately for cases in which
the previous action was defection (z = 0) or cooperation (z = 1). ∗∗∗ denotes p < 0.01,
∗∗
   denotes p < 0.05, ∗ denotes p < 0.1, and no symbol indicates that the result is not
statistically significant.



reciprocity reported in the original study. Yet this aggregate agreement does not imply
individual-level fidelity. The simulated populations underestimate important aspects
of human heterogeneity and generate conditional cooperation patterns that differ from
the empirical decision rules.
    This pattern is the central result of the paper. LLM-based agents can reproduce
collective cooperation dynamics without fully reproducing the distribution of indi-
vidual behaviors or the context-dependent mechanisms through which humans adapt
their decisions. In other words, the model captures part of the phenomenology of the
experiment, but not all of its behavioral structure. This macro–micro dissociation mat-
ters because many proposed uses of LLM agents in social simulation rely implicitly on
the assumption that matching aggregate outcomes is sufficient evidence of behavioral
realism.
    Our model benchmark also shows that LLMs cannot be treated as interchangeable
agents. Different model families produce markedly different cooperation regimes, and
alignment-perturbed variants derived from related checkpoints can generate system-
atically different collective dynamics. Model choice is therefore a substantive modeling
assumption, not a technical detail. This sensitivity reinforces the need for empirical
benchmarking before drawing conclusions from LLM-based social simulations [15].
    The micro-level results are especially informative. Human participants display
broad distributions of cooperation propensities, whereas the simulated populations
often produce narrower or differently shaped distributions. Conditional cooperation
provides an even stronger test. Human behavior in the original experiment is charac-
terized by structured responses to the local social environment, with distinct patterns
after cooperation and after defection. The LLM agents reproduce some qualitative
dependence on neighborhood cooperation, but the inferred rules differ quantitatively,
and in some cases qualitatively, from the empirical patterns. Thus, the model does
not simply implement a noisy version of the human rule. It appears to reach partially
similar aggregate outcomes through different local response functions.




                                          13
    The hybrid simulations with random agents help clarify this point. Introducing
a fraction of random decision-makers improves agreement with the empirical data in
some dimensions, particularly fluctuation synchrony in the networked condition and
distributional agreement in selected cases. This should not be interpreted as a tuned
correction that makes the model human-like. Rather, it suggests that stochasticity,
inconsistent behavior, or non-strategic play may be necessary ingredients in models of
human cooperation. Real participants are not homogeneous optimizers, and a faithful
behavioral surrogate may need to represent this diversity explicitly. At the same time,
the hybrid model does not remove the mismatch in conditional cooperation, indicating
that noise alone is not sufficient to recover human decision mechanisms.
    These results have broader implications for the validation of machine behavior.
A model may be useful for reproducing an aggregate trajectory while still being
inadequate for causal explanation or intervention design. This distinction is particu-
larly important for digital twins, policy simulations, and agent-based models that use
LLMs as substitutes for human actors. If the aim is only to forecast a limited aggre-
gate outcome under conditions close to the benchmark, macro-level agreement may
be informative. If the aim is to understand how individuals respond to incentives,
social context, or interventions, then micro-level heterogeneity and decision-level rules
become essential.
    Several limitations should be kept in mind. The empirical benchmark comes from a
specific experiment, participant pool, and institutional context, and the same compar-
ison should be repeated across other social dilemmas and populations. The simulations
also rely on a particular prompt structure and on open-weight models available at the
time of the study. Although persona variants and repeated executions did not qualita-
tively change the results, broader prompt and model robustness remain an important
direction for future work. More broadly, our findings suggest that LLM simulations
cannot currently replace human experimentation, which remains necessary to establish
the empirical ground truth used for model validation. However, when benchmarked
against human data, LLM agents may still be valuable for scaling simulations and
exploring conditions that are difficult to study experimentally. Finally, current LLMs
are typically optimized to follow human instructions and preferences, not to repro-
duce the full diversity of human behavior in experiments [12]. This may contribute
to the reduced behavioral diversity observed here, consistent with forms of model
homogenization and mode collapse reported in recent work [13, 14]. More generally,
our findings support the view that claims based on LLM social simulations should be
calibrated to the strength of empirical validation and robustness checks [16].
    Overall, llama4:16x17b provides a promising but incomplete surrogate for human
behavior in networked social dilemmas. It reproduces robust macro-level cooperation
dynamics, but not the full heterogeneity and conditional structure of human strategic
decision-making. The main lesson is therefore not simply that LLM agents succeed or
fail as human surrogates, but that surrogacy is level-dependent. Validating machine
behavior requires asking not only whether artificial agents produce similar outcomes,
but also whether they do so through similar behavioral distributions and decision
mechanisms.




                                           14
4 Methods
4.1 Simulation framework
All LLM-based agents were implemented using the CrewAI orchestration framework1 ,
which handles prompt construction, model querying, response parsing, and payoff
updates at each iteration. Model inference was performed locally using Ollama2 as the
serving backend, enabling self-contained execution of all agents without external API
dependencies. Each agent was mapped to a node in the network and interacted only
with the information in its local prompt, which contained its neighbors’ previous-round
actions and the corresponding normalized payoffs. Models were queried independently
for each agent at each round, ensuring decentralized decision-making consistent with
the experimental protocol.
    We simulate a repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma game on empirical social networks
(using the same network topologies and temporal dynamics as in Gracia-Lázaro et
al. [17]). Each node (agent) chooses between GREEN and BROWN in each round,
corresponding to cooperation and defection, respectively. We use color labels rather
than the canonical game actions in the agent-facing prompts to reduce the likelihood
that the LLM recognizes the task from familiar Prisoner’s Dilemma terminology and
responds on that basis rather than from the local interaction history and payoffs. The
game proceeds in discrete rounds. In each round, each agent observes its neighbors’
previous choices and (degree-)normalized payoffs, then chooses an action for the cur-
rent round. Payoffs were computed pairwise as follows: if both agents choose GREEN,
each receives 7 ECUs; if one chooses BROWN and the neighbor chooses GREEN, the
BROWN agent receives 10 ECUs, and the GREEN agent receives 0 ECUs; if both
choose BROWN, both receive 0 ECUs. An agent’s total payoff in a round is the sum
of these pairwise payoffs with all neighbors. In the last experiments, a fraction ρ of
nodes were designated random (i.e., choosing actions uniformly), while all other nodes
used the LLM-driven policy.
    We also tested conditions with optional backstory cues in the agent prompts (e.g.,
labeling an agent as a student or specifying a gender, or both); details of these vari-
ants are omitted here. Full prompt templates, backstory variants that define the
persona, and implementation details, including parsing routines, are provided in the
Supplementary Information, Section S1.

4.2 LLM models and framework
We evaluate nine open-weight large language models spanning multiple model fam-
ilies, parameter scales, and training paradigms, including variants of LLaMA [19],
DeepSeek [20], Qwen [21], and SmolLM [22]. All models were selected to represent a
broad spectrum of open-source LLMs commonly used in agent-based simulations. The
evaluated models belong to four open-weight families. LLaMA models are decoder-only
transformer language models developed by Meta, available in multiple generations and
sizes. In this study, we use both standard instruction-tuned variants (i.e., llama3.1:8b,

 1
     https://www.crewai.com/, accessed March 2026
 2
     https://ollama.com/, accessed March 2026



                                                    15
llama3.1:70b, and llama4:16x17b) and alignment-modified derivatives (i.e., Black-
HillsInfoSec llama-3.1:8b-abliterated and meta-llama-3.1:70b-instruct-abliterated IQ4
XS), allowing us to assess whether differences in model scaling and instruction tuning
affect emergent cooperative behavior in multi-agent simulations. In particular, we com-
pare standard instruction-tuned LLaMA models with modified “abliterated” variants
of the same base architecture, which serve as alignment-perturbed counterparts to eval-
uate the sensitivity of the results to behavioral steering. SmolLM models are compact
open-weight language models designed for efficient inference and deployment. Here
we test smolLM2.1:7b. DeepSeek models are open-weight language models released in
multiple parameter scales and variants, and we tested two different sizes: deepseek-
llm:7b and deepseek-llm:67b. Qwen models are multilingual instruction-tuned large
language models, with recent variants (e.g., Qwen3) showing strong performance on
reasoning and general language understanding benchmarks, here we use qwen3:32b.

4.3 Quantitative analysis
We evaluate whether the simulations reproduce the empirical experiments at two
complementary levels: (i)macro dynamics (i.e., the time evolution of the fraction of
cooperators in the network), and (ii) micro behavior (i.e., heterogeneity across indi-
viduals and context-dependent decision rules). Full definitions, robustness checks,
and statistical testing procedures are reported in the Supplementary Information
(Section S2).

4.3.1 Macro-level agreement
For each condition and network, we summarize behavior at iteration t by the
cooperation rate
                                     N
                                  1 X  D
                        X D (t) =
                                                    
                                        1 ai (t) = C ,                  (1)
                                  N i=1
where D ∈ {E, S} denotes empirical (E ) or simulated (S ) data, X D (t) is the frac-
tion of cooperative agents, and C means cooperation. We then compare empirical
and simulated series using two complementary notions of similarity. First, we com-
pute pointwise trajectory errors (RMSE and MAE). These measures quantify how
close simulations are in level at each iteration, in which smaller values indicate closer
agreement, with RMSE penalizing large deviations more. Second, we compute Pearson
correlation between the two trajectories, both on the raw series (r) and on first differ-
ences (r∆ ). Correlation captures whether simulations reproduce the temporal pattern,
where co-movement of increases and decreases, even when small level shifts persist.

4.3.2 Macro-level temporal dependence
Trajectory similarity in level or correlation does not guarantee that the simulated
process evolves over time in the same way as the empirical one. To compare tem-
poral dependence, we fit a first-order autoregressive model (AR(1)) [23] to the
first-differenced series ∆X D (t) (stationarity check [24] and the differenced specifi-
cation are detailed in the Supplementary Information, Section S2.2.4). For a series


                                           16
  D
∆Xc,g,r (t), the AR(1) model is given by

                         D                   D
                       ∆Xc,g,r (t) = κ + ϕ ∆Xc,g,r (t − 1) + ε(t),                    (2)

where κ is a constant, ϕ captures persistence, and ε(t) is a white-noise error term. We
                                                          E
estimate the model separately for the empirical series Xc,g,r (t) and the simulated series
  S
Xc,g,r (t). The coefficient ϕ summarizes how strongly changes in cooperation propagate
from one iteration to the next: values closer to zero indicate rapid adjustment, whereas
larger magnitudes indicate more persistent (or anti-persistent) dynamics. We quantify
dynamic similarity using the absolute difference |ϕS −ϕE |, and we additionally compare
the implied mean increment of the differenced process, which captures systematic drift
in cooperation over time.

4.3.3 Significance via null models
Because the absolute magnitudes of these metrics depend on the scale and length of
the series, we assess whether the observed agreement exceeds what would be expected
by chance. We construct Monte Carlo null time series that preserve the empirical
marginal distribution of cooperation rates while destroying temporal dependence, and
we compute two-tailed p-values by comparing the observed metric to its null distribu-
tion (see Supplementary Information, Section S2.2.5). For correlations, we test against
the standard null hypothesis of zero correlation.

4.3.4 Micro-level mechanisms
We quantify individual behavioral heterogeneity by computing each agent’s coop-
eration propensity over the full time horizon T . For dataset D, this is defined
as
                                             T
                                          1 X D
                                   PiD =        y (t),                                (3)
                                          T t=1 i
where yiD (t) = 1 aD
                             
                     i (t) = C ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether agent i cooperated at round
t. To test whether simulations reproduce individual-level diversity, we compare the
empirical and simulated distributions of {Pi } using the first-order Wasserstein distance
(W1 ). Lower values indicate closer agreement in behavioral heterogeneity, rather than
merely similar mean cooperation levels (see Supplementary Information, Section S2.3).
To probe context-dependent strategies, we analyze conditional cooperation as a func-
tion of (i) an agent’s own previous action and (ii) the fraction of cooperating neighbors
in the previous round (for details, see Supplementary Information, Section S2.3.4).
Acknowledgements. H.F.A. acknowledges ARAID for its financial support.
A.A. acknowledges support from the grant RYC2021-033226-I funded by MICI-
U/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and the European Union NextGenerationEU/PRTR.
A.A. and Y.M. were partially supported by the Government of Aragón, Spain, and
ERDF “A way of making Europe” through grant E36-23R (FENOL), and by Grant
No. PID2023-149409NB-I00 from Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Universidades,
Agencia Española de Investigación (MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033) and ERDF
“A way of making Europe”.


                                           17
Author contributions. H.F.A.: Conceptualization, Data curation, Software, For-
mal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing-original
draft, Writing-review and editing. C.G.L.: Conceptualization, Data curation, Inves-
tigation, Methodology, Writing-review and editing. A.A.: Conceptualization, Investi-
gation, Methodology, Writing-review and editing. Y.M.: Conceptualization, Formal
analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing-original draft, Writing-review and edit-
ing.
Competing interests. The authors declare no competing interests.




                                         18
Supplementary information
S1 Technical details
S1.1 Overview
We simulate a repeated multi-agent Prisoner’s Dilemma on an input network. Each node is controlled
either by an LLM-based agent or by a randomized policy. The CrewAI orchestration layer is used to
orchestrate LLM agents, tasks, and responses, as well as an LLM served via an Ollama-compatible
endpoint.
    In summary, in each round of the dynamics:
1. Each agent receives a brief description of the previous round, including neighbors’ choices and
   normalized payoffs.
2. Each agent replies with a JSON object containing a choice (“GREEN” or “BROWN”) and a free-text
   reasoning.
3. The simulation computes payoffs for every node based on the payoff matrix, logs the answers, and
   proceeds to the next round.
    As for the graph input and experimental setup, we used the same graphs used in the original paper
(i.e., [17]). This includes the network structures and the temporal changes of edges for the control cases,
as well as numbers of iterations.

S1.2 Agent creation and random agents
For each node, we create either:
• an LLM-driven Agent (CrewAI), or
• a random agent (chooses uniformly between GREEN and BROWN).
   A fraction ρ of nodes are forced to be random. These nodes remain random throughout the dynamics’
execution.

S1.3 Payoff computation
Payoffs are pairwise and defined by the following matrix (per neighbor):

                                   You / Neighbor GREEN BROWN
                                      GREEN          7    0
                                      BROWN         10    0

The node’s payoff in a round equals the sum over its neighbors of the payoff according to each neighbor’s
choice.
   Implementation details:
• It iterates over neighbors of node i and sums the correct payoff depending on the node’s choice and
  the neighbor’s choice.
• For comparison purposes, a normalized neighbor payoff is computed when exposing neighbor payoffs
  to agents. The normalization rescales a neighbor’s payoff by the ratio of the focal node’s degree to the
  neighbor’s degree.

S1.4 LLM orchestration and prompts
Important fields passed to each Agent instance include:
• role: short role description shown to the model.
• goal: short task: “maximize your own ECUs.” ECU is a monetary unit.
• backstory: personalized per agent (degree and optional backstory fields).
• system template: a brief system message explaining the experiment.
• prompt template: in the implementation set to:
      Answer the task below in valid JSON format: {input}




                                                    19
  The placeholder {input} is a dynamic variable that is automatically replaced at runtime with the
  task-specific description passed to the Task object.
• The CrewAI Task is created with expected output describing the required JSON format.
   The main LLM configuration values used by the script are:
• llm model = ‘‘ollama/llama4:16x17b’’ (default, but we also tested several LLMs).

S1.4.1 Prompts and textual templates
The textual templates used are reproduced below. These are sent to the agent together with the task
description.

Role and goal

role = "You are participating in a social experiment as a volunteer. Your objective is to
maximize your total ECUs, the monetary unit. An ECU is a monetary unit"

goal = "Objective: **Your goal is to maximize your own ECUs (ECU is a monetary unit).**\n"


System prompt

system_template = "You are not expected to behave in any particular way. Whatever you do will
determine the amount of money you can earn. You have a written version of this direction,
which you can check at any stage of the experiment."


Prompt template

"Answer the task below in valid JSON format: {input}"


Expected response format
All agents must reply with a JSON object in the following format (this is enforced using the
expected output string in the code):
String in a Json format ONLY with choice (GREEN or BROWN) and reasoning (plain text):
{
  "choice": ...,
  "reasoning": "..."
}


First-iteration description (displayed to the agent at round 0)
A human-readable explanation of payoffs and examples is provided.
Possible payoffs per neighbor.
In the following table each row corresponds to the decision you can make and each column
correspond to one of your neighbors’ decision.
Your choice / Neighbor choice \t GREEN \t BROWN
GREEN \t 7 \t 0
BROWN \t 10 \t 0

Consider that: you and each of your neighbors (which are humans) will globally earn more if
you both choose GREEN (7 ECUs you/7 ECUs your neighbor); you will earn more if you choose
BROWN and your neighbor chooses GREEN (10 ECUs you/0 ECUs your neighbor); but if both you and
your neighbor choose BROWN you both will earn less (0 ECUs you/0 ECUs your neighbor) than if
you both chose GREEN.

This is the screen you will be seeing during the experiment (note that each participant
actually sees the graph corresponding to his/her connectivity).
Each round you must choose one of them clicking the corresponding button.



                                                20
These are some examples of what you could earn in a round.
Example 1: Imagine you choose GREEN, 3 of your neighbors choose GREEN and 1 chooses BROWN. In
that round you will earn 3 x 7 + 1 x 0 = 21 ECUs.
Example 2: In another round you choose BROWN, 2 of your neighbors choose GREEN and 2 choose
BROWN. In that round you will earn 2 x 10 + 2 x 0 = 20 ECUs.

Round iteration.
Remember that each part will consist of an undetermined number of rounds.
Each round you will have up to 20 s to choose a color. After these 20 s, if you didn’t choose,
the system will choose for you.
Whatever happens it will not affect the behavior of the system in the next rounds: you will be
able to make your subsequent choices normally. (Don’t worry: 20 s are more than enough to make
a choice).
The round will not end until all participants have made their choice.
At the end of each round you will see a screen like this one. Your choice (as given by the
color) and your earning in this round. Also your [NUMBER_OF_NEIGHBORS] neighbors’ choices
(represented by their colors) and their respective earnings in that round.
Your neighbors’ earnings are given with respect to your number of neighbors. For example, you
have 5 neighbors and one is Ferdinand (fictitious name). Ferdinand in turn has two neighbors:
one is you and the other a stranger. If Ferdinand has won 10 ECUs in the last round, the gain
of Ferdinand that you are shown is: (10 ECUs/2 neighbors of Ferdinand) x 5 neighbors of you =
25 ECUs.
Note that what each of your neighbors has won depends on what you have chosen and also on what
the neighbors of your neighbors have chosen.
Immediately after finishing a round there will be a new one, and then another one, and so on
until you see a screen warning you about the end of that part of the experiment.
   Note that the prompt placeholder [NUMBER OF NEIGHBORS] is replaced by the number of neighbors. In
addition, the prompt explicitly stated that these neighbors corresponded to human participants (“which
are humans”), thereby indicating to the LLM that it was interacting with people in a real experiment.
This framing substantially affected the resulting behavior.

Backstory variants
The code supports three backstory type values:
• STUDENT: adds “You are a high school student.”
• GENDER: adds a “Gender: man/woman.” line (based on vertex property is man from the data of [17]).
• STUDENT AND GENDER: combines the above.

Round-to-round description
For rounds r ≥ 1, the agent receives a per-neighbor summary. The description contains:
• The round index.
• Each neighbor’s previous choice and the neighbor’s normalized payoff.
• The focal node’s previous choice and payoff.
• The instruction: “Based on this information, make your choice for this round.”

Now, you have to answer again:
This is round [ROUND_NUMBER].
In the previous round, your neighbors made the following choices:
Neighbor choices in the previous round:
Neighbor [NEIGHBOR_ID_1]: choice = [NEIGHBOR_CHOICE_1], payoff =
[NORMALIZED_NEIGHBOR_PAYOFF_1].
Neighbor [NEIGHBOR_ID_2]: choice = [NEIGHBOR_CHOICE_2], payoff =
[NORMALIZED_NEIGHBOR_PAYOFF_2].
Neighbor [NEIGHBOR_ID_3]: choice = [NEIGHBOR_CHOICE_3], payoff =
[NORMALIZED_NEIGHBOR_PAYOFF_3].
Your choice and payoff in the previous round was: choice = [YOUR_PREVIOUS_CHOICE], payoff =
[YOUR_PREVIOUS_PAYOFF].
Based on this information, make your choice for this round.
   Notice that in the simulations, all prompt placeholders were replaced by their corresponding values.
The prompt shown here illustrates an agent interacting with three neighbors.


                                                  21
S1.5 Parsing and error handling
• The script expects the agent response to be valid JSON. Because LLMs occasionally output non-strict
  JSON, the code contains helpers to sanitize and robustly parse responses:
  – Normalize json string(s) : trims text outside the outermost {...}, removes control characters, attempts
    to fix common issues (missing braces, extra whitespace between braces, etc.), and finally ensures the
    string looks like a JSON object.
  – Convert string to json : wraps json loads and, when necessary, raises a descriptive error on failure.
  – String to choice output (json string) : uses the normalizer, parses the JSON, and returns a Python
    dict with keys choice and reasoning.
  Note that this is not the standard implementation. However, we implemented it this way to avoid
  minor issues common to less sophisticated LLMs.
• If parsing or the Crew kickoff call fails, the code retries up to max tries times (default max tries =
  10). On repeated failure, the implementation falls back to:
  – a   default      response      {"choice": "GREEN", "reasoning": "Error: ... defaulting to
    GREEN."}; or
   This error message was implemented as a precaution to ensure robustness across different LLMs. In
practice, however, such parsing failures were not observed for llama4 16x17b, the model used in the
main experiments.

S1.6 Simulation: main loop and execution logic
The simulation proceeds for round num = 0, ..., max rounds-1. Each round consists of the following
steps:
1. Description preparation.
  • For round 1, agents receive a full explanation of the payoff matrix, examples, and the experimental
    structure.
  • For subsequent rounds (r > 1), agents receive:
     – each neighbor’s previous choice,
     – each neighbor’s normalized payoff,
     – their own previous choice and payoff.
2. Task construction. A Task object is created for each non-random agent. The task description is
   injected into the prompt template through the {input} placeholder, ensuring that the round-specific
   information is embedded into a fixed JSON-format instruction.
3. Decision generation. For each node i:
  • If the node is random, a uniform random choice between GREEN and BROWN is generated.
  • Otherwise, the CrewAI pipeline is executed:
     response = Crew(...).kickoff()
     parsed = string_to_choice_output(response.raw)

4. Retry mechanism and robustness.
      LLM calls may fail for two reasons:
  (a) Server or connection failures (e.g., temporary unavailability of the Ollama endpoint).
  (b) Formatting errors (the LLM does not produce valid JSON).
      To ensure robustness, each agent call is retried up to max tries = 10 times.
      This retry mechanism is important because:
  • Server-side failures occasionally occur in long simulations.
  • We empirically observed that when formatting errors occur, they are significantly more frequent in
    the first round. In later rounds, once the model has produced a correctly formatted JSON response,
    formatting mistakes become much less frequent.
      If all retries fail, the system assigns a safe default response:
  {"choice":"GREEN", "reasoning":"Error... defaulting to GREEN."}



                                                     22
   This ensures that the simulation continues without interruption.
5. Payoff computation. After all nodes have chosen, payoffs are computed using the pairwise payoff
   matrix.

High-level structured pseudocode
initialize graph(s) g
assign exactly floor(rho * N) random agents
create LLM agents for non-random nodes

for round_num in 0 .. max_rounds-1:
    prepare round-specific description

      for each node i:
          if random:
              result = random_choice()
          else:
              retry up to 10 times:
                  call LLM
                  attempt JSON parsing
              if all retries fail:
                  result = default GREEN

          log result

      compute payoffs
      store payoffs in the graph
      update cooperation statistics
end


S2 Quantitative analysis
S2.1 Definitions
• Sources of data:
  – Empirical: E .
  – Simulations: S (LLM players and LLM + random players).
• Notation:
  – D ∈ {E, S}: dataset kind
  – c: Experimental condition (student, gender, and student + gender).
  – g : Network structure.
  – N : Number of network nodes.
  – r: Index for number of trials or replications in simulation.
  – i: Agent index.
  – t: Time step.
  – aDi (t): action {C, D} at time t for dataset D , where C and D are cooperate and defect, respectively.

      Let’s define the indicator variable:

                                        yiD (t) = 1 aD
                                                             
                                                     i (t) = C ∈ {0, 1},                              (4)

thus, y = 1 means cooperation.

S2.2 Macro analysis
Cooperation rate (macro): For each condition c, topology g , and trial r, compute:

                                                                 N
                                              D             1 X D
                                             Xc,g,r (t) =        y (t),                               (5)
                                                            N i=1 i


                                                            23
which is the fraction of cooperators at time t.
   Cooperation propensity per agent (micro):

                                                         T
                                                      1 X D
                                              PiD =        y (t),                                            (6)
                                                      T t=1 i

i.e., how often an agent i cooperates over the full temporal horizon T .

S2.2.1 Time evolution analysis
Here, we test whether the model can reproduce the evolution of cooperation over time. To accomplish
this, we compare simulated and empirical series. First, we compute the trajectory errors to determine
whether they are equal at the same iteration. Then, we examine the temporal dependence structure of
the empirical data using an autoregressive model.

S2.2.2 Comparison of trajectory errors
Before using an AR model to examine the temporal dynamics, we assess how closely the simulated series
replicates the empirical series in terms of point-by-point accuracy. Two common metrics are used:
• Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE):
                                         v
                                         u
                                         u1 X T
                                                                    2
                                                  E (t) − X S
                                                 Xc,g,r
                                  RMSE = t                 c,g,r (t) ,                                       (7)
                                           T t=1

  which penalizes larger deviations more heavily.
• Mean Absolute Error (MAE):

                                                  T
                                               1 X E              S
                                     MAE =          X      (t) − Xc,g,r (t) ,                                (8)
                                               T t=1 c,g,r

  which measures the average absolute deviation and is less sensitive to outliers.
   While RMSE and MAE provide a measure of trajectory similarity between the two series, they do
not capture the underlying temporal dependence structure. Therefore, we complement this analysis with
AR model estimation to assess the persistence properties of the series.

S2.2.3 Correlation analysis
In addition to trajectory errors, we also compute the Pearson correlation coefficient between the empirical
and simulated time series. While RMSE and MAE measure the magnitude of deviations at each time
step, they do not capture whether the simulated series follows the same temporal pattern as the empirical
data. Pearson correlation quantifies the degree of linear association between the two series, indicating
whether increases and decreases in cooperation occur synchronously over time. We calculate Pearson
both for the raw correlation series (r) and for the first differences of the series (r∆ ) to capture correlations
in the changes between consecutive time steps. For each correlation, we report the corresponding p-value
to evaluate the statistical significance of the observed association, providing a measure of confidence that
the observed correlation is not due to random chance.

S2.2.4 Autoregressive comparison between empirical and simulated series
Before estimating the autoregressive model, we verify whether the empirical and simulated time series
are stationary. Stationarity ensures that the mean, variance, and autocovariance structure of the series do
not change over time, which is a fundamental assumption for AR model estimation. To do this, we apply
the Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test to both series [24]. In our analysis, we estimate the model using
                                D                                        D
the first-differenced series, ∆Xc,g,r (t), rather than the level series Xc,g,r (t). The differenced specification
captures changes in cooperation over time and satisfies the stationarity requirement, whereas the level
series exhibits non-stationary behavior according to the ADF test.



                                                       24
   To assess whether the simulated time series reproduces the temporal dependence structure of the
empirical data, we estimate an autoregressive model of order one (AR(1)) for the differenced series [23].
                D
For a series ∆Xc,g,r (t), the AR(1) model is given by

                                    D                   D
                                  ∆Xc,g,r (t) = κ + ϕ ∆Xc,g,r (t − 1) + ε(t),                                (9)

where κ is a constant, ϕ measures persistence, and ε(t) is a white noise error term. We estimate the
                                                           E                                  S
model separately for the empirical differenced series ∆Xc,g,r  (t) and the simulated series ∆Xc,g,r (t). The
key parameter of interest is the persistence coefficient ϕ. To evaluate whether the simulation reproduces
the dynamic structure, we use the following analysis metrics:
• Difference in persistence coefficients: To assess whether the simulated series reproduces the
  temporal dependence structure of the empirical data, we compare the estimated AR(1) persistence
  parameters through the absolute difference

                                               Diffϕ = |ϕS − ϕE |.                                          (10)

  The coefficient ϕ measures the strength and direction of temporal dependence. If |ϕS −ϕE | is small, the
  simulation reproduces the degree of persistence (or anti-persistence) observed in the empirical data.
  Large differences indicate that the simulated dynamics adjust either too quickly or too slowly relative
  to the empirical process, even if the overall trajectories appear similar.
• Implied mean increment: For a stationary AR(1) process in first differences (|ϕD | < 1), the
  unconditional mean of the differenced process is
                                                           κD
                                                  µD =          .                                           (11)
                                                         1 − ϕD

  This quantity represents the average change around which the series increments fluctuate over time.
  Comparing µE and µS allows us to verify whether simulated and empirical processes exhibit similar
  average dynamics. Substantial differences indicate systematic biases in the evolution of cooperation,
  even if persistence properties are similar.

S2.2.5 Null model
Since the magnitude of the proposed metrics cannot be directly interpreted, we use a null model to
evaluate their relevance. The null model generates a synthetic time series of the same length as the
empirical and simulated series. Observations are independently drawn from the empirical marginal dis-
tribution. This procedure preserves the unconditional distribution of cooperation levels while eliminating
any temporal dependence structure.
    Let M obs denote the observed value of a metric. To construct a reference distribution under the
null hypothesis of no temporal structure, we generate B independent null realizations and compute the
corresponding metric values {M (1) , . . . , M (B) }. Next, the statistical significance is assessed by comparing
M obs to the empirical distribution of {M (b) }B b=1 . Here, we use B = 10, 000. The null hypothesis is rejected
when M obs lies in the tails of the null distribution.
    The Monte Carlo two-tailed p-value is defined as

                                       B
                                    1 X  (b)                     
                               p=      1 M − µnull ≥ M obs − µnull ,                                        (12)
                                    B
                                       b=1

                   PB
where µnull = B1 b=1 M (b) is the mean of the null distribution. Here, we adopt this approach because a
small ptwo-tailed indicates that the observed metric is unlikely under the null hypothesis, given deviations
in either direction. Note that for Pearson correlation, we adopted the null hypothesis of zero correlation
(H0 : r = 0).
    We adopt this two-tailed criterion because our goal is to determine whether the observed metric is
unusually far from the null expectation, regardless of direction. Under this interpretation, both unusually
large and unusually small values of M obs relative to the null distribution are treated as evidence against
the null hypothesis. Thus, a small p-value indicates that the observed metric is unlikely under the null
model, not only when it exceeds the null expectation, but more generally when it represents an extreme
deviation from it.

                                                       25
S2.3 Micro analysis
S2.3.1 Definitions
Switching rate and persistence (micro): Let’s define switching rate:

                                                     T
                                                1 X  D
                                      SiD =             1 ai (t) ̸= aD
                                                                              
                                                                     i (t − 1) .                            (13)
                                              T − 1 t=2

Persistence is defined as PiD = 1 − SiD .
   Neighborhood cooperation (for conditional cooperation): For each agent i and for t ≥ 2, we
can calculate the previous round cooperation in the agent’s neighborhood N as

                                                          1           X
                                mD
                                 i (t − 1) =                                     yjD (t − 1),               (14)
                                                   Ngt−1 (i)
                                                                   j∈Ngt−1 (i)


where Ngt−1 (i) denotes the set of neighbors of agent i in the interaction graph gt−1 . Also for agent i,
we can use another variable ziD (t − 1) = yiD (t − 1) so that with ziD (t − 1) and mD    i (t − 1) we can study
conditional cooperation.
     For the conditional-rule analysis, the p-value is computed using the same Monte Carlo criterion      defined
in Eq. 12. However, each observation is represented by the triplet mD               D           D
                                                                                                    
                                                                         i (t− 1), zi (t− 1), yi (t) . Under the
null hypothesis that yiD (t) is independent of the previous-round context, null realizations are generated
by randomly permuting the values of yiD (t) across observations while keeping mD                        D
                                                                                        i (t − 1) and zi (t − 1)
fixed. This preserves the marginal distribution of   current actions while removing any association between
yiD (t) and the predictors mD                  D
                               i (t − 1) and zi (t − 1) .


S2.3.2 Confidence interval
Due to computational constraints, for most tests, only one simulation per condition is performed. In
this case, confidence intervals are estimated via bootstrapping across agents rather than simulation runs,
capturing uncertainty due to agent heterogeneity.
    For the confidence interval (CI), we can use a bootstrap method to set pointwise uncertainty. In
practice:
• Sample N agents/players with replacement (i.e., a player can appear multiple times).
• Recompute θD (t) using the sampled agents.
                                               n             oB
• Repeat B times to obtain bootstrap replicates θc,S
                                                   D,(b)
                                                         (t)      .
                                                              b=1
• Define CI95% (t) = [Q0.025 , Q0.975 ].
   To quantitatively measure the difference between these trajectories, we use RMSE and MAE to mea-
                                              E         S
sure the distance between the trajectories θc,S and θc,S . In addition, we calculate the Pearson correlation
coefficient for both for the raw correlation series (r) and for the first differences of the series (r∆ ) between
                  E,(b)       S,(b)
the trajectories θc,S and θc,S to capture correlations in the changes between consecutive time steps.
   For cases where we run the dynamics R times, we use the Cluster bootstrap to account for observations
being grouped by simulation run. Specifically, for each bootstrap replicate, we first resample runs with
replacement, then resample agents within each selected run. We then recompute the statistic of interest
at each timestep. Repeating this many times yields a bootstrap distribution from which we take the
percentiles to have the 95% confidence interval. This procedure preserves both within-run dependence
and between-run variability, providing more realistic uncertainty than pooling all agents across runs as
independent observations.

S2.3.3 Heterogeneity across individuals
To evaluate whether simulations reproduce the diversity of behavioral patterns observed in empirical
data, we compare the distributions of individual cooperation propensities across agents. Let

                                              {PiE }N
                                                    i=1       and {PiS }N
                                                                        i=1




                                                              26
denote the cooperation propensities computed for empirical and simulated datasets, respectively. These
quantities capture the frequency with which each agent cooperates over the full temporal horizon and
therefore encode behavioral heterogeneity at the individual level.
   We quantify the discrepancy between both distributions using the first-order Wasserstein distance.
First, we sort both samples in non-decreasing order:
                                D      D              D
                               P(1) ≤ P(2) ≤ · · · ≤ P(N ),                 D ∈ {E, S}.

The empirical Wasserstein distance of order one between the two samples is then defined as

                                                              N
                                                        1 X E      S
                                      W1 (E, S ) =         P(k) − P(k) .                             (15)
                                                        N
                                                             k=1

This metric measures the minimal average amount of probability mass that must be transported to
transform the simulated distribution into the empirical one. A small value of W1 (E, S ) indicates that
the simulation successfully reproduces the level of behavioral heterogeneity observed among real agents,
whereas larger values reveal discrepancies such as overly homogeneous or excessively polarized simulated
behaviors.

S2.3.4 Conditional cooperation rule
The conditional cooperation rule is defined as the probability that agent i cooperates at time t given its
previous action and the cooperation level in its neighborhood:

                                  Pr yiD (t) = 1 | mD           D
                                                                         
                                                    i (t − 1), zi (t − 1) ,                          (16)

recall that
                                       ziD (t − 1) = yiD (t − 1).
   Let {bk }K
            k=0 denote the bin boundaries. Define


                           I1 = [b0 , b1 ],      Ik = (bk−1 , bk ] for k = 2, . . . , K.             (17)

Then, for each previous action z ∈ {0, 1}, define

                             Sk,z = {(i, t) : mD                 D
                                               i (t − 1) ∈ Ik , zi (t − 1) = z}.                     (18)

   The empirical conditional cooperation probability is estimated as

                                           D            1         X
                                         Pbk,z =                           yiD (t).                  (19)
                                                   |Sk,z |
                                                              (i,t)∈Sk,z


Thus, for each bin k and previous action z ∈ {0, 1}, we obtain four conditional cooperation probabilities:

                                          E       E
                                        Pbk,0 , Pbk,1       : for experiments,

                                          S       S
                                        Pbk,0 , Pbk,1 : for LLMs,
after previous defection (z = 0) or cooperation (z = 1).
    Finally, we can do as before and compare these quantities using RMSE and MAE and Pearson
correlation.




                                                             27
S3 Results
S3.1 Visual analysis
First, we show the results for ρ = 0.


                 1.0
                                                                    Empirical: Lattice
                 0.8                                                Empirical: Heterogeneous
                                                                    Simulation: Lattice
                                                                    Simulation: Heterogeneous

   Cooperation
                 0.6

                 0.4

                 0.2

                 0.0
                         10             20            30              40             50
                                                   Iteration
Fig. S1: Evolution of cooperation over iterations for the STUDENT condition in the setting. Dashed lines
show empirical results from the behavioral experiment, while solid lines show simulation results using
llama4 16x17b. The solid lines represent the mean cooperation rate per round (empirical) or per iteration
(simulation), and the error bars represent the standard error.




                 1.0
                                                                    Empirical: Lattice
                 0.8                                                Empirical: Heterogeneous
                                                                    Simulation: Lattice
                                                                    Simulation: Heterogeneous

   Cooperation
                 0.6

                 0.4

                 0.2

                 0.0
                         10             20            30              40             50
                                                   Iteration
Fig. S2: Evolution of cooperation over iterations for the GENDER condition in the setting. Dashed lines
show empirical results from the behavioral experiment, while solid lines show simulation results using
llama4 16x17b. The solid lines represent the mean cooperation rate per round (empirical) or per iteration
(simulation), and the error bars represent the standard error.




                                                   28
                 1.0
                                                                  Empirical: Lattice
                 0.8                                              Empirical: Heterogeneous
                                                                  Simulation: Lattice
                                                                  Simulation: Heterogeneous

   Cooperation
                 0.6

                 0.4

                 0.2

                 0.0
                        10            20             30             40            50
                                                  Iteration
Fig. S3: Evolution of cooperation over iterations for the STUDENT AND GENDER condition in the setting.
Dashed lines show empirical results from the behavioral experiment, while solid lines show simulation
results using llama4 16x17b. The solid lines represent the mean cooperation rate per round (empirical)
or per iteration (simulation), and the error bars represent the standard error.




                 1.0
                                                                  Empirical: Lattice
                 0.8                                              Empirical: Heterogeneous
                                                                  Simulation: Lattice
                                                                  Simulation: Heterogeneous

   Cooperation
                 0.6

                 0.4

                 0.2

                 0.0
                        10            20             30             40            50
                                                  Iteration
Fig. S4: Control: Evolution of cooperation over iterations for the STUDENT condition in the setting.
Dashed lines show empirical results from the behavioral experiment, while solid lines show simulation
results using llama4 16x17b. The solid lines represent the mean cooperation rate per round (empirical)
or per iteration (simulation), and the error bars represent the standard error.




                                                 29
                 1.0
                                                                   Empirical: Lattice
                 0.8                                               Empirical: Heterogeneous
                                                                   Simulation: Lattice
                                                                   Simulation: Heterogeneous

   Cooperation
                 0.6

                 0.4

                 0.2

                 0.0
                        10             20            30             40             50
                                                  Iteration
Fig. S5: Control: Evolution of cooperation over iterations for the GENDER condition in the setting.
Dashed lines show empirical results from the behavioral experiment, while solid lines show simulation
results using llama4 16x17b. The solid lines represent the mean cooperation rate per round (empirical)
or per iteration (simulation), and the error bars represent the standard error.




                 1.0
                                                                   Empirical: Lattice
                 0.8                                               Empirical: Heterogeneous
                                                                   Simulation: Lattice
                                                                   Simulation: Heterogeneous

   Cooperation
                 0.6

                 0.4

                 0.2

                 0.0
                        10             20            30             40             50
                                                  Iteration
Fig. S6: Control: Evolution of cooperation over iterations for the STUDENT AND GENDER condition in
the setting. Dashed lines show empirical results from the behavioral experiment, while solid lines show
simulation results using llama4 16x17b. The solid lines represent the mean cooperation rate per round
(empirical) or per iteration (simulation), and the error bars represent the standard error.




                                                  30
     a)                                   Empirical: Lattice                   b)            Empirical: Heterogeneous
                            50                                                      60
                            40                                                      50


        Number of Players
                                                                                    40
                            30
                                                                                    30
                            20
                                                                                    20
                            10                                                      10
                            0                                                       0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0         0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0
      c)                                 Simulation: Lattice                   d)           Simulation: Heterogeneous
                       140                                                          60
                       120                                                          50



   Number of Players
                       100                                                          40
                        80                                                          30
                        60
                                                                                    20
                        40
                        20                                                          10
                         0                                                          0
                          0.0      0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0         0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0
                                    Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds                       Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
Fig. S7: Distribution of per-agent cooperation rates for the STUDENT condition setting. Each histogram
displays the fraction of cooperative rounds per player. Bins are uniformly spaced in the interval [0, 1].
Simulated results are generated using llama4 16x17b.




     a)                                   Empirical: Lattice                   b)            Empirical: Heterogeneous
                            50                                                      60
                            40                                                      50


        Number of Players
                                                                                    40
                            30
                                                                                    30
                            20
                                                                                    20
                            10                                                      10
                            0                                                       0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0         0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0
      c)                                 Simulation: Lattice                   d)           Simulation: Heterogeneous
                       140                                                          60
                       120                                                          50



   Number of Players
                       100                                                          40
                        80
                                                                                    30
                        60
                                                                                    20
                        40
                        20                                                          10
                         0                                                          0
                          0.0      0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0         0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0
                                    Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds                       Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
Fig. S8: Distribution of per-agent cooperation rates for the GENDER condition setting. Each histogram
displays the fraction of cooperative rounds per player. Bins are uniformly spaced in the interval [0, 1].
Simulated results are generated using llama4 16x17b.



                                                                           31
     a)                                   Empirical: Lattice                   b)             Empirical: Heterogeneous
                            50                                                      60
                            40                                                      50


        Number of Players
                                                                                    40
                            30
                                                                                    30
                            20
                                                                                    20
                            10                                                      10
                            0                                                        0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0          0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0
      c) 140                             Simulation: Lattice                   d)            Simulation: Heterogeneous
                                                                                    60
                       120
                                                                                    50


   Number of Players
                       100
                        80                                                          40
                        60                                                          30
                        40                                                          20
                        20                                                          10
                         0                                                           0
                          0.0      0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0          0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0
                                    Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds                        Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
Fig. S9: Distribution of per-agent cooperation rates for the STUDENT AND GENDER condition setting. Each
histogram displays the fraction of cooperative rounds per player. Bins are uniformly spaced in the interval
[0, 1]. Simulated results are generated using llama4 16x17b.




     a)                                   Empirical: Lattice                   b)             Empirical: Heterogeneous
                            60                                                      50
                            50                                                      40


        Number of Players
                            40                                                      30
                            30
                                                                                    20
                            20
                            10                                                      10
                            0                                                        0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0          0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0
      c)                                 Simulation: Lattice                   d)            Simulation: Heterogeneous
                       250                                                          100
                       200                                                          80



   Number of Players
                       150                                                          60
                       100                                                          40
                            50                                                      20
                            0                                                        0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0          0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0
                                    Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds                        Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
Fig. S10: Control: Distribution of per-agent cooperation rates for the STUDENT condition setting. Each
histogram displays the fraction of cooperative rounds per player. Bins are uniformly spaced in the interval
[0, 1]. Simulated results are generated using llama4 16x17b.



                                                                           32
     a)                                   Empirical: Lattice                   b)             Empirical: Heterogeneous
                            60                                                      50
                            50                                                      40


        Number of Players
                            40                                                      30
                            30
                                                                                    20
                            20
                            10                                                      10
                            0                                                        0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0          0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0
      c) 250                             Simulation: Lattice                   d)            Simulation: Heterogeneous
                                                                                    100
                       200
                                                                                    80


   Number of Players
                       150                                                          60
                       100                                                          40
                            50                                                      20
                            0                                                        0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0          0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0
                                    Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds                        Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
Fig. S11: Control: Distribution of per-agent cooperation rates for the GENDER condition setting. Each
histogram displays the fraction of cooperative rounds per player. Bins are uniformly spaced in the interval
[0, 1]. Simulated results are generated using llama4 16x17b.




     a)                                   Empirical: Lattice                   b)             Empirical: Heterogeneous
                            60                                                      50
                            50                                                      40


        Number of Players
                            40                                                      30
                            30
                                                                                    20
                            20
                            10                                                      10
                            0                                                        0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0          0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0
      c) 250                             Simulation: Lattice                   d) 100        Simulation: Heterogeneous

                       200                                                          80



   Number of Players
                       150                                                          60

                       100                                                          40

                            50                                                      20

                            0                                                        0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0          0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0
                                    Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds                        Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
Fig. S12: Control: Distribution of per-agent cooperation rates for the STUDENT AND GENDER condition
setting. Each histogram displays the fraction of cooperative rounds per player. Bins are uniformly spaced
in the interval [0, 1]. Simulated results are generated using llama4 16x17b.



                                                                           33
        In addition to testing different scenarios, we evaluated our simulation setup with llama4 16x17b
   across a range of temperatures. Specifically, temperature values were randomly sampled from the interval
   [0, 2]. These experiments were conducted exclusively on the lattice network topology (see Figure S13).

                                                                                            b)       Emp.: Lattice   c)     Sim.: Lattice
     a)



                                                                        Number of Players
              1.00
                                                        Emp.: Lattice                        40
              0.75

Cooperation
                                                        Sim.: Lattice
              0.50                                                                           20
              0.25
              0.00                                                                               0
                        10         20       30     40       50                                   0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0
                                         Iteration                                                  Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
   Fig. S13: Simulation results obtained with llama4 16x17b on the Lattice network under different tem-
   peratures sampled uniformly from the interval [0, 2].


       To further assess whether the reduced dispersion observed in the simulations is model-dependent,
   we repeated the analysis using qwen3 32b. The results shown in Fig. S14 indicate that the tendency of
   LLM agents to generate less variable cooperation distributions than human participants is not specific
   to llama4 16x17b.

                                                                                            b)       Emp.: Lattice   c) Emp.: Heterogeneous
     a)                                                                                      50



                                                                        Number of Players
              1.00
                             Emp.: Lattice      Emp.: Heterogeneous
              0.75                                                                               0

Cooperation
                             Sim.: Lattice      Sim.: Heterogeneous
              0.50
                                                                                            d)       Sim.: Lattice   e) Sim.: Heterogeneous
              0.25                                                                          100
              0.00                                                                               0
                        10         20       30     40       50                                   0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0
                                         Iteration                                                  Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
   Fig. S14: Simulation results obtained with qwen3 32b on the Lattice and Heterogeneous networks.


              Next, we present the results for other values of ρ.




                                                                 34
                            1.0                                                                                                             Rand. (%)
                                                                                                                                                     90
                            0.8                                                                                                                      50



    Cooperation
                            0.6                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                     0
                            0.4

                            0.2

                            0.0
                                                10                       20                      30                    40                       50
                                                                                    Iteration
Fig. S15: Cooperation over iterations for the lattice network, varying ρ, under the STUDENT condition.
The simulation results were generated by llama4 16x17b. The black dashed line shows the empirical
data, and the error bars show the standard error.



     a)                                        Empirical                            b)         Hybrid Simulation (80% LLM + 20% Random)
                            50                                                           100
                            40                                                           80


        Number of Players
                            30                                                           60
                            20                                                           40
                            10                                                           20
                            0                                                             0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8         1.0          0.0        0.2       0.4         0.6      0.8          1.0
      c)                                 Full LLM Simulation                        d)                  LLM Subset (within Hybrid)
                       140                                                               100
                       120                                                               80


   Number of Players
                       100
                        80                                                               60
                        60                                                               40
                        40
                                                                                         20
                        20
                         0                                                                0
                          0.0      0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8        1.0          0.0        0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8         1.0
                                    Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds                                  Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
Fig. S16: Distribution of per-agent cooperation rates for the lattice network with ρ = 0.2 (80% LLM +
20% Random), under the STUDENT condition. Bins are uniformly spaced in the interval [0, 1]. Simulation
results were generated using llama4 16x17b.




                                                                                35
     a)                                        Empirical                       b)         Hybrid Simulation (80% LLM + 20% Random)
                                                                                    200
                            60
                            50


        Number of Players
                                                                                    150
                            40
                            30                                                      100
                            20
                                                                                    50
                            10
                            0                                                        0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0          0.0       0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0
      c)                                 Full LLM Simulation                   d)                 LLM Subset (within Hybrid)
                       250                                                          200
                       200



   Number of Players
                                                                                    150
                       150
                                                                                    100
                       100

                            50                                                      50

                            0                                                        0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0          0.0       0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0
                                    Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds                            Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
Fig. S17: Control: Distribution of per-agent cooperation rates for the lattice control network with
ρ = 0.2 (80% LLM + 20% Random), under the STUDENT condition. Bins are uniformly spaced in the
interval [0, 1]. Simulation results were generated using llama4 16x17b.



     a)                                        Empirical                       b)         Hybrid Simulation (80% LLM + 20% Random)
                            60                                                      50
                            50


        Number of Players
                                                                                    40
                            40
                                                                                    30
                            30
                                                                                    20
                            20
                            10                                                      10
                            0                                                        0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0          0.0       0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0
      c)                                 Full LLM Simulation                   d)                 LLM Subset (within Hybrid)
                            60
                                                                                    50
                            50



        Number of Players
                                                                                    40
                            40
                                                                                    30
                            30
                            20                                                      20

                            10                                                      10
                            0                                                        0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0          0.0       0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0
                                    Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds                            Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
Fig. S18: Distribution of per-agent cooperation rates for the heterogeneous network with ρ = 0.2 (80%
LLM + 20% Random), under the STUDENT condition. Bins are uniformly spaced in the interval [0, 1].
Simulation results were generated using llama4 16x17b.




                                                                           36
     a)                                        Empirical                       b)        Hybrid Simulation (80% LLM + 20% Random)
                            50                                                      80
                            40


        Number of Players
                                                                                    60
                            30
                                                                                    40
                            20
                            10                                                      20

                            0                                                       0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0         0.0       0.2       0.4        0.6       0.8    1.0
      c)                                 Full LLM Simulation                   d)                LLM Subset (within Hybrid)
                       100                                                          80
                            80



   Number of Players
                                                                                    60
                            60
                                                                                    40
                            40
                            20                                                      20

                            0                                                       0
                             0.0   0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0         0.0       0.2       0.4        0.6        0.8   1.0
                                    Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds                           Cooperative Rounds / Total Rounds
Fig. S19: Control: Distribution of per-agent cooperation rates for the heterogeneous control network
with ρ = 0.2 (80% LLM + 20% Random), under the STUDENT condition. Bins are uniformly spaced in
the interval [0, 1]. Simulation results were generated using llama4 16x17b.


S3.2 Quantitative analysis
S3.2.1 Macro analysis
We begin our analysis by comparing the three backstory types, as shown in Figure S20 and Table S1.
To reduce the number of simulations, we test two scenarios: (i) Hybrid Simulation (80% LLM + 20%
Random) and (ii) Full LLM Simulation.




                                                                           37
    a) 1.0
                                                   Empirical            GENDER
       0.8                                         STUDENT              STUDENT AND GENDER

    Cooperation
       0.6
       0.4
       0.2
       0.0
    b) 1.0
       0.8

    Cooperation
       0.6
       0.4
       0.2
       0.0
    c) 1.0
       0.8

    Cooperation
       0.6
       0.4
       0.2
       0.0
    d) 1.0
       0.8

    Cooperation
       0.6
       0.4
       0.2
       0.0
                          10             20            30             40             50
                                                    Iteration
Fig. S20: Evolution of cooperation over iterations for the conditions in the setting. Dashed lines
show empirical results from the behavioral experiment, while solid lines show simulation results using
llama4 16x17b. The solid lines represent the mean cooperation rate per round (empirical) or per iter-
ation (simulation), and the error bars represent the standard error. The panels depict the following
scenarios: (a) lattice, (b) lattice control, (c) heterogeneous, and (d) heterogeneous control.


    Since the different backstory types do not significantly impact the results, we only consider STUDENT
for the following results. First, we compare the different executions for both networks. See Figure S21
and Table S2.




                                                   38
 Experiment                                           RMSE       MAE         Diffϕ      Diffµ      r          r∆
 lattice - GENDER                                     0.104**    0.090       0.155***   0.001      0.577***   0.367***
 lattice - STUDENT                                    0.098**    0.083**     0.217***   0.002      0.612***   0.276*
 lattice - STUDENT AND GENDER                         0.110*     0.095       0.113***   0.002      0.495***   0.384***
 lattice control - GENDER                             0.089***   0.074*      0.383***   0.003***   0.472***   0.151
 lattice control - STUDENT                            0.089***   0.074*      0.464***   0.002***   0.583***   0.214
 lattice control - STUDENT AND GENDER                 0.089***   0.075*      0.327***   0.002***   0.506***   0.031
 heterogeneous - GENDER                               0.110**    0.098       0.017      0.001*     0.606***   0.117
 heterogeneous - STUDENT                              0.107**    0.096       0.071      0.002      0.622***   0.151
 heterogeneous - STUDENT AND GENDER                   0.108**    0.097       0.038*     0.001*     0.642***   0.224
 heterogeneous control - GENDER                       0.087***   0.051*      0.276      0.005*     0.467***   0.002
 heterogeneous control - STUDENT                      0.079***   0.051       0.359      0.004*     0.440***   0.362***
 heterogeneous control - STUDENT AND GENDER           0.078***   0.050       0.420      0.002*     0.367***   0.157
Table S1: Trajectory errors, autoregressive comparison, and correlation across different backstory types (for
the scenario with no random agents). RMSE and MAE measure point-by-point deviations between empirical and
simulated cooperation rates. Diffϕ denotes the absolute difference between the AR(1) persistence coefficients, and
Diffµ denotes the absolute difference between the implied long-run means of the simulated and empirical series. r
denotes the Pearson correlation coefficient between empirical and simulated trajectories. For RMSE, MAE, Diffϕ ,
and Diffµ , statistical significance is assessed using the Monte Carlo null model described in the text. For r, signif-
icance refers to the null hypothesis of zero correlation (H0 : r = 0). ∗∗∗ denotes p < 0.01, ∗∗ denotes p < 0.05, ∗
denotes p < 0.1, and no symbol indicates that the result is not statistically significant.




    a) 1.0
                  0.8


    Cooperation
                  0.6
                  0.4
                  0.2
       0.0
    b) 1.0
                  0.8


    Cooperation
                  0.6
                  0.4
                  0.2
                  0.0
                          10              20            30              40              50
                                                     Iteration
Fig. S21: The average evolution of cooperation over r = 20 runs for both lattice and heterogeneous
networks (panels a and b, respectively). The dashed lines show the results of the behavioral experiment,
the error bars represent the standard error, and the solid lines show the simulation results. The shaded
regions represent the respective standard deviation.




                                                    39
 Network         RMSE      MAE      Diffϕ      Diffµ     r          r∆
 Lattice         0.099**   0.088    0.461***   0.004**   0.666***   0.407***
 Heterogeneous   0.105**   0.096*   0.190      0.001**   0.708***   0.179

Table S2: Trajectory errors, autoregressive comparison, and correla-
tion across different executions for the scenario with no random agents,
on both lattice and heterogeneous networks. RMSE and MAE mea-
sure point-by-point deviations between empirical and average simulated
cooperation rates. Diffϕ denotes the absolute difference between the
AR(1) persistence coefficients, and Diffµ denotes the absolute differ-
ence between the implied long-run means of the simulated and empirical
series. r denotes the Pearson correlation coefficient between empirical
and simulated trajectories. For RMSE, MAE, Diffϕ , and Diffµ , statisti-
cal significance is assessed using the Monte Carlo null model described
in the text. For r, significance refers to the null hypothesis of zero corre-
lation (H0 : r = 0). ∗∗∗ denotes p < 0.01, ∗∗ denotes p < 0.05, ∗ denotes
p < 0.1, and no symbol indicates that the result is not statistically sig-
nificant.




                                     40
   Table S3 reports trajectory errors, AR(1) differences, and correlation metrics for simulations on
lattice network, with varying percentages of random agents in the population. Table S4 presents the
same metrics across different experimental scenarios (i.e., lattice, heterogeneous, and control setups).


                Random (%)    RMSE       MAE         Diffϕ      Diffµ      r          r∆
                          0   0.098**    0.083**     0.217***   0.002      0.612***   0.276*
                         10   0.116***   0.099**     0.537***   0.000**    0.665***   0.284**
                         20   0.109***   0.093**     0.405***   0.001***   0.690***   0.469***
                         30   0.104***   0.092**     0.443***   0.000***   0.691***   0.384***
                         40   0.086*     0.074       0.098***   0.001      0.675***   0.282**
                         50   0.057***   0.044**     0.376***   0.003      0.638***   0.200
                         60   0.049**    0.037**     0.020***   0.003      0.569***   0.236*
                         70   0.060***   0.048***    0.058*     0.003      0.645***   0.332**
                         80   0.091      0.079       0.048*     0.005***   0.304**    -0.097
                         90   0.121      0.110       0.215*     0.004**    0.457***   0.297**

              Table S3: Trajectory errors, autoregressive comparison, and correlation
              across different percentages of random agents for the same backstory type
              on lattice network. RMSE and MAE measure point-by-point deviations
              between empirical and simulated cooperation rates. Diffϕ denotes the abso-
              lute difference between the AR(1) persistence coefficients, and Diffµ denotes
              the absolute difference between the implied long-run means of the sim-
              ulated and empirical series. r denotes the Pearson correlation coefficient
              between empirical and simulated trajectories. For RMSE, MAE, Diffϕ , and
              Diffµ , statistical significance is assessed using the Monte Carlo null model
              described in the text. For r, significance refers to the null hypothesis of
              zero correlation (H0 : r = 0). ∗∗∗ denotes p < 0.01, ∗∗ denotes p < 0.05, ∗
              denotes p < 0.1, and no symbol indicates that the result is not statistically
              significant.




 Experiment                                         RMSE        MAE        Diffϕ      Diffµ      r          r∆
 lattice (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)                      0.098**     0.083**    0.217***   0.002      0.612***   0.276*
 lattice (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)                      0.109***    0.093**    0.405***   0.001***   0.690***   0.469***
 lattice control (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)              0.089***    0.074*     0.464**    0.002***   0.583***   0.214
 lattice control (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)              0.087***    0.046**    0.519***   0.005***   0.509***   0.098
 heterogeneous (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)                0.107**     0.096      0.071      0.002      0.622***   0.151
 heterogeneous (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)                0.109***    0.101**    0.249      0.000***   0.743***   0.343**
 heterogeneous control (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)        0.079***    0.051      0.359      0.004*     0.440***   0.362***
 heterogeneous control (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)        0.070**     0.046      0.384      0.003*     0.325**    0.135
Table S4: Trajectory errors, autoregressive comparison, and correlation across experimental scenarios. RMSE
and MAE measure point-by-point deviations between empirical and simulated cooperation rates. Diffϕ denotes
the absolute difference between the AR(1) persistence coefficients, and Diffµ denotes the absolute difference
between the implied long-run means of the simulated and empirical series. r denotes the Pearson correlation
coefficient between empirical and simulated trajectories. For RMSE, MAE, Diffϕ , and Diffµ , statistical signifi-
cance is assessed using the Monte Carlo null model described in the text. For r, significance refers to the null
hypothesis of zero correlation (H0 : r = 0). ∗∗∗ denotes p < 0.01, ∗∗ denotes p < 0.05, ∗ denotes p < 0.1, and no
symbol indicates that the result is not statistically significant.




S3.2.2 Micro analysis
First, we show the persistence across different percentages of random agents (in the lattice scenario),
as shown in Table S5. Next, we present the comparison between the different experiments (see Table S6).




                                                     41
                                                                D
                          Experiment                        P        95% CI
                          Empirical                         0.640    (0.629, 0.652)
                          Lattice (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)     0.579    (0.573, 0.586)
                          Lattice (90% LLM + 10% Rand.)     0.613    (0.605, 0.621)
                          Lattice (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)     0.633    (0.624, 0.642)
                          Lattice (70% LLM + 30% Rand.)     0.645    (0.634, 0.656)
                          Lattice (60% LLM + 40% Rand.)     0.650    (0.637, 0.662)
                          Lattice (50% LLM + 50% Rand.)     0.610    (0.598, 0.621)
                          Lattice (40% LLM + 60% Rand.)     0.593    (0.582, 0.605)
                          Lattice (30% LLM + 70% Rand.)     0.564    (0.554, 0.574)
                          Lattice (20% LLM + 80% Rand.)     0.540    (0.531, 0.549)
                          Lattice (10% LLM + 90% Rand.)     0.518    (0.511, 0.525)

                         Table S5: Mean cooperation persistence and 95%
                         confidence interval for different percentages of random
                         agents. Confidence intervals are estimated via boot-
                         strapping over agents.



                                                                        D
                    Experiment                                      P       95% CI
                    lattice (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)                   0.579   (0.573, 0.586)
                    lattice (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)                   0.633   (0.623, 0.642)
                    lattice - Empirical                             0.640   (0.629, 0.651)
                    lattice control (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)           0.610   (0.604, 0.615)
                    lattice control (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)           0.589   (0.582, 0.596)
                    lattice control - Empirical                     0.724   (0.711, 0.738)
                    heterogeneous (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)             0.604   (0.592, 0.617)
                    heterogeneous (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)             0.629   (0.615, 0.642)
                    heterogeneous - Empirical                       0.620   (0.610, 0.630)
                    heterogeneous control (100% LLM + 0% Rand.)     0.578   (0.572, 0.584)
                    heterogeneous control (80% LLM + 20% Rand.)     0.577   (0.570, 0.584)
                    heterogeneous control - Empirical               0.693   (0.680, 0.707)

                  Table S6: Mean cooperation persistence and 95% confidence
                  interval. Confidence intervals are estimated via bootstrapping over
                  agents.



   Next, we examine conditional cooperation as a function of neighborhood behavior.
Figures S22 and S23 show the average probability of cooperation as a function of the fraction of
cooperating neighbors in the previous round, separately after a previous defection and after a previous
cooperation. Both tested scenarios (lattice and heterogeneous) comprise 20 dynamics executions.




                                                    42
      a) 1.0




       Neighborhood Coop. (After Coop.)
                                          0.8

                                          0.6

                                          0.4

                                          0.2

         0.0
      b) 1.0




       Neighborhood Coop. (After Def.)
                                          0.8

                                          0.6

                                          0.4

                                          0.2

                                          0.0
                                                10   20     30       40           50
                                                          Timestep
Fig. S22: Average fraction of cooperating neighbors over time for the lattice network. Results are
shown separately for agents that cooperated (panel a) or defected (panel b) in the previous round. The
continuous blue line represents the simulation, and the black dashed line represents the empirical data.
The simulated curve is the mean across all 20 runs, and the error bars represent 95% CIs estimated
by Cluster bootstrap across runs. Empirical patterns (dashed) are shown with 95% CIs estimated by
bootstrapping over players.




                                                          43
      a) 1.0




       Neighborhood Coop. (After Coop.)
                                          0.8

                                          0.6

                                          0.4

                                          0.2

         0.0
      b) 1.0




       Neighborhood Coop. (After Def.)
                                          0.8

                                          0.6

                                          0.4

                                          0.2

                                          0.0
                                                10   20     30       40           50
                                                          Timestep
Fig. S23: Average fraction of cooperating neighbors over time for the heterogeneous network. Results
are shown separately for agents that cooperated (panel a) or defected (panel b) in the previous round.
The continuous green line represents the simulation, and the black dashed line represents the empirical
data. The simulated curve is the mean across all 20 runs, and the error bars represent 95% CIs estimated
by Cluster bootstrap across runs. Empirical patterns (dashed) are shown with 95% CIs estimated by
bootstrapping over players.




                                                          44
S3.2.3 Heterogeneity across individuals
To further analyze the role of stochastic behavior in shaping individual-level heterogeneity, we vary
the fraction of random agents ρ in the population. Table S7 reports the resulting values of W1 (E, S )
across different percentages of random agents. The results show a non-monotonic relationship between ρ
and heterogeneity mismatch, with intermediate levels of randomness generally yielding lower distances
between empirical and simulated distributions.


                                        Random (%)    W1 (E, S)
                                                  0   0.101
                                                 10   0.089
                                                 20   0.081
                                                 30   0.084
                                                 40   0.073
                                                 50   0.037
                                                 60   0.039
                                                 70   0.051
                                                 80   0.080
                                                 90   0.119

                                      Table S7: Sensitivity
                                      of individual coopera-
                                      tion heterogeneity to
                                      the fraction of random
                                      agents. Wasserstein dis-
                                      tance between empirical
                                      and simulated distri-
                                      butions of individual
                                      cooperation     propen-
                                      sities. Lower values
                                      indicate better repro-
                                      duction of behavioral
                                      heterogeneity.




S3.2.4 Conditional cooperation rule
To quantify how well the simulations reproduce the empirical conditional cooperation rule, we compute
RMSE and MAE between the empirical and simulated conditional cooperation probabilities. Errors are
calculated separately for cases in which the previous action was defection (z = 0) and cooperation
(z = 1), as well as aggregated across both cases, see Table S8.




                                                 45
 Random (%)    RMSEz=0     MAEz=0     RMSEz=1     MAEz=1
           0   0.237**     0.217***   0.397***    0.388*
          10   0.208**     0.188***   0.322***    0.310*
          20   0.180       0.165***   0.255***    0.246*
          30   0.153       0.144***   0.199***    0.192*
          40   0.145**     0.136***   0.117***    0.116***
          50   0.140***    0.121***   0.096***    0.092***
          60   0.137***    0.112***   0.060***    0.055***
          70   0.135***    0.101***   0.049***    0.041***
          80   0.150***    0.116***   0.042***    0.038***
          90   0.181***    0.163***   0.035***    0.027***

Table S8: Deviation between empirical and simulated con-
ditional cooperation rules across different percentages of
random agents. Errors are computed separately for cases
in which the previous action was defection (z = 0) or
cooperation (z = 1). The columns RMSEall and MAEall
summarize the overall deviation across both cases. ∗∗∗
denotes p < 0.01, ∗∗ denotes p < 0.05, ∗ denotes p < 0.1,
and no symbol indicates that the result is not statistically
significant.




                            46
References
 [1] Lu, Y., Aleta, A., Du, C., Shi, L., Moreno, Y.: Llms and generative agent-based models for complex
     systems research. Physics of Life Reviews 51, 283–293 (2024)

 [2] Chiang, C.-H., Lee, H.-y.: Can large language models be an alternative to human evaluations? In:
     Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
     1: Long Papers), pp. 15607–15631 (2023)

 [3] Papachristou, M., Yang, L., Hsu, C.-C.: Leveraging large language models for collective decision-
     making. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 9(7), 1–44 (2025)

 [4] Flamino, J., Modi, M.S., Szymanski, B.K., Cross, B., Mikolajczyk, C.: Testing the limits of large
     language models in debating humans. Scientific Reports 15(1), 13852 (2025)

 [5] Nudo, J., Pandolfo, M.E., Loru, E., Samory, M., Cinelli, M., Quattrociocchi, W.: Generative exag-
     geration in llm social agents: Consistency, bias, and toxicity. Online Social Networks and Media 51,
     100344 (2026)

 [6] Loru, E., Nudo, J., Di Marco, N., Santirocchi, A., Atzeni, R., Cinelli, M., Cestari, V., Rossi-Arnaud,
     C., Quattrociocchi, W.: The simulation of judgment in llms. Proceedings of the National Academy
     of Sciences 122(42), 2518443122 (2025)

 [7] Hadad, O., Loru, E., Nudo, J., Di Marco, N., Cinelli, M., Quattrociocchi, W.: The statistical
     signature of llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.18152 (2026)

 [8] Akata, E., Schulz, L., Coda-Forno, J., Oh, S.J., Bethge, M., Schulz, E.: Playing repeated games with
     large language models. Nature Human Behaviour 9(7), 1380–1390 (2025)

 [9] Ashery, A.F., Aiello, L.M., Baronchelli, A.: Emergent social conventions and collective bias in llm
     populations. Science Advances 11(20), 9368 (2025)

[10] Kumar, A., Poungpeth, N., Yang, D., Farrell, E., Lambert, B.L., Groh, M.: When large language
     models are reliable for judging empathic communication. Nature Machine Intelligence 8(2), 173–185
     (2026)

[11] Serapio-Garcı́a, G., Safdari, M., Crepy, C., Sun, L., Fitz, S., Romero, P., Abdulhai, M., Faust,
     A., Matarić, M.: A psychometric framework for evaluating and shaping personality traits in large
     language models. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1–15 (2025)

[12] Wang, Y., Zhong, W., Li, L., Mi, F., Zeng, X., Huang, W., Shang, L., Jiang, X., Liu, Q.: Aligning
     large language models with human: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12966 (2023)

[13] Slocum, S., Parker-Sartori, A., Hadfield-Menell, D.: Diverse preference learning for capabilities
     and alignment. In: The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (2025).
     https://openreview.net/forum?id=pOq9vDIYev

[14] Hamilton, S.: Detecting mode collapse in language models via narration. In: Proceedings of the First
     Edition of the Workshop on the Scaling Behavior of Large Language Models (SCALE-LLM 2024),
     pp. 65–72 (2024)

[15] Reia, S.M., Pfoser, D., et al.: Opportunities and challenges of llms in urban science: Comment on”
     llms and generative agent-based models for complex systems research” by yikang lu et al. Physics
     of Life Reviews 53, 305–306 (2025)

[16] Ye, J., Cao, L., Chen, D., Ferrara, E.: Stop drawing scientific claims from llm social simulations
     without robustness audits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.18890 (2026)

[17] Gracia-Lázaro, C., Ferrer, A., Ruiz, G., Tarancón, A., Cuesta, J.A., Sánchez, A., Moreno, Y.: Hetero-
     geneous networks do not promote cooperation when humans play a prisoner’s dilemma. Proceedings
     of the National Academy of Sciences 109(32), 12922–12926 (2012)


                                                     47
[18] Grujić, J., Fosco, C., Araujo, L., Cuesta, J.A., Sánchez, A.: Social experiments in the mesoscale:
     Humans playing a spatial prisoner’s dilemma. PloS one 5(11), 13749 (2010)

[19] Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.-A., Lacroix, T., Rozière, B., Goyal,
     N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F., et al.: Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2302.13971 (2023)

[20] Bi, X., Chen, D., Chen, G., Chen, S., Dai, D., Deng, C., Ding, H., Dong, K., Du, Q., Fu,
     Z., et al.: Deepseek llm: Scaling open-source language models with longtermism. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2401.02954 (2024)

[21] Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et
     al.: Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 (2025)

[22] Allal, L.B., Lozhkov, A., Bakouch, E., Blázquez, G.M., Penedo, G., Tunstall, L., Marafioti, A.,
     Kydlı́ček, H., Lajarı́n, A.P., Srivastav, V., et al.: Smollm2: When smol goes big–data-centric training
     of a small language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02737 (2025)

[23] Hamilton, J.D.: Time Series Analysis. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1994)

[24] Dickey, D.A., Fuller, W.A.: Distribution of the estimators for autoregressive time series with a unit
     root. Journal of the American statistical association 74(366a), 427–431 (1979)




                                                     48
