                                             When Agents Meet Electric Bus Fleet Operations: Pricing Behavior,
                                              Trade-offs, and Policy Implications in an Aggregator Framework

                                                    Jônatas Augusto Manzolli1,2,∗       Ali Eslami1,∗        Luis Miranda-Moreno1      Jiangbo Yu1,†

                                                            1 Department of Civil Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

                                                                      2 INESC Coimbra, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal


                                                   ∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.       † Corresponding author: jiangbo.yu@mcgill.ca




                                                                                               Abstract




arXiv:2606.26400v1 [cs.AI] 24 Jun 2026
                                                   Agentic systems are changing how complex operational tasks are coordinated by connecting
                                               heterogeneous data sources, introducing a new paradigm for simplifying tasks, connecting datasets,
                                               and automating processes. Electric bus fleets provide a relevant test case for this paradigm. Their
                                               operation requires continuous coordination between service reliability, battery state-of-charge, charger
                                               availability, electricity prices, route-energy uncertainty, and vehicle-to-grid (V2G) opportunities.
                                               This paper proposes an agentic aggregator framework that streamlines this decision environment by
                                               coupling an optimization-based electric bus scheduling model with supervisory agents for disturbance
                                               detection, tariff adaptation, and schedule evaluation. The optimization core enforces physical feasibility
                                               across routes, chargers, batteries, and V2G exchanges, while the agentic layer interprets changing
                                               operating conditions, triggers real-time re-optimization when needed, and defines how flexibility
                                               value is allocated between the aggregator and the public transport operator (PTO). A realistic depot
                                               case study evaluates day-ahead and real-time operations under profit-based and operation-based
                                               coordination modes, considering service delays, route-energy deviations, electricity price shocks, and
                                               combined disturbances. The results show that agentic aggregation can support adaptive fleet-grid
                                               coordination by maintaining feasible schedules, activating re-optimization selectively, and improving
                                               the use of charging and V2G flexibility. However, they also reveal a critical trade-off: the same agentic
                                               capability that reduces operational complexity can extract value from the PTO when configured
                                               around profit-oriented pricing. Prompt-sensitivity experiments further show that agentic pricing
                                               behavior changes with prompt configuration, making prompt design a reproducibility and governance
                                               variable. These findings suggest that agentic aggregators can become useful tools for managing electric
                                               bus V2G operations, but their deployment in public-fleet contexts requires transparent coordination
                                               modes, auditable tariff-setting, and explicit value-sharing rules.

                                         Keywords: Electric bus fleets; Aggregators; Smart charging; Vehicle-to-grid; Energy market; Agentic AI


                                         1    Introduction
                                         Artificial intelligence (AI) is rapidly moving from passive decision support toward agentic systems capable
                                         of coordinating tasks, connecting heterogeneous data sources, invoking external tools, and automating
                                         structured workflows. This evolution is particularly relevant for energy and transport systems, where
                                         operational decisions depend on fragmented information, physical constraints, market signals, and real-time
                                         disturbances. In such contexts, agentic AI should not be understood as a replacement for mathematical
                                         optimization or engineering models, but as a supervisory layer that can streamline the complex workflow
                                         around them: detecting when conditions change, preparing decision inputs, selecting the appropriate
                                         analytical tool, and interpreting the resulting outputs.
                                             Electric bus fleets provide a timely test case for this capability. As public transport electrification
                                         expands, electric buses are becoming large, time-varying loads connected to the power system [1]. Their
                                         operation is already complex because public transport operators (PTOs) must coordinate battery state-of-
                                         charge (SOC), charger availability, route assignments, timetable reliability, charging duration, route-energy
                                         uncertainty, and depot power limits [2]. This complexity increases further when vehicle-to-grid (V2G)
                                         operation and energy trading are introduced. The fleet must then decide not only when to charge, but
                                         also when to discharge, how much energy to export, and under which tariff or compensation structure
                                         participation remains attractive. Previous optimization-based studies have shown that coordinated


                                                                                                       1
charging, tariff-aware scheduling, and V2G strategies can reduce costs and improve system performance,
especially when battery aging, demand peaks, and uncertainty are explicitly considered [3, 4]. However,
deploying these strategies in practice remains challenging because the required information changes
continuously during operation.
    In this setting, the aggregator becomes a natural coordination entity [5]. In electricity systems,
aggregators pool distributed flexibility, interact with markets, and translate system-level signals into
coordinated decisions across users and assets [6]. For electric bus fleets, the aggregator can be understood
as an intermediary between grid needs and fleet operations. It receives market and grid signals, converts
them into fleet-feasible charging and V2G actions, and defines how the economic value of flexibility is
shared between the aggregator and the PTO. This role is broader than simple arbitrage because the value
of flexibility cannot be separated from service reliability, terminal SOC, charger access, battery feasibility,
and the willingness of the PTO to participate.
    Existing studies have modeled aggregator–fleet interaction through hierarchical or market-oriented
formulations, including leader–follower structures in which an aggregator defines trading conditions and
the fleet operator responds with charging and discharging decisions [7, 8, 9]. These models provide an
important mathematical basis for aggregator-supported electric bus operation. However, they are usually
built around pre-structured inputs, fixed decision horizons, and predefined optimization calls. As a
result, they are useful for planning and scenario analysis, but less suited to real-time environments where
delays, route-energy deviations, vehicle-state uncertainty, and electricity-price changes can rapidly make
a previous schedule outdated. Existing electric bus charging studies offer powerful formulations for cost
minimization, infrastructure use, and fleet scheduling, but they place less emphasis on the orchestration
layer that decides when and how these models should be used in operation [10, 11].
    Agentic systems can address this gap by being embedded within the aggregator. Instead of treating
the aggregator only as a tariff-setting optimization problem, an agentic aggregator can operate as a
structured supervisory system around the charging optimizer. A Trigger Agent can monitor operational
and market deviations and decide whether re-optimization is needed. A Pricing Agent can translate the
selected coordination strategy into buy and sell multipliers for charging and V2G exchange. An Evaluator
Agent can assess whether the resulting schedule is acceptable from economic and operational perspectives.
In this architecture, the optimizer remains responsible for enforcing feasibility, while the agentic layer
simplifies the surrounding decision workflow. The potential benefit is operational and economic: the
system can coordinate charging and V2G events more adaptively, reduce manual intervention, and allocate
flexibility value between the aggregator and the PTO.
    At the same time, this capability creates a critical concern. If an agentic aggregator controls pricing
guidance, its behavior determines who captures the value of V2G flexibility. The same system that can
streamline electric bus operation and protect the PTO can also be configured to extract value from it
through profit-oriented tariff behavior. This concern is particularly important because agentic behavior
may depend on prompt configuration and coordination-mode instructions, which are not necessarily
visible to the PTO or easy for regulators to audit. Therefore, the central question is not only whether
agentic systems can operate electric bus V2G, but also how their behavior affects coordination, pricing,
and value allocation.
    Despite the rapid emergence of agentic AI in energy and infrastructure applications [12, 13, 14, 15],
the literature still lacks a concrete evaluation of an agentic aggregator for electric bus fleet operation. In
particular, there is limited evidence on how such a system should be structured, how it should interact
with an optimization-based charging model, how it behaves under day-ahead (DA) and real-time (RT)
operation, and how different pricing behaviors affect both the aggregator and the PTO. There is also
little quantitative evidence on whether agentic pricing configurations can shift value from public fleet
operators to aggregators under otherwise feasible operating schedules.
    Motivated by this gap, this paper proposes an agentic aggregator framework for electric bus charging
and V2G coordination. The framework combines an optimization-based PTO scheduling model with
three supervisory agents for triggering, pricing, and schedule evaluation. The system is tested under
DA and RT conditions, including service-timing disturbances, route-energy deviations, electricity-price
shocks, and combined stress cases. Two coordination modes are compared: a profit-based mode that
prioritizes aggregator revenue and an operational-based mode that prioritizes PTO-compatible flexibility
participation. The main contributions of this paper are:

   • A traceable agentic-AI architecture for adaptive EV aggregation that combines optimization with
     Trigger, Pricing, and Evaluator Agents into a unified pipeline separating disturbance detection,
     tariff adaptation, and schedule acceptance.


                                                      2
    • A controlled DA and RT evaluation comparing profit-based and operational-based aggregator
      coordination modes, showing how agentic pricing reallocates flexibility value between the aggregator
      and the PTO across delay, energy-consumption, price, and combined disturbances.
    • An applied assessment of agentic aggregator pricing schemes and prompt configurations, deriving
      policy and market-design implications for tariff transparency, value-sharing, and PTO-compatible
      participation in V2G flexibility markets.

    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature on electric
bus charging, aggregation mechanisms, and emerging agentic AI applications in energy systems. Section 3
presents the proposed methodology, including the framework architecture, agentic supervisory logic, and
optimization interface. Section 4 describes the case study used to instantiate the framework. Section 5
reports and discusses the main results, including DA operation, RT disturbances, pricing behavior, and
prompt sensitivity. Section 6 concludes the paper, discusses policy implications, and outlines directions
for future research.


2     Literature Review
The transition toward electric bus systems represents a fundamental shift in public transport, extending
beyond vehicle electrification to the coordinated management of fleets, infrastructure, and energy systems.
As electrification scales, operational decisions become increasingly coupled with electricity markets, grid
constraints, and multi-actor interactions, requiring integrated approaches that combine optimization,
economic coordination, and system-level intelligence. This literature review examines three converging
research streams: electric bus optimization-based charging and pricing strategies, fleet–grid interaction
through aggregation mechanisms, and emerging agentic AI frameworks for system orchestration.

2.1     Optimization-Based Charging and Pricing Strategies
Optimization remains the dominant analytical paradigm for electric bus charging management. A large
part of the literature focuses on scheduling charging activities under battery constraints, charging windows,
electricity tariffs, and infrastructure limits. Representative examples include integrated models for charger
deployment and fleet scheduling [16], general charging scheduling formulations under time-of-use tariffs
and station capacity constraints [17], and facility planning approaches that explicitly consider uncertainty
in travel times, battery degradation, and charger technology choices [18]. Other studies extend the
operational scope by incorporating seasonality, power matching, and infrastructure design [19], by jointly
optimizing fleet composition and scheduling across multiple depots and charging technologies [20], or by
handling large network-scale charging schedules through branch-and-price and adaptive neighborhood
search methods [21]. Recent work also shows growing interest in scalable heuristics for real-world agencies,
with applications to fleet electrification and charger allocation under time-varying electricity prices [22].
Another important stream emphasizes operational realism beyond the minimization of daily charging costs.
Battery degradation has been incorporated through both dynamic programming approaches that match
workloads to battery aging [23] and formulations that embed degradation directly into network-scale
scheduling [24]. Related studies also explore coupling bus charging with local energy resources or grid
services. For example, battery charging and discharging, demand response, and renewable integration
have been examined in public transport settings [25], while photovoltaic-storage-charging coordination
has been proposed to reduce external grid purchases and improve local energy autonomy [26].

2.2     Electric Bus Aggregation and Fleet–Grid Interaction
Lately, research on electric bus systems has increasingly shifted from vehicle-level feasibility questions to
fleet-level coordination with charging infrastructure and electricity markets. Early studies established that
the operational viability of electric buses depends strongly on route characteristics, charging opportunities,
infrastructure siting, and realistic estimates of energy consumption [27, 28]. More recent review work
confirms that electric bus scheduling has evolved into a multi-layer problem involving vehicle assignment,
charging management, infrastructure design, and robustness considerations rather than a simple charging-
timing exercise [29]. As the scale of electrification increases, these issues become inseparable from grid
interaction, since concentrated depot charging and opportunity charging can create large, time-varying
loads with direct implications for peak demand, flexibility provision, and local network planning [30]. In


                                                      3
this broader context, the aggregator serves as a useful intermediary, consolidating flexibility, translating
market signals, and coordinating assets that would otherwise be difficult for a PTO to manage directly
[31]. For example, Cao et al. [32] developed a robust optimization model for scheduling an EV aggregator
under upstream market price uncertainty, showing that different charging and discharging strategies can
protect the aggregator’s profits across optimistic, deterministic, and pessimistic price scenarios. Clairand
et al. [33] showed that accounting for the aggregator in charging station planning can reduce energy costs
while respecting grid constraints. Chen and Strunz [34] proposed an aggregator-based framework for
coordinating multi-area, multifunctional electric bus charging stations that support normal charging, fast
charging, and battery swapping, while integrating renewable energy procurement and frequency-control
ancillary services to reduce operating costs. More recently, the framework of Manzolli et al. [35] explicitly
modeled the interaction between an aggregator and a PTO through a hierarchical optimization structure.
In that formulation, the aggregator participates in energy trading and defines pricing signals, while
the PTO schedules charging and discharging activities subject to service requirements. Taken together,
these studies support the idea that fleet-grid interaction is not only a charging problem, but also an
intermediation and coordination problem in which the aggregator plays a central role. However, these
studies usually assume that the relevant data are already available and that the decision to rerun the
optimization is externally determined rather than reasoned about within the framework itself. Moreover,
these studies treat the aggregator’s pricing role as a technical design choice rather than a source of
economic risk to the PTO, leaving the regulatory implications of aggregator tariff-setting power largely
unexamined.

2.3    Agentic Orchestration for Energy Systems
Recent advances in agentic AI, enabled largely by large language models (LLMs), have opened a new line
of inquiry into their roles in energy and cyber-physical systems. Existing studies generally do not argue
that these models should replace formal optimization or physics-based models. Instead, they suggest that
they may be useful as semantic and decision-support layers that can interpret heterogeneous information,
support operator interaction, orchestrate tools, and improve monitoring workflows. Majumder et al.
[36] discuss both the promise and the limitations of LLMs in the electric energy sector, emphasizing
their usefulness for knowledge-intensive tasks while also warning about hallucinations, reliability, and
domain grounding. Zhang et al. [37] similarly frame language-enabled AI as an enabling technology
for information integration, decision support, and human–AI collaboration across energy applications.
Emerging review work on smart grids also highlights the relevance of agentic AI to grid operations,
market analysis, security support, and adaptive energy services when deployed within carefully designed
supervisory architectures [38, 39]. Although this literature is still young, a common message is already
emerging: the comparative advantage of agentic AI lies less in directly solving constrained optimization
problems and more in orchestrating complex information flows around specialized analytical tools. This
is especially relevant for energy systems where data are fragmented across operational databases, market
signals, textual procedures, alarms, and engineering models. For EV aggregation, such capabilities
could support state interpretation, pricing-policy enforcement, and the triggering of optimization runs
under changing system conditions. However, concrete frameworks that connect multi-agent supervisory
reasoning to electric bus fleet optimization remain scarce in the peer-reviewed literature.

2.4    Research Gap
The reviewed literature reveals five main observations. First, studies on electric buses have already
demonstrated the importance of fleet-aware charging coordination, fleet planning, and realistic operational
constraints. Second, aggregator-oriented research has shown that intermediary entities can improve the
economic and operational integration of flexible loads with electricity markets. Third, related optimization
work has advanced considerably in areas such as uncertainty modeling, infrastructure design, battery
degradation, and market-responsive scheduling. Fourth, the emerging AI-for-energy literature suggests
that agentic supervisory systems may be useful for orchestration, interpretation, and decision support,
but it remains mostly conceptual or broadly scoped at the grid level. Fifth, neither the aggregator-fleet
literature nor the emerging agentic AI literature has examined the regulatory implications of deploying
AI-driven pricing agents in energy markets, systems whose pricing aggressiveness can be reconfigured
through prompt design alone, without any structural change visible to regulators or PTOs.
    What remains is a framework that integrates these strands into a unified operational architecture.
In particular, the literature still lacks an approach that simultaneously integrates: i) aggregator-fleet


                                                     4
optimization grounded in electric bus operational constraints; ii) context-aware orchestration of heteroge-
neous fleet and market information; iii) event-triggered re-optimization based on deviations, disturbances,
or opportunity signals; and iv) coordination-mode reasoning in the pricing layer, such as contrasting
operational-based and profit-based aggregator strategies. The literature also lacks any quantitative
assessment of how aggregator coordination mode and prompt configuration affect PTO economic ex-
posure, and what regulatory measures this implies. This paper addresses these gaps by embedding a
multi-agent supervisory layer into the aggregator setting, while preserving the optimization engine as the
constraint-enforcing core of the decision process, and by drawing explicit policy implications from the
quantitative comparison of aggregator coordination modes.


3     Methodology
The proposed methodology is organized around the separation between agentic supervision and
optimization-based feasibility enforcement. Section 3.1 introduces the overall framework architecture
and explains how the fleet, grid, and agentic aggregator layer interact. Section 3.2 details the agentic
aggregator framework, including the supervisory agents, coordination modes, and event-triggered
re-optimization logic. Section 3.3 then presents the compact PTO scheduling and optimization interface
governed by the agentic layer. Appendix B provides the full optimization formulation, the real-time
re-optimization updates, and the formal supervisory flow that connects the agentic layer to the optimizer.

3.1    Overall Framework
As illustrated in Figure 1, the proposed framework is organized around three coupled components: the
fleet and charging system, the grid and market environment, and the multi-agentic aggregator layer that
coordinates the interaction between them.
    On the fleet side, the framework receives operational information, including bus state-of-charge
(SOC), battery limits, charger availability, trip assignments, departure and arrival times, and disturbance
information related to timetable delays and route-energy deviations. These data define the physical
feasibility region of the problem, since charging and discharging decisions must preserve transport service
while respecting battery and infrastructure constraints. On the grid and market side, the framework
receives electricity prices, power limits, and V2G flexibility opportunities. These two information streams
differ in format, timescale, and reliability: fleet states may change during service execution, whereas
market signals may vary at hourly or sub-hourly intervals.
    The aggregator layer acts as the coordination interface between the fleet and the grid. In the day-
ahead (DA) workflow, the Pricing Agent translates the selected coordination mode into structured pricing
guidance, and the Evaluator Agent assesses the resulting schedule against economic and operational
criteria. In the real-time (RT) workflow, the Trigger Agent monitors deviations from the DA reference
and decides whether operating conditions justify re-optimization. If re-optimization is triggered, the
Pricing Agent and Evaluator Agent are invoked again over the remaining horizon.
    This architecture preserves the main strengths of optimization-based fleet scheduling, namely explicit
constraints, reproducible decisions, and feasibility guarantees, while adding a contextual reasoning layer
for event-driven operation. The optimization engine remains the decision core for computing feasible
charging and discharging schedules. The multi-agentic layer does not replace this optimizer; rather, it
acts as a supervisory mechanism that determines when the optimizer should be called, what pricing
posture should be used, and whether the resulting schedule should be accepted.

3.2    Agentic Aggregator Framework
In the proposed framework, the aggregator’s pricing and coordination function is performed by specialized
supervisory agents rather than by a direct optimization over tariff variables. The agents produce structured
decisions around a constrained PTO scheduling interface, which is summarized in Section 3.3 and fully
stated in Appendix B. This separation is important: the agents govern pricing guidance, triggering, and
schedule acceptance, whereas the optimizer enforces the operational constraints of the bus fleet, chargers,
batteries, and V2G exchanges.
    At the agentic level, the price-guidance vector uτ contains bounded buy and sell multipliers for each
tariff period. Given this guidance and the current fleet–grid context, the optimizer returns a candidate
schedule s∗τ and the associated KPIs, including PTO cost, aggregator revenue, V2G activity, feasibility



                                                     5
 Figure 1: Proposed framework for electric bus fleet–grid interaction coordinated by the agentic aggregator.




                                            (a) DA architecture.




                                            (b) RT architecture.
        Figure 2: Implemented DA and RT workflow architectures for the multi-agentic aggregator.

status, and terminal SOC. The tariff mapping and the compact PTO optimization model are introduced
in Section 3.3.
    As shown in Figure 2, the implementation is divided into two event-driven workflows. The DA
workflow creates the daily reference plan, while the RT workflow repeatedly evaluates whether that
reference remains valid under updated market and fleet conditions.
    Table 1 summarizes the three supervisory agents used in the implemented workflows. The implementa-
tion avoids unconstrained free-text prompting by requiring domain-bounded instructions and structured
outputs that can be validated before they affect the optimization engine.
    The agent outputs are restricted to structured actions such as optimize, skip, or rerun, bounded
price-guidance vectors, confidence levels, and acceptance decisions. These restrictions are essential in
a cyber-physical setting because they prevent the agentic aggregator from acting as an unconstrained
controller. The framework is therefore best understood as a two-timescale orchestration layer that adds
context awareness, adaptive triggering, and economic guidance around a formal scheduling model. The
architecture was implemented as two complementary event-driven workflows using n8n as the orchestration
environment. Persistent state variables encoding the last accepted decision, historical outcomes, and
coordination-mode configuration are maintained across timesteps.

3.2.1   Day-Ahead and Real-Time Workflows
The DA workflow constructs the daily reference plan. The Pricing Agent first proposes buy and sell
multipliers for each tariff period according to the selected coordination mode. These multipliers are


                                                     6
                             Table 1: Agent roles in the implemented workflows.
 Agent              Main prompt content                     Expected structured output
 Trigger Agent      Current context, DA plan                Trigger decision δτ ∈ {skip, optimize} with ratio-
                    summary, disturbance indica-            nale and confidence score
                    tors, price deviation, energy-
                    consumption deviation, service-
                    delay indicators, and feasibility
                    risk flags
 Pricing Agent      Coordination mode, market con-          Price-guidance vector uτ containing bounded
                    ditions, average prices, recent         buy/sell multipliers per tariff period
                    outcomes, best-known multipli-
                    ers, and pricing structures for
                    aggregator–PTO trading
 Evaluator          Optimization result, feasibility        Accept or rerun decision aτ , rationale ℓτ , confi-
 Agent              status, PTO cost, aggregator rev-       dence γτ , and adjusted guidance request
                    enue, V2G activity, disturbance
                    indicators, rerun count, and ac-
                    ceptance criteria

converted into PTO-facing buy and sell tariffs by the optimization interface described in Section 3.3. The
optimizer then produces a fleet charging and V2G schedule, and the Evaluator Agent either accepts the
result or requests a bounded revision with updated guidance. This loop repeats up to Rmax times, and
the best accepted plan is exported as the DA reference schedule s∗DA . Algorithm 1 details this sequence.
Algorithm 1 DA planning workflow
 1: Fetch fleet, charger, trip, disturbance, and market data for day d
 2: Select coordination mode m ∈ {operational-based, profit-based}
 3: Build decision context cDA d   = Ψ(fd , gd , hd , m), loading historical memory hd from prior accepted
      outcomes
 4: for r = 0, . . . , Rmax do
                               DA      +      −
 5:    Pricing Agent proposes ud,r = {αp,r , αp,r }p∈P
                                              −
 6:               DA
       Convert ud,r     into tariffs {ρ+
                                       p,r , ρp,r }p∈P
 7:    Solve PTO optimization and return schedule s∗d,r
 8:    Compute KPIs: feasibility, PTO cost, aggregator revenue, V2G energy, and terminal SOC
 9:    Evaluator Agent returns (ad,r , ℓd,r , γd,r )
10:    if ad,r = accept or r = Rmax then
11:        Save s∗d,r , KPIs, tariffs, and agent rationale
12:        Export accepted DA plan as s∗DA
13:        break
14:    else
15:        Update pricing memory and prepare constrained rerun guidance
16:    end if
17: end for

    The RT workflow updates this plan only when operating conditions justify intervention. At each
30-minute interval, the Trigger Agent compares the current fleet and market state against the active
reference schedule. If no material deviation is detected, the previous schedule is retained. If re-optimization
is triggered, the Pricing Agent and Evaluator Agent are invoked under the same logic as in the DA
workflow, but the optimizer runs only over the remaining horizon from the current timestep. The updated
optimization uses observed SOC, service state, electricity prices, and revised route-energy requirements.
Algorithm 2 details this sequence.
    The formal mathematical definitions of the agent policies and their connection to the PTO scheduling
problem are given in Appendix B.3.

3.2.2    Aggregator Coordination Modes: Profit-based and Operational-based
The agentic aggregator can be configured according to different coordination modes that define its
economic posture when it proposes price guidance and evaluates candidate schedules. Two modes are
considered: profit-based and operational-based.


                                                        7
Algorithm 2 RT adaptation workflow
 1: Load last accepted plan s∗                      ∗
                             τ −1 and DA reference sDA
 2: Fetch current fleet, charger, disturbance, and market data
 3: Build current context cRT τ = Ψ(fτ , gτ , hτ , m)
 4: Trigger Agent evaluates Tτ and returns δτ
 5: if δτ = skip then
 6:     Set s∗τ ← s∗τ −1 and log trigger rationale
 7: else
 8:    for r = 0, . . . , Rmax do
                                                         RT
 9:        Pricing Agent proposes updated guidance uτ,r
10:        Solve PTO optimization from the current state and return s∗τ,r
11:        Compute RT KPIs and deviation from s∗DA
12:        Evaluator Agent returns (aτ,r , ℓτ,r , γτ,r )
13:        if aτ,r = accept or r = Rmax then
14:            Save s∗τ ← s∗τ,r and update memory
15:            break
16:        else
17:            Restrict the next guidance update using evaluator feedback
18:        end if
19:    end for
20: end if
21: Use s∗
         τ as the reference at timestep τ + 1


      • In the profit-based mode, the aggregator behaves as a commercially oriented intermediary. The
        Pricing Agent is allowed to propose higher charging-price multipliers when the PTO buys energy
        and lower V2G compensation multipliers when the PTO exports energy. This mode represents an
        upper-bound case for per-fleet value capture, since it reveals how much revenue the aggregator can
        obtain when market margin is the dominant coordination objective. It also exposes the associated
        PTO-side cost burden, which would need to be justified through contracts, reliability guarantees, or
        explicit value-sharing rules.
      • In the operational-based mode, the aggregator behaves as a fleet-oriented coordinator. The objective
        is not to eliminate aggregator revenue, but to make grid participation compatible with public
        transport operation. The Pricing Agent therefore favors lower charging-price multipliers and higher
        V2G compensation multipliers, reducing the PTO’s exposure to electricity-price markups and
        returning more value to the fleet when it provides flexibility. This mode reflects an aggregator
        operated by a public institution, a regulated platform, or a private provider whose business model
        depends on long-term fleet participation and portfolio scale.

   For each tariff period p, the buy multiplier αp+ and the sell multiplier αp− proposed by the Pricing
Agent are bounded by mode-dependent ranges:

                              α+    +    +
                               m ≤ αp ≤ αm ,           α−    −    −
                                                        m ≤ αp ≤ αm ,          ∀p ∈ P,                             (1)

where m denotes the selected coordination mode. In the operational-based mode, these bounds restrict
the aggregator to PTO-compatible pricing ranges. In the profit-based mode, they allow wider margins for
aggregator value capture. The bounds therefore make the aggregator’s economic posture explicit while
keeping the agent-generated tariffs within predefined and auditable limits. The conversion from these
multipliers to PTO-facing tariffs is given in Section 3.3.
   After a candidate schedule is produced by the optimizer, the Evaluator Agent assesses whether the
result is consistent with the selected mode through a mode-dependent supervisory score:

                                  Jm (uτ , s∗τ ) = λA  Agg
                                                    m Πτ   − λP  PTO
                                                              m Cτ   − λR
                                                                        m Rτ ,                                     (2)

where ΠAgg
        τ  is aggregator revenue, CτPTO is PTO operating cost, and Rτ is a supervisory operational-risk
      1
score. The revenue and cost terms are defined by the optimization interface in Section 3.3 and by the
   1 The term R is not an additional constraint in the PTO optimization model. It is an evaluation metric used by the
                 τ
agentic layer to discourage schedules with weak service robustness, low terminal SOC margins, or unresolved operational
warnings.



                                                          8
formal supervisory flow in Appendix B.3. The decomposition of Rτ is given by
                                Rτ = ωSOC RτSOC + ωend Rτend + ωserv Rτserv ,                             (3)
where RτSOC captures low-SOC exposure during the remaining horizon, Rτend captures end-of-day readiness
risk, and Rτserv captures service-feasibility warnings. In the operational-based mode, λP           R
                                                                                            m and λm are
                    A
larger relative to λm , so the supervisory layer favors lower PTO cost and more robust schedules. In
the profit-based mode, λA m is larger, so higher aggregator revenue receives greater weight, provided that
feasibility remains acceptable.

3.2.3   Event-Triggered Re-Optimization Logic
The event-triggered logic determines when the RT workflow should rerun the PTO optimization model.
At each RT interval τ , the Trigger Agent compares the observed operating context with the assumptions
embedded in the active reference plan. Three disturbance classes are monitored. The first class includes
electricity-price deviations, which may change the economic value of charging or V2G export. The second
class includes route-energy deviations, which affect SOC trajectories and may reduce the energy margin
available for service or flexibility. The third class includes service-timing disturbances, such as early or
late arrivals, which modify depot dwell times and charging opportunities.
    These signals are converted into normalized indicators and summarized by a compact trigger score:
                                       Tτ = ωp ∆pτ + ωe ∆eτ + ωd ∆dτ ,                                    (4)
where ∆pτ measures the normalized price deviation, ∆eτ measures the normalized route-energy deviation,
and ∆dτ measures service-delay severity. The weights ωp , ωe , and ωd reflect the relative importance of
market, energy, and service-timing deviations in the triggering logic. A new RT optimization run is
activated when the aggregate trigger score exceeds a predefined threshold or when a hard feasibility
warning is detected:
                                        Tτ ≥ Θ or FRτ = 1.                                           (5)
Here, Θ is the trigger threshold and FRτ is a binary flag identifying cases in which the current reference
plan should not continue without intervention. This flag is defined as

                             FRτ = I ∃k ∈ K : eobs      min
                                                             ∨ epred       end
                                     
                                                k,τ < Ek         k,T < Ek
                                                                                                      (6)
                                                           ∨ TRk,τ = 1 ,
                                                                                                   pred
where I[·] is an indicator function, eobs
                                       k,τ is the observed stored energy of bus k at interval τ , ek,T is the
terminal stored energy expected if the current reference schedule is maintained, and TRk,τ indicates
whether bus k is at risk of missing an active or upcoming service assignment.
    If neither condition in Eq. (5) is satisfied, the RT workflow keeps the current reference schedule and
no optimization is solved. If the trigger condition is satisfied, the PTO optimization model is rerun from
the current interval to the end of the operating day using the observed SOC, service state, updated
electricity prices, and observed route-level energy requirements. The accepted RT solution then becomes
the new reference schedule for subsequent intervals. Figure 3 exemplifies this dynamic.

3.3     PTO Scheduling and Optimization Interface
The agents described above govern a public transport operator (PTO) charging-scheduling model. This
subsection states the compact optimization interface used in the body of the paper. The complete
constraint set, the RT re-optimization variant, and the formal connection between the supervisory layer
and the optimizer are provided in Appendix B.
   Let p ∈ P index tariff periods, t ∈ T time intervals, k ∈ K buses, n ∈ N chargers, and i ∈ I routes.
The PTO decides route assignments bk,i,t , charging xk,n,t , V2G discharging yk,n,t , stored energy ek,t , and
the aggregate depot power exchanged with the grid, wt+ for import and wt− for export.
   The Pricing Agent proposes period multipliers αp+ and αp− , which are mapped into the PTO-facing
buy and sell tariffs by scaling the average grid price π̄pg :

                                ρ+    + g
                                 p = αp π̄p ,     ρ−    − g
                                                   p = αp π̄p ,      ∀p ∈ P.                              (7)
Given these tariffs, the PTO selects a schedule s∗ that minimizes its net energy-trading cost:
                                           s∗ ∈ arg min C PTO (s),                                        (8)
                                                    s∈S


                                                      9
where                                          Xh                           i
                                                                    −     −
                                 C PTO (s) =           ρ+   w
                                                        p(t) t
                                                              +
                                                                − ρ     w
                                                                    p(t) t ∆t,                         (9)
                                               t∈T

and S is the feasible set defined by the operational constraints.
   The binding energy dynamics are given by the per-bus SOC balance:
                                               X
                               ek,t+1 = ek,t +    ηnch Pnch xk,n,t ∆t
                                                 n∈N
                                           X                            X                             (10)
                                                  1    dis
                                       −          dis Pn yk,n,t ∆t −
                                                 ηn
                                                                              ξi bk,i,t ,
                                           n∈N                          i∈I

subject to battery limits and terminal-energy requirements,

                          Ekmin ≤ ek,t ≤ Ekmax ,         ek,0 = Ek0 ,     ek,T ≥ Ekend .              (11)

The feasible set also includes route–charger exclusivity, so that a bus cannot charge and serve a route in
the same interval; per-charger occupancy constraints; depot-power aggregation constraints,
                                 X X                           X X
                          wt+ =          Pnch xk,n,t ,  wt− =           Pndis yk,n,t ;                (12)
                                k∈K n∈N                             k∈K n∈N

and depot exchange limits,
                                     0 ≤ wt+ ≤ W ,           0 ≤ wt− ≤ W .                            (13)
The full mathematical formulation is deferred to Appendix B to keep the body of the methodology
focused on the agentic coordination logic.


4     Case Study Description
The case study evaluates the proposed agentic aggregator in a controlled electric-bus depot setting. The
system includes the main elements required for fleet-grid coordination: buses, battery limits, depot
chargers, route-service windows, route-level energy requirements, and time-varying electricity prices. The
analysis is organized in two stages. First, the DA evaluation defines the reference schedule under nominal
conditions. Second, the RT evaluation introduces controlled disturbances in service timing, route energy
consumption, and electricity prices. In the following, we describe the bus-system characteristics and the
DA and RT evaluation scenarios, respectively.

4.1     Fleet and Charging Configuration
The fleet and infrastructure configuration is summarized in Table 2. The case study involves a depot-based
electric bus system with 8 buses, each with a battery capacity of 365 kWh and an initial SOC of 20%,
served by 8 chargers rated at 200 kW. At the depot level, the charging process is coordinated over
48 half-hour intervals, and the case-study instance is evaluated under DA conditions before moving to
RT adjustments. This setting remains representative of a realistic fleet depot in which charger ratings,
aggregate energy availability, and service schedules jointly constrain operations.
    The operational side is defined through 8 route blocks with heterogeneous service windows. According
to the trip-time sheet, route activity starts between 05:30 and 07:00 and finishes between 18:30 and 23:00,
leaving different charging opportunities before, between, and after service blocks. Figure 4 shows these
windows for each vehicle. The corresponding nominal route energy-consumption values range from 0.859
to 0.923 kWh/km, with an average of approximately 0.891 kWh/km, which is sufficiently demanding to
make both dwell-time compression and route-energy deviations operationally consequential.
    The electricity-market inputs are summarized in Table 3. Spot-market prices range from approximately
0.067 to 0.122 EUR/kWh, with a daily mean of about 0.090 EUR/kWh. In the DA analysis, this profile
is the common benchmark price seen by the non-agentic scenarios and the reference against which the
multi-agentic aggregator defines PTO buy and sell tariffs. In the RT analysis, the same base profile serves
as the anchor for determining whether the system remained on the DA tariff or switched to a revised RT
tariff after an accepted re-optimization.




                                                        10
             Day-ahead planning                     Reference schedule                                                    Operation

             SOC                               Charging, service, and V2G plan                                Potential disturbances in operation
             timetables                                                                                       (Energy prices, consumption, delays)
             battery
             constraints
             charger
             availability



                     Plan               1      Operation (no disturbances)             𝜏                         Operation (Remaining horizon)         T



                                                                                 No
                                                                                           Continue current schedule
                   Observed at time 𝜏

               Actual SOC                                                                                                       Update schedule
               Service state (delays)                            Re-optimize                Re-optimize from 𝜏 to T
                                                                                                                              New charging and route
               Updated energy prices                                                        past decisions unchanged
                                                                                                                                   assignments
               Observed energy consumption

                                                                             Yes
                                                                                            Same model as day-ahead
                                                                                               with update inputs


                                                  Figure 3: Real-time optimization logic.
                 Table 2: Main fleet, infrastructure, and horizon parameters in the case study.
                                            Parameter                                                Value
                                            Number of buses                                            8
                                            Battery capacity per bus                               365 kWh
                                            Initial SOC per bus                                       20%
                                            Number of chargers                                         8
                                            Charger rating                                          200 kW
                                            Routes                                                     8
                                            Scheduling horizon                                        24 h
                                            Time discretization                               30 min (48 intervals)

4.2    Day-Ahead Planning Strategies
The DA analysis is organized around four strategies that progressively move from non-agentic charging
benchmarks toward agent-guided aggregator coordination. These strategies are summarized in Table 4.
    The first two strategies provide operational baselines: a rule-based "dumb charging" policy and an
optimization-based smart-charging policy without V2G participation. The last two strategies activate the
pricing role of the multi-agentic aggregator under profit-based and operational-based coordination. They
aim to show how different aggregator postures affect the balance between grid-facing flexibility value and
PTO-facing operating needs.

4.3    Real-Time Evaluation Scenarios
The RT evaluation examines how the multi-agentic aggregator responds when observed operating conditions
diverge from the accepted DA reference plan, s∗DA . Controlled perturbations are introduced in service
timing, route energy consumption, electricity prices, and selected combined cases, representing typical
mismatches between planning assumptions and realized electric-bus operation. Table 5 summarizes the
evaluated RT disturbance scenarios.
    The experiment uses structured input files to emulate 30-minute operational updates. At each RT
interval, the workflow builds the observed system context and applies the trigger logic introduced in
Section 3.2.3. If δτ = skip, the active schedule is maintained and the monitoring record is updated.
If δτ = optimize, the optimization model is solved from the current observed state, and the resulting
schedule is evaluated, accepted, or sent to a bounded rerun.




                                                                                      11
                                     Bus 1
                                     Bus 2
                                     Bus 3


                  Vehicle schedule
                                     Bus 4
                                     Bus 5
                                     Bus 6
                                     Bus 7
                                     Bus 8
                                              7.5    10.0     12.5       15.0      17.5   20.0   22.5
                                                                     Hour of day
                 Figure 4: Daily service windows extracted from the trip-time input sheet.
                                 Table 3: Electricity-price characteristics of the case-study instance.
                                             Price parameter                  Value
                                             Spot price range        0.067–0.122 EUR/kWh
                                             Average spot price         0.090 EUR/kWh
                                             Number of intervals               48
                                             Interval duration               30 min

5     Results and Discussion
5.1    Day-Ahead Optimization Results
Table 6 compares the four DA scenarios and shows a clear progression from conservative charging to
flexibility-based operation.
    Dumb charging (S1) provides the conservative baseline, with the highest PTO cost (218.10 EUR/day),
the largest grid purchase (2400 kWh/day), and the highest average terminal SOC (52.38%). Smart
charging without V2G (S2) reduces the PTO cost by 40.2%, to 130.47 EUR/day, by shifting charging to
lower-cost periods and reducing purchases to 1600 kWh/day, although the terminal SOC falls to 25.61%.
The agentic cases (S3 and S4) add bidirectional grid exchange, but they express different reconciliation
policies through both tariffs and dispatch. The profit-based mode (S3) buys 1900 kWh/day and sells
300 kWh/day, raising aggregator revenue to 20.30 EUR/day but increasing PTO cost to 140.59 EUR/day.
The operational-based mode (S4) buys 2000 kWh/day and sells 400 kWh/day, reaching the lowest PTO
cost, 118.91 EUR/day, while reducing aggregator revenue to 2.39 EUR/day.
    Figure 5 explains how the two agentic cases create different financial outcomes through the tariff
vectors selected by the Pricing Agent.
    The time-varying tariff trajectories show that the profit-based mode maintains a pricing structure
that is more favorable to the aggregator, while the operational-based mode keeps the charging tariff
close to the spot price and increases the V2G compensation. The weighted average prices make this
contrast clearer: the operational-based case combines a lower average buy tariff (0.0826 EUR/kWh) with
a substantially higher sell-back tariff (0.1158 EUR/kWh), whereas the profit-based case combines a higher
buy tariff (0.0874 EUR/kWh) with a lower sell-back tariff (0.0847 EUR/kWh). The agentic layer therefore
modifies how the economic value of flexibility is distributed between the PTO and the aggregator. The
power and energy profiles in Figure 6 show the operational behavior behind these results.
    In S1, charging is concentrated early in the horizon and remains purely unidirectional. This explains the
large energy purchase and the high terminal SOC observed. In S2, charging is concentrated in a narrower
time window, indicating that the optimizer selects more favorable charging periods instead of charging
immediately whenever buses are available. The agentic cases, S3 and S4, introduce discharge events near
the end of the horizon, but the operational-based case exports more energy than the profit-based case.
The SOC trajectories provide an additional operational interpretation. All scenarios respect the 20%
lower SOC bound, but they use the available battery reserve differently. S1 keeps the largest energy
buffer, ending at 52.38% average SOC. S2 reduces this buffer to 25.61%, which reflects a more efficient
use of the battery capacity for cost minimization. S3 ends at 23.44% average SOC after 300 kWh/day
of V2G export, whereas S4 ends at 22.72% after 400 kWh/day of export. The operational-based DA
plan therefore gives the PTO both lower tariff exposure and a larger sell-back opportunity, while the
profit-based plan retains more margin for the aggregator from a smaller export volume.


                                                                     12
                                          Table 4: DA strategies considered in the evaluation design.

ID                   Strategy                           V2G        Main purpose
S1                   Dumb charging                      Off        Rule-based benchmark that charges buses as early as possible without
                                                                   market-responsive optimization.
S2                   Smart charging (no V2G) Off                   Deterministic cost-minimizing charging benchmark using spot-
                                                                   market prices directly.
S3                   Profit-based aggregator            On         Agent-guided pricing case in which the aggregator prioritizes per-
                                                                   fleet revenue and stronger tariff margins while preserving feasibility.
S4                   Operational-based aggre- On                   Agent-guided pricing case in which the aggregator prioritizes PTO-
                     gator                                         compatible flexibility provision and lower tariff exposure.

                                                                                                                           SOC-weighted DA tariffs
                                          DA tariff trajectories                                           0.14
          0.18                                                                                             0.12                                           0.116
          0.16
                                                                                                           0.10
          0.14                                                                                                    0.087     0.085            0.083
                                                                                                           0.08
                                                                                                 EUR/kWh
          0.12
EUR/kWh                                                                                                    0.06
          0.10
          0.08                                                                                             0.04
          0.06
                                                                                                           0.02
          0.04
                 0                  12              24               36                     48             0.00
                                                Timestep                                                           Profit-based             Operational-based
                       Spot               Profit-based sell        Operational-based sell
                       Profit-based buy   Operational-based buy                                                               Buy tariff    Sell tariff

                        (a) Time-varying buy and sell tariffs.                                                (b) SOC-weighted average tariffs.
Figure 5: DA tariff comparison for the agentic scenarios. Panel (a) shows the time-varying buy and sell price
curves. Panel (b) reports the corresponding SOC-weighted average buy and sell price levels.

    These results indicate that the main economic gain comes first from optimized charging, which reduces
unnecessary energy purchases and shifts charging toward lower-cost periods. V2G adds a second layer
of value by allowing the fleet to export energy, but the benefit depends strongly on the coordination
mode selected by the aggregator. The profit-based mode favors aggregator revenue through a larger tariff
spread, while the operational-based mode favors PTO-compatible participation through lower buy prices,
higher sell-back compensation, and greater export. This point is important for the RT analysis, because
the accepted DA plan establishes the expected cost, the aggregator revenue target, and the SOC margin
available to absorb RT deviations.

5.2                  Real-Time Disturbance Results
For consistency, RT deltas are computed against the DA reference of the corresponding coordination
mode, and the applied tariffs are reconstructed at the timestep level: when no accepted RT tariff update
is active, the DA multiplier vector is used; once the RT workflow accepts an updated vector, the executed
tariff applies from that timestep onward. For price-disturbance cases the market price is additionally
scaled during the disturbance window. The weighted buy and sell tariffs reported below follow Eq. (14):
                                     P + +                    P − −
                                +      t wt ρp(t) ∆t      −      t wt ρp(t) ∆t
                              ρ̄ = P +               ,  ρ̄ = P −               .                     (14)
                                          t wt ∆t                   t wt ∆t

    We organize the analysis by disturbance family and report both coordination modes together, since
the central result is the difference between them. Per-scenario outcomes for the two modes are collected
in Tables 7 and 8, and the matched mode difference (operational-based minus profit-based) in Table 9;
the prose highlights the governing mechanism rather than restating individual values.
Delay disturbances. Timing shifts raise PTO cost in both modes by compressing the windows available
for charging and export, but the modes recover differently. Profit-based operation holds sell tariffs low,
so the aggregator recoups margin from the charging side and the fleet retains the unexported energy as
elevated terminal SOC (about 28–31%). Operational-based operation instead pairs a lower buy tariff


                                                                                   13
Table 5: RT scenarios in the evaluation design. Each scenario is analyzed using profit-based (S3) and operational-
based (S4) strategies.

Scenario      Family           Disturbance         Time              Description
D+30          Service          +30 min delay       04:30–09:00       Early-day delay compresses depot charg-
beg.          timing                                                 ing windows and reduces V2G export op-
                                                                     portunities.
D-30 beg.                      −30 min early       04:30–09:00       Early-day early return creates unplanned
                               return                                dwell time; tests whether the schedule
                                                                     recovers flexibility.
D+30 end                       +30 min delay       17:30–24:00       Late-day delay shortens the end-of-day
                                                                     charging window and threatens terminal
                                                                     SOC reserve.
D-30 end                       −30 min early       17:30–24:00       Late-day early return frees time near the
                               return                                end of the horizon; tests V2G export re-
                                                                     sponse.
E+50          Route            +50%                06:00–20:00       Higher traction demand raises grid pur-
              energy           kWh/km, all                           chases, depletes SOC reserve, and sup-
                               buses                                 presses V2G.
E-50                           −50%                06:00–20:00       Lower traction demand frees surplus SOC;
                               kWh/km, all                           tests whether the aggregator expands
                               buses                                 V2G export.
P+25          Electricity      +25% spot           02:30–05:00       Moderate positive price shock; tests tariff-
              price            price                                 guided reduction of charging during the
                                                                     window.
P-25                           −25% spot           02:30–05:00       Moderate negative price shock; tests
                               price                                 whether the aggregator shifts charging
                                                                     into the low-price window.
P+50                           +50% spot           02:30–05:00       Strong positive price shock; tests the up-
                               price                                 per bound of tariff exposure and V2G
                                                                     suppression.
P-50                           −50% spot           02:30–05:00       Strong negative price shock; tests maxi-
                               price                                 mum charging shift and V2G compensa-
                                                                     tion response.
C-Seq         Combined         P + 50 then         02:30–05:00,      Sequential arrival of market, energy, and
                               E + 50 then         12:30–15:00,      timing stressors; each disturbance re-
                               D + 30              17:30–24:00       solved before the next arrives.
C-All 5–                       P + 50, E +         02:30–24:00       Full-day simultaneous stress; all three dis-
48                             50, D + 30                            turbance types active across most of the
                               simultaneous                          operating horizon.
C-All 5–                       P + 50, E +         02:30–12:30       Early/midday simultaneous stress; distur-
25                             50, D + 30                            bances resolve shortly after midday, leav-
                               simultaneous                          ing a clean late horizon.
C-All 20–                      P + 50, E +         10:00–24:00       Late-morning-to-end-of-day simultaneous
48                             50, D + 30                            stress; disturbances begin after the morn-
                               simultaneous                          ing period with limited remaining horizon
                                                                     to recover.

with a substantially higher sell tariff, which contains PTO cost exposure even when discharge windows
are reduced; every matched delay case is cheaper for the PTO than its profit-based counterpart.
Energy-consumption disturbances. The two energy cases act in opposite directions. Under higher
consumption (E + 50) grid purchases rise and export is suppressed (profit-based) or only partially
preserved (operational-based), and PTO cost increases in both modes. The lower-consumption case
(E − 50) is more revealing. In profit-based mode it produces a counterintuitive outcome: despite reduced
traction demand, PTO cost stays above the DA reference. This follows from the two-step re-optimization
— an early update exports the temporary SOC surplus while a later update repurchases energy to restore
feasible battery margins once consumption returns to nominal — combined with a low V2G compensation


                                                       14
                            Table 6: DA results across the four evaluated scenarios using SOC-derived energy accounting.
                                                                              Aggregator                                                        Avg. buy            Avg. sell        Min.       End avg.
                                                           PTO cost                            Bought                              Sold
       Scenario                                                                 revenue                                                           price              price           SOC         SOC
                                                          (EUR/day)                          (kWh/day)                          (kWh/day)
                                                                              (EUR/day)                                                        (EUR/kWh)          (EUR/kWh)          (%)          (%)
       Dumb charging (S1)                                       218.10               0.00         2400.0                           0.0             0.0909                 –          20.00          52.38
       Smart charging, no V2G (S2)                              130.47              0.00          1600.0                           0.0             0.0815                 –          20.00          25.61
       Profit-based aggregator (S3)                             140.59              20.30         1900.0                          300.0            0.0874              0.0847        20.00          23.44
       Operational-based aggregator (S4)                        118.91              2.39          2000.0                          400.0            0.0826              0.1158        20.00          22.72

                                          DA aggregate net power profiles                                                                           DA average fleet SOC profiles
                 1500                                                                                                  90
                 1250                                                                                                  80
                 1000                                                                                                  70


Net power (kW)                                                                                       Average SOC (%)
                 750                                                                                                   60

                 500                                                                                                   50

                 250                                                                                                   40

                   0                                                                                                   30

                  250                                                                                                  20
                        0            12                  24                    36            48                             0                 12                  24                  36                    48
                                                     Timestep                                                                                                 Timestep
                                 Dumb charging       Profit-based        Operational-based                                                Dumb charging       Profit-based      Operational-based
                                 Smart no V2G                                                                                             Smart no V2G

(a) Aggregated charging and discharging power profiles.                                                                            (b) Average fleet SOC trajectories.
Figure 6: DA operating profiles. Panel (a) compares aggregate power profiles. Panel (b) compares the
corresponding average fleet SOC trajectories.

tariff that leaves most of the export value with the aggregator. Operational-based mode turns the same
disturbance into expanded flexibility: it exports 900 kWh (versus 400 kWh) at a much higher sell tariff,
leaving PTO cost essentially unchanged from the DA reference while raising aggregator revenue only
modestly. The contrast shows that the coordination mode, not the disturbance, governs who captures the
value released by a favorable deviation.
Price disturbances. Price shocks produce the largest economic spread and the sharpest mode separation.
Under positive shocks the profit-based aggregator raises buy tariffs aggressively and suppresses export,
driving PTO cost to the maximum among price-shock scenarios (247.89 EUR at P + 50) while maximizing
its own revenue (73.70 EUR). The operational-based aggregator instead holds buy tariffs near their
DA level and preserves full V2G compensation, roughly halving PTO cost at the same disturbance
(131.81 EUR) at the expense of its margin. Negative shocks move both modes in the same direction —
lower buy tariffs, preserved export, reduced PTO cost — so the two modes converge when the market
itself relieves PTO exposure.
Combined disturbances. Compound stress exposes a structural, not merely quantitative, difference.
Profit-based operation eliminates V2G export entirely across all four combined cases, so its economic
response is driven solely by charging cost and tariff margin. Operational-based operation preserves
export in three of the four cases (all except C-All 20–48), keeping flexibility exchange alive under stress.
The exception, C-All 20–48, is a relaxed-feasibility outcome in both modes: late-day disturbances leave
insufficient time to restore the 20% reserve while meeting remaining service commitments, so the SOC
floor drops below bound. The sequential case C-Seq is less severe than the simultaneous cases in both
modes, because the system can re-optimize between separated disturbances.
    The physical trajectories confirm these economic outcomes. Figures 7 and 8 show that operational-
based operation sustains larger terminal reserves and broader export, most visibly in E − 50 and the
price case, whereas profit-based operation concentrates charging and curtails discharge, particularly under
combined stress.
    In both modes the workflow intervenes selectively rather than continuously: accepted re-optimizations
cluster around disturbance-relevant windows (Figure 9), so each update remains traceable to a specific
event and its resulting SOC and tariff trajectory.
Mode comparison. Across all fourteen matched scenarios, operational-based operation reduces PTO cost
without exception, with the largest reductions where profit-based tariffs are most aggressive (P + 50 and
the combined cases). This advantage is mirrored by a fall in aggregator revenue in all fourteen cases. The
E − 50 scenario shows why revenue cannot be read from export volume alone: operational-based mode
sells 500 kWh more, yet earns less, because the higher compensation paid to the PTO outweighs the


                                                                                                  15
Table 7: Profit-based RT scenario summary using SOC-derived grid exchange, including weighted applied tariffs.
Deltas are relative to the profit-based DA reference.
                          RT PTO    ∆ PTO      RT agg.   ∆ agg.     Buy      Sell    Buy tariff    Sell tariff    Final
 Scenario      Family
                           (EUR)    (EUR)      (EUR)     (EUR)     (kWh)   (kWh)    (EUR/kWh)     (EUR/kWh)      SOC (%)
 D-30 beg.     Delay       177.88    +37.30      25.83    +5.52     2000     100         0.0925        0.0708       30.84
 D+30 beg.     Delay       180.08    +39.49      40.24   +19.93     2000     200         0.0980        0.0794       30.33
 D-30 end      Delay       169.82    +29.24      29.98    +9.67     2000     200         0.0925        0.0757       28.49
 D+30 end      Delay       177.88    +37.30      25.83    +5.52     2000     100         0.0925        0.0708       29.37
 E+50          Energy      224.99    +84.40      28.18    +7.88     2388       0         0.0942             –       27.32
 E-50          Energy      161.67    +21.08      45.94   +25.63     2000     400         0.0925        0.0583       34.35
 P+25          Price       185.89    +45.31      16.90     -3.41    1600       0         0.1162             –       25.61
 P+50          Price       247.89   +107.30      73.70   +53.40     1700      81         0.1476        0.0377       28.70
 P-25          Price       120.95     -19.64     38.90   +18.60     1900     300         0.0760        0.0780       23.44
 P-50          Price        70.17     -70.41     33.65   +13.35     2000     400         0.0507        0.0780       22.72
 C-Seq         Combined    225.63    +85.04      57.50   +37.20     1900       0         0.1188             –       27.54
 C-All 5–48    Combined    245.37   +104.78      49.07   +28.77     2400       0         0.1022             –       28.42
 C-All 5–25    Combined    257.02   +116.43      58.95   +38.64     2400       0         0.1071             –       42.29
 C-All 20–48   Combined    250.09   +109.50      39.30   +19.00     2400       0         0.1042             –       27.48

Table 8: Operational-based RT scenario summary using SOC-derived grid exchange, including weighted applied
tariffs. Deltas are relative to the operational-based DA reference.
                          RT PTO    ∆ PTO      RT agg.   ∆ agg.     Buy      Sell    Buy tariff    Sell tariff    Final
 Scenario      Family
                           (EUR)    (EUR)      (EUR)     (EUR)     (kWh)   (kWh)    (EUR/kWh)     (EUR/kWh)      SOC (%)
 D-30 beg.     Delay       157.51    +38.60       8.91    +6.52     2100     200         0.0863        0.1180       30.48
 D+30 beg.     Delay       137.03    +18.12       9.91    +7.52     2000     300         0.0858        0.1155       26.53
 D-30 end      Delay       152.56    +33.65      13.38   +10.99     2000     200         0.0879        0.1160       28.87
 D+30 end      Delay       164.16    +45.25      12.77   +10.38     2000     100         0.0879        0.1160       29.74
 E+50          Energy      211.09    +92.18      17.22   +14.83     2494     100         0.0877        0.0757       29.76
 E-50          Energy      118.67      -0.24     17.85   +15.46     2494     900         0.0877        0.1111       31.11
 P+25          Price       130.85    +11.94       3.28    +0.89     1900     300         0.0856        0.1059       23.44
 P+50          Price       131.81    +12.90       3.95    +1.56     2000     400         0.0871        0.1059       22.72
 P-25          Price        80.52     -38.39      3.45    +1.06     2000     400         0.0614        0.1059       22.72
 P-50          Price        39.56     -79.35      3.04    +0.65     2000     400         0.0410        0.1059       22.72
 C-Seq         Combined    170.28    +51.37       2.41    +0.02     2088     100         0.0871        0.1160       29.71
 C-All 5–48    Combined    196.32    +77.41       3.39    +1.00     2600     200         0.0844        0.1153       26.97
 C-All 5–25    Combined    194.53    +75.62       3.38    +0.99     2600     200         0.0837        0.1160       40.84
 C-All 20–48   Combined    222.74   +103.84      12.62   +10.23     2400       0         0.0928             –       27.86


larger volume. The results therefore identify no universally dominant mode but a reconciliation frontier
between grid-facing value capture and fleet-facing participation: operational-based control suits PTO
cost containment, service robustness, and contract acceptability, while profit-based control applies when
aggregator revenue is the objective and the PTO has explicitly accepted the higher tariff exposure.
    Beyond characterizing this frontier, the matched comparison quantifies the economic exposure a
PTO faces when the aggregator is profit-oriented and unconstrained. The gap between modes is not
marginal: under the (P+50) price shock the PTO pays 116.07 EUR more per day under profit-based
coordination than under operational-based coordination, and double-digit daily gaps persist across the
combined-disturbance cases. Because the agentic layer can shift between these modes through prompt
configuration alone, with no change to the optimizer, the contract, or any externally visible system
parameter, this exposure is neither observable to the PTO nor auditable by a regulator under current
market arrangements. The same mechanism that lets a cooperative aggregator protect the PTO also lets
a profit-oriented one extract value from it, and nothing in the technical architecture distinguishes the
two from the outside. This is the empirical basis for the policy argument developed in Section 5.5: the
aggregator domain requires explicit regulatory structure, because the operational-based outcome cannot
be assumed to arise on its own.

5.3     Operational interpretation and decision-support implications
The results lead to three main operational conclusions that extend beyond the specific scenarios evaluated.
(i) DA optimization and V2G pricing are separable decisions with distinct risk profiles. Optimized no-V2G
charging reduces PTO cost by 40.2% relative to dumb charging, showing that fleet operators can capture
substantial savings before entering bidirectional flexibility markets. V2G adds further value, but its
practical attractiveness depends on how the coordination mode distributes cost savings, export revenue,
and terminal reserve between the PTO and the aggregator. (ii) Operational-based aggregation is the most
PTO-compatible V2G policy in the evaluated cases. Within the selected FS+CoT configuration used for
the main DA comparison, it produces the lowest PTO cost among the four main DA strategies, lowers
cost in all fourteen matched RT scenarios, and offers lower buy tariffs with higher sell-back compensation.
(iii) Operational-based aggregation is not economically irrational from the aggregator’s perspective; it


                                                          16
Table 9: Matched profit-based–operational-based RT comparison using SOC-derived grid exchange (operational-
based minus profit-based).

                                                                                                                                                                              ∆ final
                                                                                  ∆ PTO                              ∆ agg.                    ∆ buy         ∆ sell
                                     Scenario                  Family                                                                                                          SOC
                                                                                  (EUR)                              (EUR)                     (kWh)         (kWh)
                                                                                                                                                                               (pp)
                                     D-30 beg.                 Delay                -20.37                             -16.91                      +100           +100              -0.36
                                     D+30 beg.                 Delay                -43.05                             -30.33                         0           +100              -3.81
                                     D-30 end                  Delay                -17.26                             -16.60                         0              0             +0.37
                                     D+30 end                  Delay                -13.72                             -13.06                         0              0             +0.37
                                     E+50                      Energy               -13.90                             -10.96                      +106           +100             +2.44
                                     E-50                      Energy               -43.00                             -28.09                      +494           +500              -3.24
                                     P+25                      Price                -55.05                             -13.62                      +300           +300              -2.17
                                     P+50                      Price               -116.07                             -69.75                      +300           +319              -5.98
                                     P-25                      Price                -40.43                             -35.46                      +100           +100              -0.72
                                     P-50                      Price                -30.61                             -30.61                         0              0               0.00
                                     C-Seq                     Combined             -55.35                             -55.09                      +188           +100             +2.18
                                     C-All 5–48                Combined             -49.05                             -45.69                      +200           +200              -1.45
                                     C-All 5–25                Combined             -62.48                             -55.57                      +200           +200              -1.45
                                     C-All 20–48               Combined             -27.35                             -26.68                         0              0             +0.37

            D-30 beg.                                                                                                        D-30 beg.
           D+30 beg.                                                                                                        D+30 beg.
                                                                                       90
             D-30 end                                                                                                         D-30 end                                                                  2000
            D+30 end                                                                   80                                    D+30 end




                                                                                                                                                                                                               SOC-derived net power (kW)
                 E+50                                                                                                             E+50                                                                  1000



                                                                                        Average fleet SOC (%)
                                                                                       70
                  E-50                                                                                                             E-50
                 P+25
Scenario
                                                                                                                                  P+25
                                                                                                                 Scenario
                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                 P+50                                                                                                             P+50
                                                                                       50
                  P-25                                                                                                             P-25
                  P-50                                                                 40                                          P-50                                                                     1000
                 C-Seq                                                                                                            C-Seq
                                                                                       30                                                                                                                   2000
            C-All 5-48                                                                                                       C-All 5-48
            C-All 5-25                                                                 20                                    C-All 5-25
           C-All 20-48                                                                                                      C-All 20-48
                         0   4   8    12   16   20       24   28   32   36   40   44                                                      0    4    8   12   16    20      24 28    32   36   40   44
                                                     Timestep                                                                                                           Timestep

                                     (a) Average fleet SOC.                                                                                   (b) SOC-derived average net power.
Figure 7: Profit-based RT operating heatmaps. Panel (a) reports average fleet SOC. Panel (b) reports average
net power inferred from SOC variation.

reflects a scale-oriented revenue model in which lower margins per fleet support broader participation,
larger flexibility volumes, and more durable contracts. The E − 50 case illustrates this trade-off: the
operational-based plan exports 500 kWh more than the profit-based plan, while higher sell compensation
reduces per-fleet aggregator revenue and raises terminal reserve.
    These conclusions also imply a disturbance-dependent acceptance logic for the PTO when an RT
re-optimization is proposed. For delay disturbances, the PTO should accept an update when the delay
threatens terminal reserve, charger access, or service continuity, rather than only when it improves
aggregator revenue. For energy-consumption disturbances, a cost-increasing update can still be acceptable
when it restores feasibility or preserves reserve, whereas a lower-consumption update should be checked
for unnecessary battery cycling before acceptance. For price disturbances, which affect tariff exposure
without disrupting service, a price-only re-optimization should be accepted only when it lowers the PTO
bill or follows a pre-agreed market-sharing rule. Across all three families, the acceptance criterion is the
PTO’s own operational and cost exposure, not the aggregator’s revenue, which reinforces the case for the
coordination-mode and transparency safeguards discussed in Section 5.5.

5.4                      Prompt-sensitivity analysis of the Pricing Agent
The preceding DA and RT analyses evaluate the complete agentic optimization workflow. To isolate the
behavior of the agentic layer itself, an additional DA experiment was conducted on the Pricing Agent
under four prompt paradigms. The optimization model, fleet input data, price profile, and evaluator
structure were kept fixed; only the prompt used to generate the DA buy and sell multipliers was changed.
The four prompt scenarios are zero-shot (ZS), chain-of-thought prompting (CoT), few-shot prompting
(FS), and few-shot plus chain-of-thought prompting (FS+CoT). Here, ZS provides the role, task, economic


                                                                                                                17
            D-30 beg.                                                                                                                                         D-30 beg.
           D+30 beg.                                                                                                                                         D+30 beg.                                                                                                            3000
                                                                                                                       90
             D-30 end                                                                                                                                          D-30 end
            D+30 end                                                                                                   80                                     D+30 end                                                                                                            2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SOC-derived net power (kW)
                 E+50                                                                                                                                              E+50




                                                                                                                         Average fleet SOC (%)
                                                                                                                       70                                                                                                                                                         1000
                  E-50                                                                                                                                              E-50
                 P+25
Scenario
                                                                                                                                                                   P+25
                                                                                                                                                  Scenario
                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                 P+50                                                                                                                                              P+50
                                                                                                                       50
                  P-25                                                                                                                                              P-25                                                                                                              1000
                  P-50                                                                                                 40                                           P-50
                 C-Seq                                                                                                                                             C-Seq                                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                                       30
            C-All 5-48                                                                                                                                        C-All 5-48
            C-All 5-25                                                                                                 20                                     C-All 5-25                                                                                                              3000
           C-All 20-48                                                                                                                                       C-All 20-48
                         0       4       8        12     16     20       24   28       32      36     40    44                                                             0        4       8        12    16     20      24 28           32        36        40        44
                                                                     Timestep                                                                                                                                          Timestep

                                                 (a) Average fleet SOC.                                                                                                            (b) SOC-derived average net power.
Figure 8: Operational-based RT operating heatmaps. Panel (a) reports average fleet SOC. Panel (b) reports
average net power inferred from SOC variation.

           C-All 20-48                                                                                                                                       C-All 20-48
            C-All 5-25                                                                                                                                        C-All 5-25
            C-All 5-48                                                                                                                                        C-All 5-48
                 C-Seq                                                                                                                                             C-Seq
                  P-50                                                                                                                                              P-50
                  P-25                                                                                                                                              P-25
                 P+50                                                                                                                                              P+50
Scenario         P+25                                                                                                                             Scenario         P+25
                  E-50                                                                                                                                              E-50
                 E+50                                                                                                                                              E+50
            D+30 end                                                                                                                                          D+30 end
             D-30 end                                                                                                                                          D-30 end
           D+30 beg.                                                                                                                                         D+30 beg.
            D-30 beg.                                                                                                                                         D-30 beg.
                             1       5       9     13     17    21       25   29        33     37     41    45                                                                 1        5       9     13     17        21       25   29        33        37        41        45
                                                                     Timestep                                                                                                                                               Timestep

                   Disturbance window                   Combined window            Workflow trigger        Accepted response                                         Disturbance window                    Combined window            Workflow trigger                   Accepted response


                                                       (a) Profit-based.                                                                                                                            (b) Operational-based.
Figure 9: RT trigger timelines. Accepted re-optimizations concentrate around disturbance-relevant windows in
both coordination modes.

context, and output requirements without worked examples; CoT adds an explicit reasoning scaffold; FS
adds example-guided pricing behavior; and FS+CoT combines examples with structured reasoning. Since
the RT experiments use zero-shot role prompting with constrained output formatting, this sensitivity
analysis focuses on the DA Pricing Agent, where the prompt variants were explicitly tested.
    Table 10 reports the accepted DA outcomes from the prompt-experiment workbooks using the same
SOC-derived accounting as Table 6. The FS+CoT rows therefore correspond to the accepted profit-based
and operational-based DA files used in the main DA analysis. Appendix C provides compact versions of
the tested prompt templates.
    Under profit-based behavior, prompt design strongly affects the agent’s ability to express the intended
aggregator objective. Aggregator revenue increases from 6.66 EUR/day under ZS to 10.61 EUR/day
under FS, 15.96 EUR/day under CoT, and 20.30 EUR/day under FS+CoT. This ordering indicates that
examples help the agent identify useful tariff patterns, while the reasoning scaffold helps connect tariff
spread, V2G volume, and aggregator margin. The operational-based results show a different pattern:
PTO costs are tightly clustered, spanning only 0.71 EUR/day between the best and worst cases. FS
gives the lowest PTO cost, 118.51 EUR/day, while FS+CoT gives the lowest aggregator revenue, 2.39
EUR/day, and remains close to the best PTO outcome. CoT alone performs worst for operational-based
pricing, increasing both PTO cost and aggregator revenue. This suggests that reasoning without examples
can lead the agent to over-emphasize economically plausible tariff spread rather than the PTO-facing
objective, while examples provide the main alignment signal in the operational-based case.
    These experiments support the interpretation that the proposed framework is not only an optimization
wrapper, but an agentic decision system whose behavior depends on how economic objectives are
communicated to the agent. The optimizer enforces feasibility once tariffs are provided, but the prompt
controls the tariff hypothesis evaluated by the optimizer. Prompting is therefore part of the experimental
design, and prompt paradigms should be reported as experimental scenarios and treated as a reproducibility
variable in agentic energy-management studies.



                                                                                                                                                 18
                              Table 10: Pricing Agent prompt-sensitivity results.
                                                                                 Aggregator
                                    PTO cost
Mode Prompta                                                                       revenue                      rankb
                                   (EUR/day)
                                                                                 (EUR/day)
PB     ZS                            137.13                                           6.66                        4
PB     FS                            137.31                                          10.61                        3
PB     CoT                           135.23                                          15.96                        2
PB     FS+CoT                        140.59                                          20.30                        1
OB     ZS                            118.83                                           2.75                        2
OB     FS                            118.51                                           2.43                        1
OB     CoT                           119.22                                           3.15                        4
OB     FS+CoT                        118.91                                           2.39                        3
 a PB: profit-based; OB: operational-based; ZS: zero-shot; FS: few-shot; CoT: chain-of-thought; FS+CoT: few-shot + CoT.
 b Rank 1 = best under mode objective: max aggregator revenue (PB) or min PTO cost (OB).


5.5    Policy Implications
The preceding results are operational, but their strongest implication is regulatory: the aggregator domain
cannot be left to unconstrained market behavior if electric bus fleets are to participate in V2G markets
on sustainable terms. Three findings established above support this conclusion.
    First, the coordination mode, not the disturbance, governs how flexibility value is split between the
aggregator and the PTO, and the gap is large — up to 116.07 EUR/day under the P + 50 shock. A
profit-maximizing aggregator that raises PTO cost is not behaving anomalously; it is doing exactly
what an unconstrained revenue objective implies. Absent a rule that bounds tariff margins or mandates
value-sharing, the PTO, a public entity operating on public budgets, absorbs this exposure directly.
    Second, for an agentic aggregator this pricing aggressiveness is set by prompt configuration alone,
which is invisible from outside the system (Section 5.4). This is a qualitatively different regulatory
problem from classical aggregator design: a rule-based pricing scheme can be audited from its parameters,
whereas an LLM-based one can be re-tuned through prompt edits that leave no structural trace, and that
disclosure rules written for conventional aggregators would not capture.
    Third, the PTO-protective operational-based outcome is not the aggregator’s default incentive, since
it reduces per-fleet revenue in every matched scenario. A profit-oriented operator has no self-interested
reason to adopt it unless its revenue model is explicitly scale-based or its margins are externally constrained.
The PTO-favorable equilibrium must therefore be induced, not assumed.
    These findings motivate three regulatory measures for V2G markets involving public fleets: (i)
bounds on aggregator tariff margins, or mandated value-sharing rules, so that PTO cost exposure cannot
exceed a defined level regardless of the aggregator’s objective; (ii) transparency requirements covering the
coordination mode and, for agentic systems, the prompt configuration and constrained-output specification
that govern pricing behavior, so that the chosen objective is auditable; and (iii) reporting standards
requiring disclosure of realized tariff vectors, trigger decisions, and value allocation, extending existing
market-conduct oversight to the agentic setting.
    A related implication concerns the role of human stakeholders in governing agentic aggregators.
Human oversight should operate primarily at the governance level rather than through manual approval
of every charging or V2G action. In practice, human control should be placed at the level of objectives,
constraints, audit, and intervention authority. PTOs, aggregators, and regulators should define the
admissible coordination mode, tariff-margin bounds, SOC and service-reliability safeguards, and conditions
under which the system may re-optimize or switch pricing behavior. Human decision-makers should also
have access to interpretable records of prompt configuration, tariff vectors, trigger decisions, accepted
schedules, and value allocation, so that agentic decisions can be reviewed and overridden when they
conflict with public-service priorities. In this framing, the agentic aggregator remains an automated
operational layer, but its economic posture and safety envelope remain human-governed.


6     Conclusions
This paper proposed a multi-agentic framework for electric bus fleet-grid coordination under DA and RT
operation. The aggregator is framed as a reconciliation entity that converts grid-side flexibility signals
into fleet-feasible charging and V2G decisions while allocating value between the aggregator and the
PTO. The framework combines an optimization-based charging model with three supervisory agents: a


                                                         19
Trigger Agent that determines whether updated conditions justify intervention, a Pricing Agent that
revises tariff guidance, and an Evaluator Agent that accepts or rejects the resulting operating plan. In
this architecture, the DA layer defines the nominal charging and V2G reference, while the RT layer
receives updated information in 30-minute blocks and revises the plan only when disturbances become
operationally or economically relevant. The contribution is therefore a structured decision pipeline
that separates disturbance detection, tariff adaptation, and schedule acceptance while preserving the
transparency of an optimization-based scheduler.
    The DA results establish the economic baseline. Optimized no-V2G charging reduces PTO cost
by 40.2% relative to dumb charging, showing that substantial fleet savings are available even before
bidirectional flexibility is considered. The V2G cases then show that the aggregator coordination mode
determines how the additional value is distributed. The profit-based mode produces the highest DA
aggregator revenue, 20.30 EUR/day, by maintaining a larger spread between PTO buy and sell-back tariffs.
Within the selected FS+CoT configuration used for the main DA comparison, the operational-based mode
produces the lowest PTO cost among the four main DA strategies, 118.91 EUR/day, by lowering the
weighted buy tariff and increasing the sell-back tariff. The prompt-sensitivity analysis further shows that
the FS operational-based prompt reduces this cost to 118.51 EUR/day. Thus, the aggregator objective
is not a neutral modeling detail; it directly controls the allocation of cost savings, V2G revenue, and
terminal reserve. The RT results strengthen this conclusion under disturbance conditions. Across the
fourteen matched RT scenarios, operational-based operation lowers PTO cost in every case relative to
profit-based operation. The largest PTO reductions occur under P + 50 (-116.07 EUR), C-All 5–25
(-62.48 EUR), C-Seq (-55.35 EUR), and P + 25 (-55.05 EUR), showing that operational-based pricing
is especially important when positive price shocks, early service disruptions, or compound disturbances
would otherwise expose the PTO to high tariff margins or reduced V2G value. The PTO benefit is not free
from the aggregator’s perspective: operational-based operation reduces aggregator revenue in all fourteen
matched scenarios. In E − 50, the lower energy-consumption disturbance creates enough additional stored
energy for operational-based dispatch to sell 900 kWh, but the higher compensation paid to the PTO
keeps aggregator revenue below the profit-based case. The RT results therefore show that aggregator
revenue is governed by both tariff margin and available flexibility volume, not by tariff margin alone. The
prompt-sensitivity experiment confirms that the agentic layer is itself an experimental object, not only an
interface to the optimizer. For profit-based pricing, the objective ranking is FS+CoT, CoT, FS, then ZS,
with SOC-derived aggregator revenue increasing from 6.66 EUR/day under ZS to 20.30 EUR/day under
FS+CoT. For operational-based pricing, examples are more important than reasoning alone: FS gives
the lowest SOC-derived PTO cost, 118.51 EUR/day, while FS+CoT gives the lowest aggregator revenue
and remains within 0.40 EUR/day of the best PTO-cost result. CoT alone performs worst because it
raises PTO cost and aggregator revenue relative to the example-guided prompts. These results show
that prompt design affects whether the Pricing Agent expresses the intended economic behavior. Future
agentic energy-management studies should therefore report prompt paradigms and constrained-output
assumptions alongside optimization inputs and results.
    From the fleet perspective, relying only on the no-V2G optimum can be economically beneficial, but it
leaves bidirectional flexibility value unused. If V2G is adopted, the operational-based coordination mode
is the PTO-facing policy that consistently makes sense in the evaluated scenarios because it lowers PTO
cost in all matched RT cases and offers more favorable tariff exposure. From the aggregator perspective,
operational-based operation is more compatible with durable fleet participation and contract acceptance,
but it generally reduces revenue per fleet. Large aggregator revenues should therefore come primarily
from increasing the number, size, and diversity of aggregated fleets, and from mobilizing larger volumes of
flexibility, rather than from extracting high margins from one PTO fleet. This is the central operational
implication of the reconciliation framing: scalable grid flexibility from electric bus fleets depends on
participation terms that remain acceptable to the PTO.
    Beyond these operational lessons, the results carry a regulatory implication that is, in our view,
the broader contribution of the study. Because the coordination mode alone moves PTO cost by up
to 116.07 EUR/day in the evaluated cases, and because an agentic aggregator can switch between
modes through prompt configuration that leaves no externally visible trace, the PTO-favorable outcome
cannot be assumed to arise on its own and cannot be verified by a counterparty under current market
arrangements. The aggregator domain therefore warrants explicit regulatory structure when public
transport fleets are involved: bounds on tariff margins or mandated value-sharing to cap PTO cost
exposure, transparency requirements covering the coordination mode and the prompt and constrained-
output specifications that govern agentic pricing, and reporting standards that extend market-conduct
oversight to realized tariff vectors, trigger decisions, and value allocation. As agentic AI is adopted in


                                                    20
energy-market intermediation, the framework proposed here doubles as a diagnostic instrument that
makes the mode- and prompt-dependent allocation of value explicit, and thereby identifies where such
oversight is most needed.
   The results should be interpreted within the limits of the present study. The RT evaluation uses
controlled isolated and combined disturbance cases, and it compares accepted RT responses against the
DA coordination references without adding no-action, rule-based trigger, or always-reoptimize baselines.
The experiments also rely on a single depot configuration, charger setting, price profile, and initial
SOC structure. The policy implications drawn above follow from this single-setting evaluation and
should be read as evidence-based motivation for regulatory attention rather than as calibrated threshold
values. Future work should extend the evaluation to larger and more heterogeneous depots, different
charger-to-bus ratios, alternative market conditions, richer combined-disturbance designs, stochastic
repeated runs, prompt-sensitivity analysis, solver-runtime measurement, and formal service-reliability
metrics. Furthermore, Cybersecurity issues of agentic systems, as mentioned in [40] and [41] will also be
investigated. The main methodological lesson is that RT fleet-grid coordination should report not only
aggregate cost and revenue, but also the trigger timing, accepted tariff vectors, SOC trajectories, and
V2G exchange pathways through which disturbances reshape operational outcomes.


Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that
could have influenced the work reported in this paper.


Data Availability Statement
The data and source code that support the findings of this study are openly available in the repository at
https://github.com/AlienEslami/Agentic-Aggregator.


Acknowledgment
This project was made possible through financial support from the Government of Canada and the Fonds
de recherche du Québec – Nature et technologies (FRQNT). Funding from the Government of Canada’s
Environmental Damages Fund was provided under its Climate Action and Awareness Fund. At the same
time, the FRQNT contributed through the Programme de recherche en partenariat - Réduction des GES
- Mobilité Durable.


Appendix A              Nomenclature
Indices
p                       Tariff-period index.
t                       Time-interval index.
k                       Bus index.
n                       Charger index.
i                       Route or service-block index.
τ                       Current operating interval in the RT workflow.
r                       Rerun index in the DA or RT workflow.
d                       Operating-day index.

Sets
P                       Set of tariff periods.
T                       Set of time intervals in the DA optimization horizon.
TτRT                    Set of RT optimization intervals from τ to the end of the operating day.
K                       Set of electric buses.
N                       Set of chargers.
I                       Set of routes or service blocks.

Time and workflow parameters
T                       Final interval of the operating horizon.
∆t                      Duration of one time interval.


                                                        21
p(t)                    Tariff period associated with time interval t.
Rmax                    Maximum number of allowed optimization reruns.

Tariff and market parameters
πtg                     Grid energy price at time interval t.
πtg,obs                 Observed or updated grid energy price used in RT at interval t.
π g,obs
   τ :T                 Updated grid-price profile used from RT interval τ to T .
π̄pg                    Average grid energy price in tariff period p.
ρ+p                     Tariff charged by the aggregator to the PTO for charging energy in tariff period p.
ρ−p                     Tariff paid by the aggregator to the PTO for V2G energy in tariff period p.
ρ+                      Vector of charging-energy tariffs.
ρ−                      Vector of V2G compensation tariffs.
α+
 p                      Charging-energy tariff multiplier proposed by the Pricing Agent in tariff period p.
α−
 p                      V2G compensation tariff multiplier proposed by the Pricing Agent in tariff period p.
      +
α+
 m , αm                 Lower and upper bounds on charging-energy tariff multipliers under mode m.
      −
α−
 m , αm                 Lower and upper bounds on V2G compensation tariff multipliers under mode m.

Fleet, battery, and charger parameters
Pnch                    Charging power rating of charger n.
Pndis                   V2G discharging power rating of charger n.
 ch
ηn                      Charging efficiency of charger n.
 dis
ηn                      Discharging efficiency of charger n.
Ekmin                   Minimum allowable stored energy of bus k.
Ekmax                   Maximum allowable stored energy of bus k.
Ek0                     Initial stored energy of bus k in the DA optimization.
Ekend                   Required end-of-day stored energy of bus k.
ξi                      Route-level energy requirement for route or service block i.
ξiobs                   Observed route-level energy requirement used in RT operation.
ξiRT                    Updated RT route-level energy requirement.
ξ obs                   Vector of observed route-level energy requirements used in RT operation.
W                       Maximum admissible aggregate depot power exchange.

Decision variables
xk,n,t                  Binary variable equal to 1 if bus k charges at charger n during interval t.
yk,n,t                  Binary variable equal to 1 if bus k discharges through charger n during interval t.
bk,i,t                  Binary variable equal to 1 if bus k is assigned to route or service block i during interval t.
b̄active
  k,i,t                 Indicator fixing route assignments already underway in RT operation.
ek,t                    Stored energy of bus k at time interval t.
wt+                     Aggregate charging power purchased by the PTO from the aggregator at interval t.
wt−                     Aggregate V2G discharging power sold by the PTO to the aggregator at interval t.
s                       PTO scheduling decision vector.
s∗                      Optimal or accepted PTO schedule.
s∗d,r                   Candidate DA schedule at operating day d and rerun r.
s∗DA                    Accepted DA reference schedule.
s∗τ −1                  Last accepted schedule before RT interval τ .
s∗τ                     Accepted schedule at RT interval τ .
s∗τ,r                   Candidate RT schedule at interval τ and rerun r.
sRT,∗
 τ                      Accepted RT schedule computed from interval τ onward.
sref                    Active reference schedule used during RT operation.



Appendix B              Optimization Core
Having established the supervisory agent roles in Section 3.2, this Appendix presents the mathematical
problem they govern. The aggregator pricing function is fully assumed by the agentic layer; what remains
here is the PTO scheduling model that the agents orchestrate, the real-time re-optimization logic that
is triggered by the agents, and the formal agentic supervisory flow that connects the two. The PTO
scheduling problem is optimization-based throughout, since route service, battery feasibility, and charger
availability must satisfy explicit physical constraints regardless of how the surrounding decision process is
orchestrated.


                                                         22
B.1     PTO Scheduling Model: Full Formulation
Let p ∈ P denote tariff periods, t ∈ T time intervals, k ∈ K buses, n ∈ N chargers, and i ∈ I routes. At
each DA or RT invocation, the Pricing Agent supplies two tariff vectors: ρ+ , the price charged to the
PTO for charging energy, and ρ− , the price paid to the PTO for V2G energy. The relationship between
these tariff vectors and the agent-proposed multipliers is defined in Appendix B.3. Given these tariffs,
the PTO selects a schedule s∗ that minimizes its net energy-trading cost:
                                                   Xh                                  i
                                                                           −      −
                       s∗ ∈ arg    min
                                     +  −
                                          C PTO
                                                 =       ρ +
                                                           p(t) w +
                                                                  t ∆t − ρ p(t) w t ∆t   ,         (B.1)
                                s∈S(ρ ,ρ )
                                                         t∈T

where S(ρ+ , ρ− ) is the feasible set defined by the operational constraints below. The objective minimizes
the cost of charging energy net of V2G compensation.
   The decision vector includes the route-assignment variables bk,i,t , the charging variables xk,n,t , the
V2G discharging variables yk,n,t , the stored energy variables ek,t , and the aggregate depot power variables
wt+ and wt− .
   A bus cannot serve a route and use a charger at the same time. This operational exclusivity is
represented by Eq. (B.2):
                          X                         X
                               (xk,n,t + yk,n,t ) +   bk,i,t ≤ 1,     ∀k ∈ K, ∀t ∈ T .                  (B.2)
                         n∈N                       i∈I

The first term identifies whether bus k is connected to a charger for charging or discharging, while the
second term identifies whether it is assigned to a route. This constraint prevents physically incompatible
decisions, such as charging a bus while it is in service. The stored energy of each bus evolves according to
Eq. (B.3):
                                         X                            X 1
                        ek,t+1 = ek,t +         ηnch Pnch xk,n,t ∆t −          P dis yk,n,t ∆t
                                                                          ηndis n
                                         n∈N                          n∈N
                                 X                                                                     (B.3)
                               −     ξi bk,i,t , ∀k ∈ K, ∀t ∈ T .
                                 i∈I

The second term represents the energy added through charging, corrected by the charging efficiency. The
third term represents the energy removed through V2G discharge, corrected by the discharging efficiency.
The final term represents the traction energy consumed when bus k serves route i, where ξi is the energy
consumption. Battery feasibility is enforced through Eq. (B.4):

                                  Ekmin ≤ ek,t ≤ Ekmax ,             ek,0 = Ek0 ,
                                                                                                       (B.4)
                                       ek,T ≥ Ekend ,          ∀k ∈ K, ∀t ∈ T .

These constraints ensure that each bus remains within its admissible battery range, starts from the
specified initial energy level, and finishes the horizon with enough energy for subsequent operation.
Charging and discharging are mutually exclusive for each bus–charger pair as presented in Eq. (B.5):

                            xk,n,t + yk,n,t ≤ 1,         ∀k ∈ K, ∀n ∈ N , ∀t ∈ T .                     (B.5)

Additional charger-capacity constraints ensure that each charger serves at most one bus in each time
interval. At the depot level, individual charging and discharging decisions are aggregated as in Eqs. (B.6)–
(B.7):                                     X X
                                    wt+ =          Pnch xk,n,t , ∀t ∈ T ,                              (B.6)
                                          k∈K n∈N
                                          X X
                                  wt− =             Pndis yk,n,t ,        ∀t ∈ T .                     (B.7)
                                          k∈K n∈N

The depot exchange is bounded by the admissible power limit as in Eq. (B.8):

                               0 ≤ wt+ ≤ W ,        0 ≤ wt− ≤ W ,             ∀t ∈ T .                 (B.8)




                                                         23
B.2     Real-Time Re-Optimization Logic
The DA formulation computes a full-day reference schedule before operation begins. During operation,
this reference may become outdated because the observed system state can differ from the DA assumptions.
These deviations may include differences between planned and observed bus SOC, service delays, updated
electricity prices, or changes in the route-level energy required to complete service. The RT workflow
addresses these deviations by rerunning the PTO optimization model. The RT workflow logic is
summarized in Fig. 3.
    Let τ denote the current operating interval. If the Trigger Agent decides to re-optimize, the optimization
horizon is updated from the current interval to the end of the operating day as in Eq. (B.9):
                                              TτRT = {τ, τ + 1, . . . , T }.                            (B.9)
The RT optimization does not revise decisions for intervals that have already occurred. It uses the
observed state at interval τ as the new initial condition and optimizes the remaining charging, discharging,
and service decisions from that point onward. At each RT update, the observed state is represented as in
Eq. (B.10):                                                         
                                                               g,obs obs
                                           xτobs = eobs  obs
                                                    τ , dτ , π τ :T , ξ  ,                             (B.10)
where eobs
       τ   is the observed bus-energy vector at the current interval, dobs
                                                                        τ   contains the observed service-
timing state, π g,obs
                τ :T  is the updated electricity-price profile used for the remaining horizon, and ξ obs
contains the observed route-level energy consumption. Once observed, these quantities replace the
corresponding DA assumptions and define the updated operating condition for the remaining horizon.
   Given the observed state and the price guidance uτ provided by the Pricing Agent, the RT optimizer
computes a revised schedule as in Eq. (B.11):
                                    sRT,∗
                                     τ    ∈ arg          min          CτPTO
                                                                         :T (uτ , s) ,                 (B.11)
                                                   s∈SτRT (uτ ,xobs
                                                                τ )


where sRT,∗
       τ    is the revised RT schedule, SτRT (·) is the feasible set updated with the observed RT conditions,
      PTO
and Cτ :T (·) is the PTO energy-trading cost over the remaining horizon. The RT model preserves the
same physical constraints as the DA model; the difference is that selected inputs are updated with
observations before the model is rerun. The main RT updates are:
                       ek,τ = eobs
                               k,τ ,                               ∀k ∈ K,                             (B.12)
                       ξiRT = ξiobs ,                              ∀i ∈ I,                             (B.13)
                         πtg = πtg,obs ,                           ∀t ∈ TτRT ,                         (B.14)
                      bk,i,t ≥ b̄active
                                 k,i,t ,                           ∀k ∈ K, ∀i ∈ I, ∀t ∈ TτRT .         (B.15)
Constraint (B.12) sets the current battery energy of each bus equal to the observed value at the moment
of re-optimization. Constraint (B.13) updates the energy requirement of each route using the observed
route-level consumption value. Constraint (B.14) replaces the DA electricity-price profile with the updated
price profile used from the current interval onward. Constraint (B.15) preserves trips that are already
underway, preventing the RT optimizer from interrupting active service commitments.
     If no re-optimization is needed, the system continues executing the last accepted reference schedule
sref . Once a revised schedule is accepted by the Evaluator Agent, it becomes the new reference sRT,∗
                                                                                                    τ    for
subsequent RT updates.

B.3     Agentic Supervisory Flow
This section provides the formal mathematical definitions of the agent policies and the connection between
agent-generated price guidance and the PTO scheduling model. In a classical aggregator design (e.g., [35]),
a dedicated upper-level problem would maximize aggregator revenue ΠAgg by directly optimizing the
tariff vectors ρ+ and ρ− offered to the PTO:
                               Xh
                                                   −     −       g          −
                                                                               i
                        ΠAgg =      ρ+     +                         +
                                     p(t) wt ∆t − ρp(t) wt ∆t − πt wt − wt ∆t .                      (B.16)
                                  t∈T

In the proposed framework, this optimization problem is replaced by the agentic supervisory layer:
                               max ΠAgg                       πθTT , πθPP , πθEE
                                                                                 
                                                   =⇒                              ,            (B.17)
                                +
                              ρ ,ρ−
                                                            |         {z         }
                                                         agentic supervisory layer
                              | {z }
                         classical aggregator upper level


                                                            24
where πθTT , πθPP , and πθEE denote the Trigger Agent, Pricing Agent, and Evaluator Agent policies,
respectively. The aggregator function is therefore redistributed across these specialized agents, which
determine when the optimizer should be called, which price guidance should be tested, and whether
the resulting schedule should be accepted. The Pricing Agent maps the current decision context and
coordination mode to a price-guidance vector:

                                                   uτ = πθPP (cτ , m) ,                                               (B.18)

where the decision context cτ is:
                                                cτ = Ψ(fτ , gτ , hτ , m) ,                                            (B.19)
with fτ the fleet-state vector, gτ the grid and market vector, hτ the historical memory vector, and m the
coordination mode. The guidance vector uτ is converted into the tariff vectors fed to the PTO scheduling
model as:
                                  ρ+     + g
                                   p = αp π̄p ,   ρ−     − g
                                                   p = αp π̄p ,    ∀p ∈ P,                          (B.20)
where αp+ and αp− are the buy and sell multipliers proposed by the Pricing Agent, and π̄pg is the average
grid price in tariff period p. In the DA workflow, given the price guidance uτ from Eq. (B.18), the
Evaluator Agent assesses the resulting schedule:

                                             (aτ , rτ , γτ ) = πθEE (cτ , uτ ) ,                                      (B.21)

where aτ ∈ {accept, rerun} is the evaluation decision, rτ is the supervisory rationale, and γτ ∈ [0, 1] is a
confidence score. In the RT workflow, the Trigger Agent policy is evaluated first:

                                         δτ = πθTT cτ , s∗τ −1 ,
                                                              
                                                                                                    (B.22)

where δτ ∈ {skip, optimize} is the trigger decision and s∗τ −1 is the last accepted plan. If δτ = optimize,
the Pricing Agent and Evaluator Agent are invoked as in Eqs. (B.18) and (B.21). In both workflows, the
optimization engine solves:
                                    s∗τ ∈ arg min C PTO (uτ , s) ,                                   (B.23)
                                                      s ∈ S(uτ )

connecting the agentic price guidance directly to the feasible scheduling decision defined in Eq. (B.1). In
the RT case this specializes to Eq. (B.11), where the feasible set expands to SτRT (uτ , xτobs ) to incorporate
the observed state.


Appendix C                 Compact Prompt Templates
This appendix reports compact versions of the prompt templates used in the agent experiments.
The original prompts contain implementation placeholders, repeated formatting instructions, and full
multiplier/output-schema constraints; the templates below preserve the operational content needed to
reproduce the experimental logic without reproducing the complete workflow text. The placeholders
{mode}, {spot_prices}, {fleet_context}, and {optimization_result} denote values injected by the
workflow at runtime.
DA Pricing Agent zero-shot template.
     You are the Electric Bus Aggregator (EBA) price-setting agent for DA optimization. Set buy and sell multipliers
     for 48 half-hour timesteps. The EBA buys from the grid at spot price Pt , sells charging energy to the PTO at
     mbuy
       t   Pt , buys V2G energy from the PTO at msell t  Pt , and resells V2G energy to the grid at Pt . Aggregator
     profit is the sum of charging margin and V2G margin. If {mode} is profit-based, maximize aggregator revenue
     while preserving feasible fleet operation and some V2G opportunity. If {mode} is operational-based, minimize
     PTO cost while preserving positive aggregator revenue and feasible operation. Respect hard constraints:
     return exactly 48 buy multipliers and 48 sell multipliers; keep mbuy t  > 1, msell
                                                                                    t   < 1; use the price forecast
     {spot_prices} and fleet context {fleet_context}; output only the requested structured fields.


Chain-of-thought extension.
      Before producing the final multiplier vectors, reason through the coupled tariff decision: identify low- and
      high-price periods; determine when charging should be encouraged or discouraged; determine when V2G export
      is valuable; check whether buy multipliers are too high to create surplus SOC; check whether sell multipliers are
      too low to induce V2G; then adapt the multipliers to the selected profit-based or operational-based objective.
      Return only the final structured multiplier output, not the reasoning text.



                                                             25
             Table Appendix C.1: Prompt paradigms used for the DA Pricing Agent experiments.
 Acronym   Name                                Agent                                       Compact definition
 ZS        Zero-shot                           DA Pricing Agent                            Role, economic framework, mode objective, hard constraints,
                                                                                           and structured output requirements are provided, but no
                                                                                           worked examples or explicit reasoning scaffold is included.
 CoT       Chain-of-thought                    DA Pricing Agent                            The zero-shot prompt is augmented with an explicit reasoning
                                                                                           scaffold that asks the agent to reason about price levels, V2G
                                                                                           opportunity, tariff spread, and the selected profit-based or
                                                                                           operational-based objective before returning the final multi-
                                                                                           plier vectors.
 FS        Few-shot                            DA Pricing Agent                            The zero-shot prompt is augmented with compact examples
                                                                                           that illustrate mode-consistent tariff behavior for profit-based
                                                                                           and operational-based pricing.
 FS+CoT    Few-shot + chain-of-thought         DA Pricing Agent                            The prompt combines examples with the reasoning scaffold,
                                                                                           giving the agent both behavioral demonstrations and a struc-
                                                                                           tured path for translating the objective into buy/sell multipli-
                                                                                           ers.
 RT-ZS-S   Zero-shot with constrained schema   RT Trigger, Pricing, and Evaluator Agents   RT agents use role prompts and structured context without
                                                                                           DA prompt-paradigm variants; outputs are constrained to
                                                                                           workflow fields such as action, trigger type, confidence, ac-
                                                                                           cepted update, and multiplier vectors.


Few-shot extension.
       Use the examples as behavioral guidance. A profit-based example raises buy multipliers and lowers sell
       multipliers enough to increase aggregator margin, but avoids eliminating V2G volume. An operational-based
       example keeps buy multipliers close to the spot price and sell multipliers high enough to transfer more V2G
       value to the PTO, while preserving small positive aggregator revenue. Generalize the pattern to the provided
       price profile and fleet context rather than copying the example values.


Few-shot plus chain-of-thought template.
       Combine the few-shot behavioral examples with the reasoning scaffold. First use the examples to identify the
       intended mode behavior; then reason about price periods, charging incentives, V2G incentives, margin, PTO
       exposure, and feasibility; finally return exactly 48 buy and sell multipliers in the required structured format.
       The examples define the behavioral direction, while the reasoning scaffold adapts that direction to the current
       price and fleet context.


DA Evaluator Agent compact template.
       Evaluate the DA optimization result {optimization_result} under the selected mode. Inspect PTO daily
       cost, aggregator revenue, bought energy, sold energy, feasibility status, terminal SOC, and whether the result
       improves on the best known solution. In profit-based mode, accept results that improve or preserve aggregator
       revenue without infeasibility or excessive loss of V2G opportunity. In operational-based mode, accept results
       that reduce PTO cost while preserving feasibility and non-negative aggregator revenue. If the result should
       be revised, return adjusted guidance with exactly 48 buy and 48 sell multipliers; otherwise return an accept
       decision and rationale in the required structured format.


RT zero-shot constrained-output template.
       At each RT timestep, read the current system state, active reference plan, price deviation, energy deviation,
       delay status, previous trigger history, and remaining horizon. The Trigger Agent returns a schema-constrained
       decision: skip or optimize, trigger type, confidence, flagged buses, and rationale. If optimization is triggered,
       the Pricing Agent returns updated buy/sell guidance for the remaining horizon using the current mode
       objective. The Evaluator Agent then accepts, rejects, or requests a bounded rerun based on feasibility, PTO
       cost, aggregator revenue, V2G activity, flagged-bus deviations, and terminal SOC. These RT prompts are
       zero-shot role prompts with constrained output fields rather than the ZS/CoT/FS/FS+CoT DA prompt
       variants.



References
 [1] International Energy Agency, Global ev outlook 2024, Tech. rep., International Energy Agency
     (2024).
     URL https://www.iea.org/reports/global-ev-outlook-2024
 [2] J. A. Manzolli, J. P. Trovão, C. H. Antunes, A review of electric bus vehicles research topics
     – Methods and trends, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 159 (2022) 112211. doi:
     10.1016/j.rser.2022.112211.
     URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1364032122001344
 [3] J. A. Manzolli, J. P. F. Trovão, C. H. Antunes, Electric bus fleet charging management: A robust
     optimisation framework addressing battery ageing, time-of-use tariffs, and energy consumption
     uncertainty, Applied Energy 381 (2025) 125137. doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2024.125137.


                                                                         26
 [4] O. Sadeghian, A. Oshnoei, B. Mohammadi-Ivatloo, V. Vahidinasab, A. Anvari-Moghaddam, A
     comprehensive review on electric vehicles smart charging: Solutions, strategies, technologies, and
     challenges, Journal of Energy Storage 54 (2022) 105241.
 [5] L. Gkatzikis, I. Koutsopoulos, T. Salonidis, The role of aggregators in smart grid demand response
     markets, IEEE Journal on selected areas in communications 31 (7) (2013) 1247–1257.
 [6] S. Burger, J. P. Chaves-Ávila, C. Batlle, I. J. Pérez-Arriaga, A review of the value of aggregators in
     electricity systems, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 77 (2017) 395–405. doi:10.1016/j.
     rser.2017.04.014.

 [7] K. Bruninx, H. Pandžić, H. Le Cadre, E. Delarue, On the interaction between aggregators, electricity
     markets and residential demand response providers, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 35 (2)
     (2019) 840–853.
 [8] S.-A. Amamra, J. Marco, Vehicle-to-grid aggregator to support power grid and reduce electric vehicle
     charging cost, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 178528–178538.

 [9] J. A. Manzolli, J. P. Trovão, C. H. Antunes, Electric bus smart charging under a bi-level optimisation
     model to set dynamic tariffs, in: IECON 2022 – 48th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial
     Electronics Society, 2022, pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/IECON49645.2022.9969101.
[10] X. Tian, Integrated Analysis and Modeling of Energy Demand, Emissions, and Lifecycle Impacts of
     Bus Electrification Under Low-Carbon Electricity Scenarios, Phd thesis, Concordia University (Aug.
     2025).
     URL https://spectrum.library.concordia.ca/id/eprint/996169/
[11] L. Zhao, S. Shen, Z. Zhao, Large-scale electric bus network transition planning via deep reinforcement
     learning, Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 146 (2025) 104899. doi:
     10.1016/j.trd.2025.104899.
     URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1361920925003098
[12] J. Yu, Preparing for an agentic era of human-machine transportation systems: Opportunities,
     challenges, and policy recommendations, Transport Policy 171 (2025) 78–97.
[13] J. Yu, R. Frank, L. Miranda-Moreno, S. Jafarnejad, J. A. Manzolli, F. Liu, J. Wang, A. Eslami,
     Agentic vehicles for human-centered mobility: Definition, prospects, and synergistic co-development
     with vehicle autonomy, arXiv preprint:2507.04996 (2025).
[14] A. Eslami, J. Yu, A Control-Theoretic Foundation for Agentic Systems, arXiv:2603.10779 [eess.SY]
     (Mar. 2026). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2603.10779.
     URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2603.10779
[15] J. A. Manzolli, J. Yu, L. Miranda-Moreno, Synthetic multi-criteria decision analysis (S-MCDA): A
     new framework for participatory transportation planning, Transportation Research Interdisciplinary
     Perspectives 31 (2025) 101463. doi:10.1016/j.trip.2025.101463.
     URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2590198225001423
[16] Y. Wang, F. Liao, C. Lu, Integrated optimization of charger deployment and fleet scheduling for
     battery electric buses, Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 109 (2022)
     103382. doi:10.1016/j.trd.2022.103382.
[17] Z. Bao, J. Li, X. Bai, C. Xie, Z. Chen, M. Xu, W.-L. Shang, H. Li, An optimal charging scheduling
     model and algorithm for electric buses, Applied Energy 332 (2023) 120512.
[18] Y. Zhou, G. P. Ong, Q. Meng, H. Cui, Electric bus charging facility planning with uncertainties:
     Model formulation and algorithm design, Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies
     150 (2023) 104108. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2023.104108.
[19] X. Liu, X. Qu, X. Ma, Optimizing electric bus charging infrastructure considering power matching
     and seasonality, Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 100 (2021) 103057.
     doi:10.1016/j.trd.2021.103057.



                                                    27
[20] Ş. Yıldırım, B. Yıldız, Electric bus fleet composition and scheduling, Transportation Research Part
     C: Emerging Technologies 129 (2021) 103197. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2021.103197.
[21] Y. Zhou, Q. Meng, G. P. Ong, H. Wang, Electric bus charging scheduling on a bus network,
     Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 161 (2024) 104553.

[22] B. Naeimian, G. Mohseni, V. Barzegari, M. Nourinejad, P. Y. Park, Public transportation fleet
     electrification and charger schedule optimization using a decomposition heuristic, Energy 333 (2025)
     137135.
[23] J. Wang, L. Kang, Y. Liu, Optimal scheduling for electric bus fleets based on dynamic programming
     approach by considering battery capacity fade, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 130
     (2020) 109978.
[24] J. A. Manzolli, J. P. Trovão, C. Henggeler Antunes, Optimisation of an electric bus charging strategy
     considering a semi-empirical battery degradation model and weather conditions, in: 2022 11th
     International Conference on Control, Automation and Information Sciences (ICCAIS), IEEE, Hanoi,
     Vietnam, 2022, pp. 298–303. doi:10.1109/ICCAIS56082.2022.9990180.
     URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9990180/
[25] B.-R. Ke, Y.-H. Lin, H.-Z. Chen, S.-C. Fang, Battery charging and discharging scheduling with
     demand response for an electric bus public transportation system, Sustainable Energy Technologies
     and Assessments 40 (2020) 100741.

[26] X. Hu, H. Li, C. Xie, Optimal charging scheduling of an electric bus fleet with photovoltaic-storage-
     charging stations, Applied Energy 390 (2025) 125714.
[27] M. Pagliaro, F. Meneguzzo, Electric bus: A critical overview on the dawn of its widespread uptake,
     Advanced Sustainable Systems 3 (6) (2019) 1800151. doi:10.1002/adsu.201800151.
[28] M. Gallet, T. Massier, T. Hamacher, Estimation of the energy demand of electric buses based
     on real-world data for large-scale public transport networks, Applied Energy 230 (2018) 344–356.
     doi:10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.08.086.
[29] L. Zhang, Y. Han, J. Peng, Y. Wang, Vehicle and charging scheduling of electric bus fleets: A
     comprehensive review, Journal of Intelligent and Connected Vehicles 6 (3) (2023) 116–124. doi:
     10.26599/JICV.2023.9210012.

[30] R. Faia, B. Ribeiro, C. Goncalves, L. Gomes, Z. Vale, Multi-agent based energy community cost
     optimization considering high electric vehicles penetration, Sustainable Energy Technologies and
     Assessments 59 (2023) 103402. doi:10.1016/j.seta.2023.103402.
     URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2213138823003958
[31] A. M. Carreiro, H. M. Jorge, C. H. Antunes, Energy management systems aggregators: A literature
     survey, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 73 (2017) 1160–1172. doi:10.1016/j.rser.2
     017.01.179.
[32] Y. Cao, L. Huang, Y. Li, K. Jermsittiparsert, H. Ahmadi-Nezamabad, S. Nojavan, Optimal scheduling
     of electric vehicles aggregator under market price uncertainty using robust optimization technique,
     International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems 117 (2020) 105628.

[33] J.-M. Clairand, M. González-Rodríguez, I. Cedeño, G. Escrivá-Escrivá, A charging station planning
     model considering electric bus aggregators, Sustainable Energy, Grids and Networks 30 (2022) 100638.
[34] J. Chen, K. Strunz, Optimal Electric Bus Charging and Battery Swapping With Renewable Energy
     and Frequency Control Ancillary Service Through Aggregator, IEEE Transactions on Transportation
     Electrification 11 (1) (2025) 3715–3729. doi:10.1109/TTE.2024.3445830.
     URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10638650/
[35] J. A. Manzolli, J. P. F. Trovão, C. H. Antunes, Aggregator-supported strategy for electric bus fleet
     charging: A hierarchical optimisation approach, Energy 307 (2024) 132497. doi:10.1016/j.energy
     .2024.132497.



                                                   28
[36] S. Majumder, L. Dong, F. Doudi, Y. Cai, C. Tian, D. Kalathil, K. Ding, A. A. Thatte, N. Li, L. Xie,
     Exploring the capabilities and limitations of large language models in the electric energy sector,
     Joule 8 (6) (2024) 1544–1549.
[37] C. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Lu, Y. Zhao, Large language models meet energy systems: Opportunities,
     challenges, and future perspectives, Applied Energy 403 (2026) 127076. doi:10.1016/j.apenergy
     .2025.127076.
[38] H. Shi, L. Fang, X. Chen, C. Gu, K. Ma, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Gu, E. G. Lim, Review of the
     opportunities and challenges to accelerate mass-scale application of smart grids with large-language
     models, IET Smart Grid 7 (6) (2024) 737–759. doi:10.1049/stg2.12191.

[39] G. Antonesi, T. Cioara, I. Anghel, V. Michalakopoulos, E. Sarmas, L. Toderean, From transformers
     to large language models: A systematic review of ai applications in the energy sector towards agentic
     digital twins, arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06359 (2025).
[40] A. Eslami, J. Yu, Stability without safety: Gain manipulation attacks on agentic cyber-physical
     systems, arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.07803 (2026).
[41] A. Eslami, J. Yu, Security risks of agentic vehicles: A systematic analysis of cognitive and cross-layer
     threats, arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.17041 (2025).




                                                     29
