                                                     Embedded Arena: Iterative Optimization via
                                                               Hardware Feedback


                                              Zhihan Zhang ∗ Alexander Le Metzger ∗ Jiuyang Lyu ∗ Chun-Cheng Chang
                                             Jiayi Shao     Yujia Liu Emmanuel Azuh Mensah          Edward Wang Kurtis Heimerl
                                                     Gregory D. Abowd     Shwetak Patel      Natasha Jaques  Vikram Iyer
                                                University of Washington University of California San Diego Northeastern University




arXiv:2606.16190v1 [cs.AR] 15 Jun 2026
                                                                              ∗
                                                                                Equal contribution
                                                                         zzhihan@cs.washington.edu



                                                                                        Abstract
                                                     Embedded devices from wildlife monitoring stations to clinical wearables require
                                                     local AI inference due to latency, communication, or privacy constraints. Optimiz-
                                                     ing models for heterogeneous microcontrollers (MCUs) requires simultaneously
                                                     satisfying hard physical constraints on memory, power, and temperature while
                                                     preserving accuracy, a multidimensional optimization that is today performed man-
                                                     ually by experts. We ask whether an LLM agent can autonomously navigate this
                                                     complex, multi-turn pipeline guided by real hardware feedback, and introduce a
                                                     hardware-in-the-loop agent arena in which the agent iteratively refines both model
                                                     and firmware—compiling, flashing, and measuring on real hardware—to enable
                                                     closed-loop optimization. Frontier models, including Claude Opus 4.7 and Gemini
                                                     3.1 Pro, fail entirely without hardware feedback (0% deployment success), whereas
                                                     our hardware-in-the-loop formulation achieves the first successful deployment
                                                     within three iterations and can surpass human expert results within seven. This
                                                     agentic co-optimization achieves 250× compression for vision models with <3.3%
                                                     accuracy loss and 400× for audio with <6% Feature Error Rate loss, enabling
                                                     battery-free operation on a commercial MCU via solar harvesting. We demonstrate
                                                     practical impact in two real-world systems: an elk-detection camera trap (96.7% ac-
                                                     curacy) and a phonetic-transcription wearable (8.44% FER) for child development
                                                     research.1


                                         1     Introduction
                                         Advances in large, cloud-based AI models have unlocked remarkable capabilities across vision,
                                         language, and multimodal reasoning, but leave a gap for applications with stringent latency, privacy,
                                         or connectivity requirements. Remote wildlife cameras must detect and classify species of interest
                                         without reliable network access [15, 16], mobile devices may process audio and biosignals locally
                                         to avoid the privacy risks and power costs of cloud streaming [2, 8, 30], and physical AI systems
                                         with safety-critical perception-action cycles cannot tolerate round-trip latency to the cloud. Such
                                         applications demand small models that run directly on microcontroller (MCU) class hardware. These
                                         devices have many orders of magnitude lower clock speeds, memory, and storage than datacenter
                                         GPUs, requiring substantial model compression and optimization to utilize the growing hardware
                                         acceleration capabilities being built into MCUs [12].
                                         Deploying AI in this heterogeneous, rapidly evolving hardware landscape requires multidimensional,
                                         system-level optimization that satisfies hard physical constraints (e.g., memory footprint, power
                                         consumption, thermal limits) while maximizing model accuracy. On the hardware side, this landscape
                                              1 § https://github.com/ubicomplab/embedded-arena



                                         Preprint.
Figure 1: AI agents iteratively optimize models to run on MCUs within their tight power, thermal,
and compute constraints using hardware-in-the-loop feedback. We demonstrate successful model
optimization for real-world applications, including wildlife detection and child speech monitoring.

is a moving target: the STM32F7 [33] MCU series alone ships in 22 silicon variants, each with
distinct memory configurations and AI accelerators. On the model side, practitioners must navigate
compression techniques (e.g., quantization, operator substitution), each of which interacts differently
with the target chip’s processing capabilities. These optimization choices are coupled and competing.
For example, for object detection on MCUs, reducing camera resolution saves activation memory
and power draw but directly degrades accuracy [6]. Today navigating these trade-offs is performed
manually by experts who hold rare, joint expertise in embedded systems and machine learning (ML).
Skilled practitioners using deployment frameworks such as LiteRT [19] spend weeks optimizing a
single model on real hardware for a single deployment—a process that must be repeated from scratch
for every new chip [33]. In this paper, we ask: can we design LLM agents that autonomously navigate
the edge AI deployment pipeline, guided by measurements from real hardware?
To answer this question, we construct a hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) environment in which the
agent iteratively produces, compiles, flashes, and refines firmware subject to physical feedback. We
observe that even state-of-the-art models like Claude Opus 4.7 fail entirely in this setting when
restricted to software-only feedback. Closing the loop with physical measurements, such as power
and temperature directly from the device, guides the agent toward firmware that actually works on the
device. HIL raises deployment success rates from 0% to 80% on the hardest tasks. We formalize this
loop as a continuous optimization problem by reducing physical measurements to a programmatically
scorable scalar objective, enabling iterative refinement. This transforms an opaque, expert-gated
process into an accessible workflow, letting practitioners without joint hardware-AI expertise deploy
state-of-the-art models on resource-constrained devices.
Our HIL formulation also addresses a gap in existing agentic systems and LLM benchmarks. While
LLM-based agents have demonstrated impressive autonomy in complex workflows [51, 29, 28, 48,
39, 4, 20, 11], benchmarks for evaluating them on long-horizon, system-level optimization remain
rare. Most (e.g., SWE-bench [26], TerminalBench [35], HumanEval [9]) focus entirely on the digital
domain, evaluating agents on isolated, human-curated single-turn tasks rather than end-to-end system
optimization. Because these tasks are scored on binary correctness, they lack a mechanism for
continuous self-improvement and saturate quickly as models advance, requiring periodic manual
updates. A smaller family of Kaggle-style competitions [4] poses open-ended optimization scored
by continuous software metrics (e.g., held-out accuracy) to support iterative hill-climbing. Our
HIL arena inherits this open-ended optimization paradigm but extends it to performance metrics
measured directly from the physical world at test time, where results vary with ambient conditions
and component state, forcing agents to reason about real hardware behavior.
We summarize our contributions as follows:

1. We are the first to formalize the deployment of AI on resource-constrained devices as a hardware-
   in-the-loop agent arena for iterative optimization, and physically build the end-to-end evaluation
   infrastructure.

2. We perform a comprehensive study of how context and hardware feedback shape the artifacts
   produced by LLM agents. HIL achieves the first successful deployment within three iterations and
   can surpass human expert results within seven, where frontier LLMs fail entirely without it.


                                                  2
3. We achieve 250× compression for vision models with <3.3% accuracy loss, and 400× for audio
   with <6% Feature Error Rate (FER), also reducing power draw by over 58% and peak device
   temperature rise by over 40%.
4. We demonstrate practical impact in two real-world deployments developed in direct collaboration
   with domain practitioners: a solar-powered camera trap for elk detection achieving 96.7% accuracy
   under 7 mW average power, and a children’s head-worn device with 8.44% on-device FER for
   phonetic transcription.

2     Hardware-in-the-Loop Arena
We present a hardware-in-the-loop arena in which an LLM agent must generate, compile, flash, and
iteratively refine software subject to physical feedback signals returned by real hardware. Unlike
software-only benchmarks, our arena closes the loop with the physical world: rewards are not
computed by scoring functions, but are measured by instruments attached to the device under test. We
now formalize this as a constrained optimization problem over real hardware, then instantiate it across
three physically distinct axes: model compression, power minimization, and thermal management.
The formalism we develop in §2.1 is general to any constrained hardware target.

2.1   Problem Formalization

Hardware constraint vector. Let H denote a target hardware
platform characterized by a constraint vector
                  h = (h1 , h2 , . . . , hK ) ∈ RK ,               (1)
where each component hk encodes a physical resource limit (e.g.,
flash storage in bytes, static RAM in bytes, peak supply current
in amperes, maximum junction temperature in kelvin, supported
operators). A solution is deployable only if all K constraints are
simultaneously satisfied. We note that h can be automatically
identified from datasheets via web search and verified using a
combination of the compiler toolchain.
                                                                           Figure 2: Hardware setup.
Solution space. A central design choice of our arena is that the solution space S is entirely open-
ended. The agent produces a software artifact s ∈ S, which may be firmware source code, a serialized
neural network, a linker configuration, or any combination thereof. The arena is agent-agnostic
and imposes no constraints on how s is constructed: the agent may employ any architecture or
strategy (e.g., retrieval-augmented generation, multi-agent architectures [29]) and is judged solely on
deployability and physical performance on the target hardware.
Given s and h, the build-and-flash operator Φ : S × RK → {0, 1} returns 1 if s compiles, boots
successfully, and executes the required workload correctly on the device, and 0 otherwise. When
Φ(s, h) = 1, a physical measurement M : S×RK → RM returns a vector of M empirically observed
quantities m = M(s, h) (e.g., inference accuracy, peak current draw, peak core temperature).

Optimization objective. Each benchmark task is defined by a tuple T = (h, f, c), where f :
RM → R is a task-specific objective to optimize, and c ∈ RC denotes task-level feasibility constraints
that complement the hard physical limits in h and must be satisfied for s to be valid (e.g., a minimum
accuracy floor). The agent’s goal is to find a deployable artifact s⋆ that minimizes the task objective:
                          s⋆ = arg min f (M(s, h))         s.t.   Φ(s, h) = 1.                      (2)
                                   s∈S

Because each exploration round consumes real resources (e.g., LLM inference, compilation, physical
hardware measurement), the number of iterations n before reaching a solution is penalized as a
separate metric.

Iterative agent loop. The benchmark is structured as a multi-turn interaction {s0 } ∪ {(st , ot )}N max
                                                                                                  t=1
(Figure 1). At t = 0, the agent is provided an initial artifact s0 (e.g., a model.py specifying a pre-
trained model architecture, or a firmware.c implementing a reference inference pipeline) together


                                                       3
with the hardware constraint vector h and the task objective f . The initial artifact s0 serves as a starting
point for optimization and need not satisfy the hardware constraints outright (e.g., Φ(s0 , h) = 0
when a pre-trained model exceeds the target flash budget).
At each subsequent step t ≥ 1, the agent submits a modified artifact st ; the benchmark executes
Φ(st , h) and, if Φ = 1, runs M, then returns the full observation ot = (Φ(st , h), mt ) to the
agent as a structured natural-language summary (e.g., current draw, measured chip temperature). If
Φ(st , h) = 0, the agent receives only the failure diagnostic without physical measurements.
The agent is allotted a budget of Nmax attempts.

Agent memory and context. At each round t, the agent’s artifact st is written to a dedicated file
(e.g., iteration_t.c), preserving the full artifact history on disk. The observation ot is appended
as a structured natural-language summary directly to the agent’s context window (see Appendix F).
The agent is additionally equipped with tools to read and edit local files. The agent may query all
prior artifacts {s0 , . . . , st−1 } on demand to inform st . We preserve the full failure trajectory rather
than maintaining only the current best artifact via version-control rollback [3], so the agent has the
option to understand past failures when proposing st .

Benchmark score. To enable fair comparison across agents, we define the benchmark score B for
a task as
                                   B = f (M(s⋆ , h)) ,                                    (3)
where s⋆ is the best deployable solution found by the agent within Nmax rounds, and f is defined
so that lower B is always better (maximization objectives are negated). If no deployable solution
satisfying c is found within Nmax rounds, the agent receives B = ∞.
When two agents achieve equal B, we break ties by the total number of attempts n ≤ Nmax , including
attempts where Φ(st , h) = 0 (i.e., the artifact fails to compile or boot). Lower n is better.

2.2     Task Instantiations on MCUs

MCUs represent a particularly demanding instantiation of the framework in §2.1: with typically
128 KB–512 KB of SRAM, 512 KB–4 MB of flash, computing throughput two to three orders of
magnitude below the tens of TOPS available on a smartphone SoC, and power budgets measured in
milliwatts, they stress every dimension of the hardware constraint vector h simultaneously.
We instantiate three tasks along distinct axes of h: model, power, and thermal (see Appendix for
full objective derivations and evaluation variants). All three physical dimensions can, in principle,
be incorporated jointly into a single f ; we decompose them into separate tasks to enable clean,
interpretable evaluation of each. The tasks are defined solely in terms of (h, f ) and the feedback mt ,
and therefore can be extended to any hardware target for which Φ and M can be automated; our
experiments span multiple MCU families (§3).

2.2.1    Task 1: Model Compression
Deploying a neural network on an MCU requires satisfying all h: flash (model weights), SRAM
(activations), and MCU-specific constraints such as supported operators and quantization formats.
Given a pre-trained model and calibration dataset s0 and evaluation dataset D, the agent produces
a compressed artifact s derived from s0 (e.g., via quantization or distillation) that maximizes on-
device inference accuracy macc = Macc (s, D) ∈ [0, 1] subject to Φ(s, h) = 1. When two agents
achieve equal B = fcomp , ties are broken by the number of attempts n, rewarding sample-efficient
optimization.

2.2.2    Task 2: Power Minimization
Excessive peak current Ipeak can trigger brownouts due to limits on battery discharge rate or permanent
hardware damage even when the time-averaged current is well within budget. For battery-operated
devices, total energy per event E determines operational lifetime on a fixed battery capacity. The
agent minimizes one or both quantities—instantiated as separate variants targeting fpeak (m) = Ipeak
and fenergy (m) = E—subject to a minimum accuracy floor macc ≥ m0acc (see Appendix D).


                                                     4
Figure 3: HIL Enables Iterative Improvement in Model Compression. (a) YOLO on MAX78000,
where Gemini 3.1 Pro surpasses the human expert best model 14.15% by iteration 7. (b) Wav2Vec2
on STM32N6. In both tasks agents hill-climb steadily once a valid st is established.


2.2.3    Task 3: Thermal Management
Device temperature governs hardware reliability and, critically for wearable applications, user safety:
skin-contact temperatures above approximately 317 K (44 °C) can cause low-temperature burns with
prolonged contact [38, 45].
Let Tamb be the measured ambient temperature and Tdev (t) (K) the device surface temperature over
the elapsed time [0, τ ]. The agent minimizes peak temperature rise ∆T = Tpeak − Tamb under a
controlled ambient load, with Tmax as a hard safety ceiling in h. Because ∆T depends on Tamb ,
we evaluate each device across multiple controlled ambient conditions, from room temperature to a
surface approximating skin contact; details are in Appendix E.

3     Experiments
To disentangle the contribution of physical feedback from LLMs’ parametric knowledge of embedded
development, we evaluate three MCU targets (ESP32-S3, MAX78000, STM32N6) under three
information settings:

1. Score (Sco): a baseline where the agent receives the task description and initial artifact s0 , with
   access to a sandboxed environment supporting file manipulation and code execution. At each turn
   it observes only the binary feasibility check Φ(st , h) and the scalar optimization objective value
   ot = f (M(st , h)).
2. Documentation (Doc): the agent is additionally provided expert-curated device datasheets and
   toolchain documentation describing target constraints (e.g., supported operators, memory limits,
   required configuration formats) as part of s0 and, except for model compression, may use web
   search to look up further details. This baseline is motivated by our finding that without such
   materials, frontier LLMs fail even basic MCU deployment questions (Appendix B).
3. Our Hardware-in-the-loop (HIL): extends Doc with physical feedback ot after each iteration,
   including resource utilization, serial logs, and deployment statistics.

We evaluate six frontier LLMs: GPT-5.4, GPT-5.4-mini, Claude Opus 4.7, Claude Sonnet 4.6, Gemini
3.1 Pro, and Gemini 3 Flash, each at both low and high reasoning effort. Each run is capped at
Nmax = 10 iterations, with up to 30 tool calls per iteration.

3.1     Model Compression

Model compression evaluates whether agents can reduce a model’s footprint to meet MCU hardware
constraints while preserving task performance. We instantiate this task across vision and audio, two
common modalities in edge, to demonstrate generalizability, on two platforms with diverse constraints:
MAX78000 (max 442 KB of model weights; very limited operator support) and STM32N6 (4.2 MB
of live model weights; more flexible operator support). After the agent produces a compressed artifact
st , the binary check Φ(st , h) confirms (i) the compressed model is trainable (i.e., we can perform
backpropagation on the weights and improve the loss during training) and, (ii) can be compiled and
run on the respective hardware with the code and network sidecars the agent provides. The score f is
test-set performance of the trained compressed model, i.e., wr = 0 on the target MCU.


                                                  5
Figure 4: Thinking Budget Improves. HIL results comparing high (solid) and low (dashed)
reasoning effort for the three models that succeed in both settings.

Example 1: Object Detection on Table 1: Best On-Device Accuracy on MAX78000.
MAX78000. The agent receives a pre- Values are mAP50-95 (YOLO11, COCO); higher is
trained YOLO11 checkpoint [27] and the      better. ✗ indicate no successful deployment within
COCO image segmentation [43] training       Nmax attempts. Three HIL agents surpass the human
set as s0 , and maximizes the mAP50-95 expert baseline (14.15%).
(f ) on the held out test set of COCO (D).
As shown in Table 7a, detailed HIL feed- Model                      Sco       Doc         HIL
back is necessary: without it, only GPT-               Thinking L H L             H     L        H
5.4 succeeds, and only in 40% of attempts
when documentation is provided—far be-       Claude  Opus  4.7    ✗    ✗    ✗     ✗   15.23     16.93
low its 70% success rate under HIL. Table 1  Claude Sonnet 4.6 ✗ ✗ ✗              ✗     ✗         ✗
underscores the impact of HIL feedback:      GPT-5.4              ✗ ✗ ✗ 8.42           9.12     12.07
                                             GPT-5.4 mini         ✗ ✗ ✗           ✗     ✗         ✗
Gemini 3.1 Pro reaches a top mAP50-95 of
                                             Gemini 3.1 Pro       ✗ ✗ ✗           ✗   10.43 18.03
B = 18.03%. Notably, both Claude Opus        Gemini 3 Flash       ✗ ✗ ✗           ✗     ✗         ✗
4.7 and Gemini 3.1 Pro beat human experts
at 14.15%. HIL also enables more success-
ful deployments, giving agents more opportunities to hill-climb (Fig. 3) and the hardware-utilization
feedback needed to design more efficient models. Figure 8 characterizes how architectural choices
affect physical performance on the MAX78000 empirically.

Example 2: Speech to Inter- Table 2: Best On-Device Error on STM32N6. Values are Feature
national Phonetic Alphabet Error Rate (%; Wav2Vec2, speech-to-IPA); lower is better.
(IPA)      Transcription    on
STM32N6. The agent re- Model                          Sco             Doc          HIL
ceives a pretrained Wav2Vec2
checkpoint [1] and speech-to-          Thinking    L       H       L      H      L      H
IPA transcription dataset [36] Claude Opus 4.7   38.69     ✗     39.90     ✗   32.14 29.12
as s0 , and minimizes Phonetic Claude Sonnet 4.6 38.41     ✗     42.31     ✗   29.78     ✗
Error Rate (PER) on the held GPT-5.4               ✗     36.93 41.81 37.01 39.47 35.73
out test set. Table 6 and 7b GPT-5.4 mini          ✗       ✗       ✗       ✗     ✗     44.29
show that hardware feedback Gemini 3.1 Pro         ✗     33.57     ✗     39.30   ✗     32.19
leads to significantly higher Gemini 3 Flash       ✗       ✗       ✗       ✗     ✗       ✗
success rates: 36.7% for HIL,
19.2% for Doc, and 16.7% for Sco overall, with GPT-5.4 reaching 90% success rate under high
reasoning.
Unlike on the MAX78000, the more lenient memory and operator constraints of the STM32N6 allow
smaller models (Sonnet 4.6, GPT-5.4-mini) to succeed even without HIL, indicating that the value of
HIL grows with task difficulty. Nonetheless, Table 2 shows that HIL consistently yields lower Feature
Error Rates (FER) [14] across all LLMs. Figure 4 reveals a consistent gap between high and low
reasoning effort, though high-reasoning Claude models occasionally over-think and fail (Table 2).

3.2   Power Minimization

The second task evaluates whether agents can optimize firmware for physical power measurements
beyond deployability. We instantiate this task on MAX78000 using a seeded firmware for object
detection. At each iteration, the agent edits C firmware; the harness compiles it with the Maxim SDK,


                                                 6
flashes it over JTAG/SWD, and powers the board through a Nordic PPK2 at 3.3 V, recording a 20 s
current trace. A candidate is valid only if it preserves the full required workload: five live camera-
based inference cycles separated by idle intervals, UART stage logging, full CNN post-processing,
and the required completion checkpoint. An LLM judge verifies the UART trace and firmware
behavior to reject attempts that bypass the camera, use synthetic input, hard-code inference results,
or otherwise evade the task. We also manually verified that the LLM judge never misclassified an
artifact.
Peak-current during inference. The             Table 3: Deployment Success Rate by Task and Feed-
first variant minimizes peak current           back Configuration. Values are mean successful itera-
maxt I(t), which reduces instantaneous         tions (%) across models (N = 6); higher is better.
current spikes that matter for small batter-
ies, energy harvesters, and power supply        Task                              Sco    Doc    HIL
sizing. The hard constraint is Ipeak ≤
32 mA, matching the minimum solar-              Power Minimization (MAX78000)
harvesting budget of our target deploy-           Ipeak ≤ 32 mA                  15.9    38.3   46.7
                                                  Energy                         25.0    38.3   68.3
ment (2 cm2 panel, ≥ 16 mA per cm2 at
0.5 V under daylight; Fig. 5a).                 Thermal Management (ESP32-S3R8)
                                                  Room temp (Tpeak ≤ 37 ◦ C       13.3   10.0   26.7
Agents may change clock frequencies,              Contact-heated (Tpeak ≤ 51 ◦ C) 10.0   16.7 33.3
sleep scheduling, peripheral gating, and
firmware scheduling. HIL raises success-
ful deployments from 15.9% (Sco) and 38.3% (Doc) to 46.7% (Table 3). Per-model results (Table 11a)
show that the example clock-configuration code provided in Doc helps some models discover low-
current settings, but HIL broadens success across the model set by exposing whether each firmware
variant actually boots, runs the required workload, and where the current spikes occur. The best
measured currents are reported in Table 12; several agents reach the 18–22 mA range, with the best
single run at 17.64 mA, a 53% reduction from the 37.19 mA unoptimized baseline at t = 0.
                                                                                              R
Total inference energy. The second variant minimizes total energy per cycle, E = V I(t) dt,
creating a different optimization pressure from peak current, for example, simply lowering clock
speed reduces instantaneous draw but can increase runtime and thus total energy (Fig. 9 and 12). HIL
is especially valuable here, raising successful iterations to 68.3% vs. 38.3% for Doc and 25.0% for
Sco (Table 3), enabling all frontier models to find valid solutions (Table 11b). As with peak current,
HIL most reliably widens the set of models that satisfy Φ and reach a finite B, while the single lowest
scalar occasionally arises from the Documentation setting when a model happens to find a strong
clocking/sleep schedule.


3.3   Thermal Management

The third task evaluates whether agents can manage device temperature on an ESP32-S3R8 running
an LLM [49] inference workload, We test §2.2.3 across two controlled ambient conditions: room
temperature (Tamb ≈ 25◦ C) and a contact-heated setup (Tcontact ≈ 33◦ C) simulating wearable
deployment. Each condition carries a distinct hard ceiling grounded in skin-safety standards [38]: the
room-temperature ceiling of Tpeak ≤ 37◦ C corresponds to the accepted upper limit for comfortable
continuous wearing, while the contact-heated ceiling of Tpeak ≤ 51◦ C corresponds to the two-minute
burn threshold for skin contact.
In both settings, the agent edits an ESP-IDF directory, a candidate passes Φ(s, h) = 1 only if the
firmware brings up WiFi as a SoftAP, streams generated tokens over UDP to the required number of
logical clients, completes all prompts, and prints the completion checkpoint within a strict τ = 60 s
execution window. The 60 s deadline acts as a hard feasibility constraint in h: it prevents trivially
minimizing ∆T by aggressive clock throttling. An LLM judge rejects any st that substitutes cached
or fake inference results. The contact-heated condition additionally tightens the workload contract
in c: the firmware must stream to 80 logical clients, collect internal temperature samples at 200 Hz
into PSRAM, stream the buffered samples over UDP, and drain the buffer before the completion
checkpoint.
HIL achieves the highest success rates in both conditions: 26.7% at room temperature and 33.3%
under contact heating, compared with 13.3% / 10.0% for Sco and 10.0% / 16.7% for Doc (Ta-
ble 3). GPT-5.4 with HIL reaches 70% success at room temperature (Table 16a) and achieves


                                                    7
Figure 5: Empirical characterization of energy harvesting modalities. (a) Harvested solar power
density from 2.3 V and 5 V silicon panels. (b) End-to-end DC output power versus available RF input
power. (c) Harvested power from a directed 1550 nm laser system across varying incident optical
powers at transmission distances of 20 cm and 2 m, demonstrating negligible attenuation.

B = +7.41◦ C above ambient (32.41◦ C absolute), a large improvement over the unoptimized 55◦ C
baseline (Table 17a).

3.4   Why Agents Fail

Across all tasks, a common failure mode emerges: Code that compiles is not code that runs on
hardware. In compression, agents frequently produce models that train successfully in PyTorch
but fail in target-specific synthesis due to unsupported operators, invalid accelerator mappings,
mismatched configuration files, calibration errors, or memory layouts that only appear valid off-
device. In power and thermal optimization, agents can compile and flash firmware that still fails
physically: the board may hang after clock changes, fail to wake from sleep, skip sensor or inference
stages, stop streaming data, or optimize the metric by evading the workload. We observe agents
disabling cameras, substituting dummy inputs, reducing UDP fan-out, shortening prompts, and
hard-coding completion messages.
HIL feedback addresses these failure modes by exposing hidden execution state through physical
traces, serial logs, checkpoint detection, and behavior judging, enabling agents to first establish a
valid hardware baseline and then optimize rather than chasing artifacts that only work in software.

4     Applications and Real-World Deployments
We demonstrate the practical impact of our HIL agentic pipeline through two real-world deployments,
developed in direct collaboration with domain practitioners facing concrete constraints. Both de-
ployments are battery-free or battery-constrained, so we first characterize the harvesting budgets that
examine feasibility.

4.1   Energy Harvesting

Energy harvesting sets the power budget for batteryless or battery-assisted operation. We characterize
three practical ambient sources; alternative sources (e.g., thermal, kinetic, vibration) typically provide
power densities one to two orders of magnitude lower [50].
Solar provides the highest power density among ambient sources. We measured two commercial
silicon panels (Voltaic) over a 5-hour sunny day using sourcemeters (Tektronix 2470), sampling
harvested power per unit area throughout. Outdoor sunlight delivers ∼12 mW/cm2 around noon and
∼8 mW/cm2 near sunset (Fig. 5a); an indoor panel near a window yields ∼2.5 mW/cm2 . Even at
indoor irradiance levels, a 3 cm2 panel can sustain MCU-class loads.
Radio frequency (RF) (e.g., Wi-Fi, cellular, broadcast) is ubiquitous in urban environments [34, 44].
We characterized an RF-to-DC harvester (Powercast P2110) across a range of input power levels.
As shown in Fig. 5b, at -5 dBm the harvested power falls below the continuous operating threshold
of the MAX78000 inference. Since ambient RF densities are typically below -10 dBm, continuous
RF-powered inference is only feasible with intermittent computing [22].
Laser power delivery concentrates high energy density onto a small area [25]. We characterize a
1550 nm fiber-output laser (FB-M1550-2000HO) collimated via an achromatic doublet (Thorlabs


                                                    8
Figure 6: Real-World Deployments. (a) Elk detection accuracy using a low-power camera with
MAX78000 across different compressed models. (b) Children’s head-worn device for data collection.
The electronics (MCU, camera, and microphone) are concealed inside. A 2-second audio snippet of
toddler saying “I can do it for him” with on-device phoneme transcription overlaid.

AC254-030-C) and focused onto a 1 cm2 photovoltaic cell (Broadcom AFBR-POC205A9). Laser
harvesting sustains substantially higher loads than RF with an efficiency over 45% (Fig. 5c), owing to
the negligible free-space attenuation of a collimated beam, making it a practical choice for controlled
deployments with unobstructed line-of-sight.

4.2   Battery-Free Camera Traps for Elk Detection

A commercial farmer in the Pacific Northwest managing 7,500 acres faces recurring crop losses
from elk intrusions. Prior deployments of cellular-connected trail cameras were limited by monthly
battery replacement, per-camera data costs, and high false-trigger rates—all of which on-device
inference directly addresses (see Appendix H for details). Our HIL pipeline compressed a YOLOv8
elk-detection model to the MAX78000, achieving 96.7% accuracy at under 36 mW during active
inference and 7 mW average power—low enough for continuous solar-powered operation. This
eliminates both battery replacement and cloud transmission costs at scale.

4.3   Children Wearables for Real-Time Phoneme Monitoring

Longitudinal, in-the-wild speech data is essential for studying early language development, yet
no existing wearable supports continuous all-day collection. In collaboration with developmental
scientists (see Appendix I for details), we identified on-device phoneme detection as the key enabler:
the device triggers recording only when children’s speech is present and performs transcription locally
without cloud transmission.
Children’s wearables impose two hard physical constraints beyond accuracy: the device must run all
day on a tiny 1,200 mAh battery, and surface temperatures must remain within safe contact limits
throughout. Our HIL pipeline jointly optimized compression, power, and thermal on the STM32N6,
compressing a Wav2Vec2-based speech-to-IPA model to a Feature Error Rate 8.44%, while jointly
satisfying both constraints. This offers an opportunity to detect child phonemes and provide early
intervention.


5     Discussion and Conclusion

We present a hardware-in-the-loop agent arena for AI deployment on MCUs, where physical mea-
surements serve as the agent’s primary feedback signal. Across compute feasibility, power, and heat,
three hardware targets, and six frontier models, hardware-in-the-loop feedback raises deployment
success from 0% to surpassing human expert results within seven iterations, yielding working
models we evaluate on real-world data for wildlife and wearable deployments.
Limitations. Our evaluations have three limitations. First, each agent run is capped at Nmax = 10
due to the compounding real resource costs of each round (e.g., LLM inference, flash cycles, and
physical instrument time), meaning we likely have not observed the performance ceiling of the
hardware-in-the-loop arena; longer budgets may yield further gains but require future investigation.
Second, we evaluated six closed-source frontier models; open-source and locally hosted LLMs remain
untested and may exhibit different failure modes or cost-accuracy trade-offs relevant to practitioners
who cannot share proprietary firmware with third-party APIs. Third, our instantiations cover three
MCU families (ESP32-S3, MAX78000, STM32N6) and two input modalities (vision and audio);


                                                  9
time-series sensor inputs, such as IMU and ECG signals, represent popular edge modalities that our
current task suite does not address.
Broader applicability. While this work focuses on deep learning for MCUs, the underlying recipe of
reducing a physical objective to a programmatic score that LLM agents can iteratively optimize could
generalize well beyond this setting. First, additional physical constraints can be folded into the loop,
from electromagnetic emissions and vibration tolerance to long-horizon properties like component
aging. Second, adding a vision frontend to wrap instruments such as mechanical balances, manual
titrations, and legacy measurements common in wet labs can enable agents to use a vast array of
legacy non-digital measurements. Third, this formulation can be extended to scientific domains with
unbounded optimization landscapes, such as material design or catalyst discovery, where the agent’s
"compiler" becomes a fabrication and characterization pipeline.

References
 [1] KoelLabs/xlsr-english-01 · Hugging Face, June 2025.
 [2] Mohsin Y Ahmed, Md Mahbubur Rahman, Viswam Nathan, Ebrahim Nemati, Korosh Vatanparvar, and
     Jilong Kuang. mLung: Privacy-Preserving Naturally Windowed Lung Activity Detection for Pulmonary
     Patients. In 2019 IEEE 16th International Conference on Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks
     (BSN), pages 1–4, May 2019. ISSN: 2376-8894.
 [3] Andrej. karpathy/autoresearch, June 2026. original-date: 2026-03-06T22:00:43Z.
 [4] Eser Aygün, Anastasiya Belyaeva, Gheorghe Comanici, Marc Coram, Hao Cui, Jake Garrison, Renee
     Johnston, Anton Kast, Cory Y. McLean, Peter Norgaard, Zahra Shamsi, David Smalling, James Thompson,
     Subhashini Venugopalan, Brian P. Williams, Chujun He, Sarah Martinson, Martyna Plomecka, Lai Wei,
     Yuchen Zhou, Qian-Ze Zhu, Matthew Abraham, Erica Brand, Anna Bulanova, Jeffrey A. Cardille, Chris Co,
     Scott Ellsworth, Grace Joseph, Malcolm Kane, Ryan Krueger, Johan Kartiwa, Dan Liebling, Jan-Matthis
     Lueckmann, Paul Raccuglia, Xuefei Julie Wang, Katherine Chou, James Manyika, Yossi Matias, John C.
     Platt, Lizzie Dorfman, Shibl Mourad, and Michael P. Brenner. An AI system to help scientists write
     expert-level empirical software. Nature, pages 1–3, May 2026.
 [5] Colby Banbury, Chuteng Zhou, Igor Fedorov, Ramon Matas Navarro, Urmish Thakker, Dibakar Gope,
     Vijay Janapa Reddi, Matthew Mattina, and Paul N. Whatmough. MicroNets: Neural Network Architectures
     for Deploying TinyML Applications on Commodity Microcontrollers, April 2021. arXiv:2010.11267 [cs].
 [6] Luca Bompani, Manuele Rusci, Daniele Palossi, Francesco Conti, and Luca Benini. Multi-resolution
     Rescored ByteTrack for Video Object Detection on Ultra-low-power Embedded Systems. In 2024
     IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), pages 2182–
     2190, Seattle, WA, USA, June 2024. IEEE.
 [7] Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, and Song Han. ProxylessNAS: Direct Neural Architecture Search on Target Task
     and Hardware, February 2019. arXiv:1812.00332 [cs].
 [8] Soujanya Chatterjee, Md Mahbubur Rahman, Ebrahim Nemati, Viswam Nathan, Korosh Vatanparvar, and
     Jilong Kuang. mLung++: automated characterization of abnormal lung sounds in pulmonary patients using
     multimodal mobile sensors. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 2019 ACM International Joint Conference
     on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2019 ACM International Symposium on
     Wearable Computers, UbiComp/ISWC ’19 Adjunct, pages 474–481, New York, NY, USA, September
     2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
 [9] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan,
     Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger,
     Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder,
     Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet,
     Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-
     Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir
     Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam,
     Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer,
     Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba.
     Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code, July 2021. arXiv:2107.03374 [cs].
[10] Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie Yan, Meghan Cowan, Haichen Shen,
     Leyuan Wang, Yuwei Hu, Luis Ceze, Carlos Guestrin, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. TVM: an automated
     end-to-end optimizing compiler for deep learning. In Proceedings of the 13th USENIX conference on


                                                     10
     Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI’18, pages 579–594, USA, October 2018. USENIX
     Association.

[11] Yizhe Chi, Deyao Hong, Dapeng Jiang, Tianwei Luo, Kaisen Yang, Boshi Zhang, Zhe Cao, Xiaoyan
     Fan, Bingxiang He, Han Hao, Weiyang Jin, Dianqiao Lei, Qingle Liu, Houde Qian, Bowen Wang, Situ
     Wang, Youjie Zheng, Yifan Zhou, Calvin Xiao, Eren Cai, and Qinhuai Na. Frontier-Eng: Benchmark-
     ing Self-Evolving Agents on Real-World Engineering Tasks with Generative Optimization, April 2026.
     arXiv:2604.12290 [cs.AI] version: 2.

[12] Alexander Curtiss, Blaine Rothrock, Abu Bakar, Nivedita Arora, Jason Huang, Zachary Englhardt, Aaron-
     Patrick Empedrado, Chixiang Wang, Saad Ahmed, Yang Zhang, Nabil Alshurafa, and Josiah Hester.
     FaceBit: Smart Face Masks Platform. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., 5(4):151:1–
     151:44, December 2022.

[13] Robert David, Jared Duke, Advait Jain, Vijay Janapa Reddi, Nat Jeffries, Jian Li, Nick Kreeger, Ian
     Nappier, Meghna Natraj, Shlomi Regev, Rocky Rhodes, Tiezhen Wang, and Pete Warden. TensorFlow Lite
     Micro: Embedded Machine Learning on TinyML Systems, March 2021. arXiv:2010.08678 [cs].

[14] David R. Mortensen, Patrick Littell, Akash Bharadwaj, Kartik Goyal, Chris Dyer, and Lori S. Levin.
     PanPhon: A Resource for Mapping IPA Segments to Articulatory Feature Vectors. In Proceedings of
     COLING 2016, the 26th International Conference on Computational Linguistics: Technical Papers. ACL,
     2016.

[15] Harsh Desai, Matteo Nardello, Davide Brunelli, and Brandon Lucia. Camaroptera: A Long-range Image
     Sensor with Local Inference for Remote Sensing Applications. ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst.,
     21(3):32:1–32:25, May 2022.

[16] Cynthia Dong, Emmanuel Azuh Mensah, Vaishnavi Ranganathan, and Kurtis Heimerl. The promise and
     peril of on-device ai for conservation work. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors
     in Computing Systems, pages 1–19, 2026.

[17] Zachary Englhardt, Richard Li, Dilini Nissanka, Zhihan Zhang, Girish Narayanswamy, Joseph Breda, Xin
     Liu, Shwetak Patel, and Vikram Iyer. Exploring and Characterizing Large Language Models for Embedded
     System Development and Debugging. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in
     Computing Systems, CHI EA ’24, pages 1–9, New York, NY, USA, May 2024. Association for Computing
     Machinery.

[18] Paul Glover-Kapfer, Carolina A. Soto-Navarro, and Oliver R. Wearn. Camera-trapping version 3.0:
     current constraints and future priorities for development. Remote Sensing in Ecology and Conservation,
     5(3):209–223, 2019. _eprint: https://zslpublications.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/rse2.106.

[19] Google. LiteRT: High-Performance On-Device Machine Learning Framework.

[20] Juraj Gottweis, Wei-Hung Weng, Alexander Daryin, Tao Tu, Petar Sirkovic, Artiom Myaskovsky, Grzegorz
     Glowaty, Felix Weissenberger, Alessio Orlandi, Dan Popovici, Anil Palepu, Keran Rong, Ryutaro Tanno,
     Khaled Saab, Fan Zhang, Jacob Blum, Andrew Carroll, Kavita Kulkarni, Nenad Tomašev, Dina Zverinski,
     Ivor Rendulic, Elahe Vedadi, Florian Hasler, Luka Rimanic, Marina Boia, Ivan Budiselic, Ben Feinstein,
     Mathias Bellaiche, Tom Sheffer, Jan Freyberg, Jeremy Ratcliff, Ottavia Bertolli, Katherine Chou, Avinatan
     Hassidim, Burak Gokturk, Amin Vahdat, Yuan Guan, Vikram Dhillon, Eeshit Dhaval Vaishnav, Byron Lee,
     Tiago R. D. Costa, José R. Penadés, Gary Peltz, Yossi Matias, James Manyika, Demis Hassabis, Yunhan
     Xu, Pushmeet Kohli, Annalisa Pawlosky, Alan Karthikesalingam, and Vivek Natarajan. Accelerating
     scientific discovery with Co-Scientist. Nature, pages 1–3, May 2026.

[21] Song Han, Jeff Pool, John Tran, and William Dally. Learning both Weights and Connections for Efficient
     Neural Network. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 28. Curran Associates,
     Inc., 2015.

[22] Josiah Hester and Jacob Sorber. The Future of Sensing is Batteryless, Intermittent, and Awesome. In
     Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Embedded Network Sensor Systems, SenSys ’17, pages 1–6,
     New York, NY, USA, November 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.

[23] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network, March
     2015. arXiv:1503.02531 [stat].

[24] Andrew Howard, Mark Sandler, Bo Chen, Weijun Wang, Liang-Chieh Chen, Mingxing Tan, Grace Chu,
     Vijay Vasudevan, Yukun Zhu, Ruoming Pang, Hartwig Adam, and Quoc Le. Searching for MobileNetV3.
     pages 1314–1324. IEEE Computer Society, October 2019.


                                                     11
[25] Vikram Iyer, Elyas Bayati, Rajalakshmi Nandakumar, Arka Majumdar, and Shyamnath Gollakota. Charging
     a Smartphone Across a Room Using Lasers. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable
     and Ubiquitous Technologies, 1(4):143:1–143:21, January 2018.
[26] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R.
     Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-world Github Issues? October 2023.
[27] Glenn Jocher and Jing Qiu. Ultralytics YOLO11, 2024. AGPL-3.0.
[28] Andrej Karpathy. autoresearch.
[29] Yubin Kim, Ken Gu, Chanwoo Park, Chunjong Park, Samuel Schmidgall, A. Ali Heydari, Yao Yan, Zhihan
     Zhang, Yuchen Zhuang, Yun Liu, Mark Malhotra, Paul Pu Liang, Hae Won Park, Yuzhe Yang, Xuhai Xu,
     Yilun Du, Shwetak Patel, Tim Althoff, Daniel McDuff, and Xin Liu. Towards a Science of Scaling Agent
     Systems, April 2026. arXiv:2512.08296 [cs].
[30] Eric C. Larson, TienJui Lee, Sean Liu, Margaret Rosenfeld, and Shwetak N. Patel. Accurate and privacy
     preserving cough sensing using a low-cost microphone. In Proceedings of the 13th international confer-
     ence on Ubiquitous computing, UbiComp ’11, pages 375–384, New York, NY, USA, September 2011.
     Association for Computing Machinery.
[31] Yiming Li, Yuhan Cheng, Mingchen Ma, Yihang Zou, Ningyuan Yang, Wei Cheng, Hai "Helen" Li, Yiran
     Chen, and Tingjun Chen. Skilled AI Agents for Embedded and IoT Systems Development, March 2026.
     arXiv:2603.19583 [cs].
[32] Edgar Liberis and Nicholas D. Lane. Differentiable Neural Network Pruning to Enable Smart Applications
     on Microcontrollers. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., 6(4):171:1–171:19, January
     2023.
[33] Ji Lin, Wei-Ming Chen, Yujun Lin, John Cohn, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. MCUNet: tiny deep learning
     on IoT devices. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
     Systems, NIPS ’20, pages 11711–11722, Red Hook, NY, USA, December 2020. Curran Associates Inc.
[34] Vincent Liu, Aaron Parks, Vamsi Talla, Shyamnath Gollakota, David Wetherall, and Joshua R. Smith.
     Ambient backscatter: wireless communication out of thin air. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2013
     conference on SIGCOMM, SIGCOMM ’13, pages 39–50, New York, NY, USA, August 2013. Association
     for Computing Machinery.
[35] Mike A. Merrill, Alexander Glenn Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich, Lin
     Shi, Jeong Yeon Shin, Thomas Walshe, E. Kelly Buchanan, Junhong Shen, Guanghao Ye, Haowei Lin,
     Jason Poulos, Maoyu Wang, Marianna Nezhurina, Di Lu, Orfeas Menis Mastromichalakis, Zhiwei Xu,
     Zizhao Chen, Yue Liu, Robert Zhang, Leon Liangyu Chen, Anurag Kashyap, Jan-Lucas Uslu, Jeffrey Li,
     Jianbo Wu, Minghao Yan, Song Bian, Vedang Sharma, Ke Sun, Steven Dillmann, Akshay Anand, Andrew
     Lanpouthakoun, Bardia Koopah, Changran Hu, Etash Kumar Guha, Gabriel H. S. Dreiman, Jiacheng Zhu,
     Karl Krauth, Li Zhong, Niklas Muennighoff, Robert Kwesi Amanfu, Shangyin Tan, Shreyas Pimpalgaonkar,
     Tushar Aggarwal, Xiangning Lin, Xin Lan, Xuandong Zhao, Yiqing Liang, Yuanli Wang, Zilong Wang,
     Changzhi Zhou, David Heineman, Hange Liu, Harsh Trivedi, John Yang, Junhong Lin, Manish Shetty,
     Michael Yang, Nabil Omi, Negin Raoof, Shanda Li, Terry Yue Zhuo, Wuwei Lin, Yiwei Dai, Yuxin Wang,
     Wenhao Chai, Shang Zhou, Dariush Wahdany, Ziyu She, Jiaming Hu, Zhikang Dong, Yuxuan Zhu, Sasha
     Cui, Ahson Saiyed, Arinbjörn Kolbeinsson, Christopher Michael Rytting, Ryan Marten, Yixin Wang, Jenia
     Jitsev, Alex Dimakis, Andy Konwinski, and Ludwig Schmidt. Terminal-Bench: Benchmarking Agents on
     Hard, Realistic Tasks in Command Line Interfaces. October 2025.
[36] Alexander Le Metzger, Aruna Srivastava, and Ruslan Mukhamedvaleev. Koel Labs ML, August 2024.
[37] Pavlo Molchanov, Stephen Tyree, Tero Karras, Timo Aila, and Jan Kautz. Pruning Convolutional Neural
     Networks for Resource Efficient Inference. February 2017.
[38] A. R. Moritz and F. C. Henriques. Studies of Thermal Injury: II. The Relative Importance of Time
     and Surface Temperature in the Causation of Cutaneous Burns. The American Journal of Pathology,
     23(5):695–720, September 1947.
[39] Jaehyun Nam, Jinsung Yoon, Jiefeng Chen, Jinwoo Shin, Sercan Ö Arık, and Tomas Pfister. MLE-STAR:
     Machine Learning Engineering Agent via Search and Targeted Refinement, August 2025. arXiv:2506.15692
     [cs].
[40] Vishwam Raval, Mohamed Zeid, and Prasad Enjeti. Circuit-AI: A Self-Hosted AI-Agent Language Model
     Framework for Control Loop Implementation and Simulation. In 2025 IEEE International Communications
     Energy Conference (INTELEC)), pages 91–96, October 2025.


                                                    12
[41] Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen. MobileNetV2:
     Inverted Residuals and Linear Bottlenecks. pages 4510–4520. IEEE Computer Society, June 2018.

[42] Mingxing Tan, Bo Chen, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, and Quoc V.
     Le. MnasNet: Platform-Aware Neural Architecture Search for Mobile. pages 2815–2823. IEEE Computer
     Society, June 2019.

[43] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, Lubomir Bourdev, Ross Girshick, James Hays, Pietro
     Perona, Deva Ramanan, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Piotr Dollár. Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in
     Context, 2015.

[44] Anran Wang, Vikram Iyer, Vamsi Talla, Joshua R. Smith, and Shyamnath Gollakota. FM Backscatter:
     Enabling Connected Cities and Smart Fabrics. pages 243–258, 2017.
[45] Xiaoye Xie, Xinzhu Liu, Jianhua Cai, Bohan Zhang, Tianjun Sun, Peng Luo, Dai An, Yurong Deng, and
     Chuan’an Shen. Characteristics and aetiology of low-temperature burns in Beijing of China. International
     Wound Journal, 20(6):2105–2112, January 2023.

[46] Ruiyang Xu, Jialun Cao, Mingyuan Wu, Wenliang Zhong, Yaojie Lu, Ben He, Xianpei Han, Shing-
     Chi Cheung, and Le Sun. EmbedAgent: Benchmarking Large Language Models in Embedded System
     Development, January 2026. arXiv:2506.11003 [cs].

[47] Huanqi Yang, Mingzhe Li, Mingda Han, Zhenjiang Li, and Weitao Xu. AutoEmbed: LLM-driven
     Automated Software Development for Generic Embedded IoT Systems. In Proceedings of the 2026
     ACM/IEEE International Conference on Embedded Artificial Intelligence and Sensing Systems, SenSys
     ’26, pages 362–376, New York, NY, USA, May 2026. Association for Computing Machinery.

[48] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and
     Ofir Press. SWE-agent: agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. In Proceedings
     of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37 of NIPS ’24,
     pages 50528–50652, Red Hook, NY, USA, December 2024. Curran Associates Inc.

[49] Peiyuan Zhang, Guangtao Zeng, Tianduo Wang, and Wei Lu. TinyLlama: An Open-Source Small Language
     Model, January 2024.
[50] Yang Zhang, Yasha Iravantchi, Haojian Jin, Swarun Kumar, and Chris Harrison. Sozu: Self-Powered
     Radio Tags for Building-Scale Activity Sensing. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on
     User Interface Software and Technology, UIST ’19, pages 973–985, New York, NY, USA, October 2019.
     Association for Computing Machinery.

[51] Zhihan Zhang, Alexander Metzger, Yuxuan Mei, Felix Hähnlein, Zachary Englhardt, Tingyu Cheng,
     Gregory D. Abowd, Shwetak Patel, Adriana Schulz, and Vikram Iyer. Sustainability assessment using
     multimodal artificial intelligence agents. Nature Electronics, pages 1–13, June 2026.

[52] Barret Zoph and Quoc V. Le. Neural Architecture Search with Reinforcement Learning, February 2017.
     arXiv:1611.01578 [cs].




                                                     13
Appendix Table of Contents

A Background                                                                                      15
    A.1 MCU Deployment Regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         15
    A.2 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    15

B Benchmarking LLM Knowledge of MCU Deployment                                                    17

C Model Compression                                                                               18
    C.1 Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
    C.2 More Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    18
    C.3 Failure Modes in Model Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21

D Power Minimization                                                                              22
    D.1 More Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    23
    D.2 Failure Modes in Power Minimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       25

E Thermal Management                                                                              26
    E.1 More Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    27
    E.2 Failure Modes in Thermal Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         29

F Structured Natural Language Feedback Example                                                    30

G MAX78000 MCU                                                                                    32
    G.1 Model Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    32
    G.2 Clock Frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     33

H Wildlife Monitoring: Elk Detection                                                              34
    H.1 Custom MCU Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       35
    H.2 Camera . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    36
    H.3 LoRa Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      37

I   Early Language Development and Phoneme Perception                                             39




                                                 14
A     Background
A.1   MCU Deployment Regime

MCUs occupy a distinct position in the AI deployment spectrum with orders-of-magnitude differences
in both compute capabilities, energy consumption and cost. Compared even to edge platforms like
the Raspberry Pi 5, MCUs offer three to five orders of magnitude less memory while consuming
roughly 500× less power. This low power consumption enables capabilities such as battery-free
operation under energy harvesting (Table 4). The compute constraints however require aggressive
compression of popular pre-trained models which exceed typical MCU memory budgets by 200 to
3,000×. Additionally, while some platforms, such as the MAX78000, include hardware acceleration
for tasks like running CNN models, they also have limited operator support.




Table 4: Hardware specifications comparison across the AI deployment spectrum. MCUs occupy
a unique position as the most resource-constrained yet cost- and energy-effective platform. MCUs
provide 3-5 orders of magnitude less memory and consume 500× less power even compared to
common edge devices like the Raspberry Pi 5, critical for battery-free applications. However, this
efficiency comes at a cost: popular pre-trained models exceed the memory budget by 200-3,000×,
making direct deployment impractical.


A.2   Related Work

TinyML and MCU Deployment. Machine learning on resource-constrained microcontrollers has
grown rapidly over the past decade, driven by the proliferation of edge devices and the need for
on-device intelligence. This domain is commonly termed TinyML. Dominant approaches include
manually designed compact architectures [41], Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [52, 42, 7, 24, 33,
5], and post-training compression via quantization, pruning, and knowledge distillation [21, 37, 32,
23]. Automated deployment frameworks such as LiteRT (formerly TensorFlow Lite Micro) [13],
microTVM [10], and STM32Cube.AI translate trained models into MCU-targeted firmware, handling
operator scheduling, memory planning, and quantized kernel selection. These approaches share two
limitations that motivate our work. First, they optimize within the tensor arena and treat memory
as the sole constraint, ignoring coupled physical quantities—supply current, peak power, device
temperature—that are equally binding in real deployments. Second, they cast deployment as a closed
numerical optimization, with a fixed search space (architectures, bitwidths, sparsity patterns) and
dense gradient or score signals. Real deployment is more like software or ML engineering: the action
space is open-ended (code edits, compiler flags, memory layouts, peripheral configurations), feedback
is sparse, and interpreting that feedback requires reasoning across hardware datasheets, compiler
diagnostics, and physical measurements. LLM agents are well-suited to this regime, where iterative
exploration benefits from semantic priors over code and hardware behavior rather than gradient
signals over a fixed parameterization.

LLM Agents for Embedded Systems. Prior work exploring and benchmarking LLMs for
embedded systems focuses on single-turn or software-only iterations, with a focus on generic
tasks such as driver generation and system integration, and evaluates with discrete pass/fail out-
puts [17, 40, 31, 46, 47]. IoT-SkillsBench [31] evaluates skills-based agents for embedded coding
with discrete outputs (compile failure, behavior failure, behavior correct) using a single-pass pipeline
with minimal planning and no iterative refinement. EmbedAgent [46] casts agents into developer
roles such as programmer, system architect, and non-AI/ML development tasks, without automated
iterative testing. AutoEmbed [47] targets general embedded development with iterative loops, but


                                                  15
these loops only check compilation and successful flashing. They do not evaluate runtime perfor-
mance or optimize against it, and they reduce success to binary accuracy (correct API call) and
completion rate. CircuitAI [40] automates data collection and power measurement correction on a
Jetson Orin Nano but does not place an LLM agent in the optimization loop. Critically, none of these
systems target AI/ML deployment workloads; they focus on general embedded firmware tasks, where
the optimization landscape is qualitatively different from the joint search over model architecture,
quantization, and compiler configuration that characterizes on-device ML deployment.




                                                16
B    Benchmarking LLM Knowledge of MCU Deployment
Before designing our agentic system, we first assess the current capabilities of SoTA LLMs on tasks
relevant to deep learning deployment on MCUs. While language models have been used for basic
embedded systems code generation (e.g., Arduino sketches) [17], their knowledge of DL on MCU
remains unexplored.

Benchmark Construction. We first constructed a challenging benchmark grounded in real-world
DL on MCU development. Five embedded systems experts within our research team, each holding
graduate degrees in computer engineering or related fields, contributed to the benchmark design.
Experts were encouraged to draw on their practical deployment experiences to create examples that
frontier LLMs struggle with, such as reasoning about memory layout constraints, understanding
hardware-specific quantization limitations, and navigating MCU SDK documentation quirks.
After manual cleaning and wrangling, the final benchmark contains 30 question-answer pairs covering
topics including model compression strategies, hardware constraint interpretation, framework-specific
code generation, and deployment troubleshooting.

Evaluation Setup. We evaluate a range of popular general-purpose models, including GPT and
Gemini series, using two zero-shot baseline approaches:

      1. Direct Prompting: LLMs answer questions in a single turn via textual reasoning given only
         the input prompt.
      2. Doc + Search Agent: LLMs are provided with expert-curated documentation used to
         construct each question, and are equipped with web search capabilities to access online
         resources.

Results. All evaluated models struggle on this benchmark. Even with web search and context
provided, only GPT-5 surpasses 60% accuracy (Table 5).

                 Table 5: Benchmarking LLMs on MCU Deep Learning QAs.
             Model                Direct Prompting Provided Doc & Search
             Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite            16.7                     36.7
             Gemini 2.5 Flash                 33.3                     50.0
             Gemini 2.5 Pro                   45.0                     50.0
             GPT-5 nano                       31.7                     50.0
             GPT-5 mini                       38.3                     53.3
             GPT-5                            60.0                     63.3




                                                 17
C     Model Compression
C.1   Setup

Since there is a high correlation with code that passes the MAX78000 and STM32N6 compiler
toolchain checks and runs on the hardware, we do not want the models to have access to these
toolchains, so we disable web search tools and lock down network access in the sandbox. We deliver
the documentation by initializing the sandbox with a folder of relevant files for the agent to explore
using its file tools. It is worth noting that there are still some checks that the MCU software toolchains
don’t cover, such as edge cases around the size and overlap of activations, so it is still necessary to
check that the model can actually run on the hardware. The agents are limited to a training budget of
1 training run, up to 1 hour on an A100 with 80GB VRAM per iteration. This is more than enough
for tiny edge models and no agent used more than 91% kernel utilization, 15 GB VRAM, and 339.4
W peak power for a training run. Most agents also opted for a conservative 47.57 epochs on average
(SD = 54.54; n = 194), with the longest training run taking 46.06 minutes (< 1 hour). Without HIL
feedback, the agents just have to guess the epochs based on the final test score which they often do
very conservatively. With HIL, they initially have to guess, and in future iterations can inspect the
training loss vs. test score to inform the number of epochs.

C.2   More Results


Table 6: Deployment Success Rate by Task and Feedback Configuration. Values are mean
successful iterations (%) across models and thinking levels (N = 12); higher is better.
                          Task                        Sco Doc HIL
                           YOLO11 on MAX78000                   0.0     3.3          27.5
                           Wav2Vec2 on STM32N6                 16.7     19.2         36.7


Table 7: Per-Model Deployment Success Rate for Model Compression. Values are successful
iterations (%); higher is better.
                                       (a) YOLO11 on MAX78000

                           Model                     Sco             Doc        HIL
                                     Thinking    L         H     L     H        L       H
                           Claude Opus 4.7        0        0     0      0       30      50
                           Claude Sonnet 4.6      0        0     0      0        0       0
                           GPT-5.4                0        0     0     40       40      70
                           GPT-5.4 mini           0        0     0      0        0       0
                           Gemini 3.1 Pro         0        0     0      0       80      60
                           Gemini 3 Flash         0        0     0      0        0       0


                                       (b) Wav2Vec2 on STM32N6

                         Model                       Sco              Doc           HIL
                                   Thinking      L         H     L         H        L     H
                         Claude Opus 4.7        60     0         60         0    70      80
                         Claude Sonnet 4.6      60     0         30         0    70      0
                         GPT-5.4                0      70        60        40    60      90
                         GPT-5.4 mini           0      0         0         0     0       30
                         Gemini 3.1 Pro         0      10        0         40    0       40
                         Gemini 3 Flash         0      0         0         0     0       0




                                                      18
Table 8: Best On-Device Phoneme Error on STM32N6. Values are Phoneme Error Rate (%;
Wav2Vec2, speech-to-IPA transcription); lower is better. ✗ indicate no successful deployment within
Nmax attempts.
             Model                      Sco                Doc             HIL
                        Thinking       L           H          L           H           L        H
              Claude Opus 4.7      89.40            ✗        90.27         ✗      86.37     84.92
              Claude Sonnet 4.6    89.14            ✗        91.06         ✗      86.08       ✗
              GPT-5.4                ✗            91.54      93.42       88.20    90.05     89.94
              GPT-5.4 mini           ✗              ✗          ✗           ✗        ✗       97.68
              Gemini 3.1 Pro         ✗            87.64        ✗         90.13      ✗       85.44
              Gemini 3 Flash         ✗              ✗          ✗           ✗        ✗         ✗




Table 9: Per-Model Token Usage for Model Compression. Values are in millions (M) of tokens.
                                      (a) YOLO11 on MAX78000

                  Model                         Sco                 Doc             HIL
                           Thinking         L          H       L          H       L        H
                  Claude Opus 4.7          1.17       2.77    0.90       3.45    0.65     2.44
                  Claude Sonnet 4.6        2.88       0.72    3.66       0.77    4.16     0.58
                  GPT-5.4                  1.58       1.52    1.49       2.23    0.73     2.57
                  GPT-5.4 mini             0.62       1.82    0.60       2.77    1.23     2.50
                  Gemini 3.1 Pro           2.36       3.70    5.29       2.91    5.44     3.45
                  Gemini 3 Flash           2.29       2.77    3.37       2.93    3.85     3.78


                                      (b) Wav2Vec2 on STM32N6

                 Model                          Sco                Doc              HIL
                           Thinking        L          H       L           H       L        H
                 Claude Opus 4.7        0.85       2.34      0.50     2.36       0.48     3.60
                 Claude Sonnet 4.6      1.63       1.00      1.77     1.95       0.91     1.51
                 GPT-5.4                1.98       2.69      1.38     2.92       1.65     2.04
                 GPT-5.4 mini           0.46       1.89      1.13     1.68       0.96     4.10
                 Gemini 3.1 Pro         4.58       3.75      6.69     6.08       10.92    7.68
                 Gemini 3 Flash         4.07       3.23      6.39     3.21       5.63     8.79




                                                       19
Table 10: Per-Model Tool Use for Model Compression. Values represent the average number of
tool calls per iteration.
                                    (a) YOLO11 on MAX78000

                Model                      Sco             Doc         HIL
                         Thinking      L         H     L         H    L      H
                Claude Opus 4.7       12.5   21.6     9.2    21.8     4.3   14.6
                Claude Sonnet 4.6     24.3   6.4      24.0    9.2    24.8    6.0
                GPT-5.4               18.8   20.3     17.7   21.1     9.4   18.3
                GPT-5.4 mini          10.2   24.7     11.3   25.3    14.0   25.4
                Gemini 3.1 Pro        24.2   23.4     25.2   24.7    23.4   14.5
                Gemini 3 Flash        13.7   17.4     18.4   17.8    15.7   16.1


                                 (b) Wav2Vec2 on STM32N6

                Model                      Sco             Doc         HIL
                         Thinking      L         H     L         H    L      H
                Claude Opus 4.7        3.7   14.4     1.8    12.7     1.2   11.7
                Claude Sonnet 4.6      6.8   8.9      9.6    17.8     3.2   12.4
                GPT-5.4               10.7   16.4     6.8    15.0     8.3   11.2
                GPT-5.4 mini           5.7   19.6     5.3    16.3     5.8   16.9
                Gemini 3.1 Pro        25.0   23.6     24.9   22.9    24.6   20.8
                Gemini 3 Flash        14.0   15.2     17.7   13.2    13.4   18.5




                                                 20
C.3   Failure Modes in Model Compression

Manual inspection of compression trajectories shows that the main bottleneck is deployability rather
than model construction. Agents frequently produce neural networks that are syntactically valid and
train to nontrivial validation scores, but fail when translated through the target-specific synthesis and
deployment stack. On the MAX78000, common failures include unsupported layer configurations,
invalid accelerator mappings, mismatches between the PyTorch model and the architecture YAML,
missing or malformed calibration inputs, and models whose activations or weights exceed accelerator
memory constraints even when the training code runs normally. On the STM32N6, failures often
involve unsupported export paths, invalid quantization choices, dynamic shapes, or memory layouts
that violate Cube.AI/STEdgeAI constraints.
Successful runs typically follow a different pattern: the agent first establishes a minimal deployable
baseline, then makes conservative changes that preserve synthesis compatibility while improving task
score. Unsuccessful runs often pursue higher-capacity architectures too early, improving software-
level accuracy while repeatedly losing hardware validity.




                                                   21
D    Power Minimization
Let V be the (fixed) supply voltage, I(t) the instantaneous current measured over the workload
window [0, τ ], and P (t) = V · I(t) the instantaneous power. We define peak current and total energy
as
                               Ipeak = max I(t),                                                  (4)
                                       t∈[0,τ ]
                                       Z τ               Z τ
                                  E=        P (t) dt = V     I(t) dt.                             (5)
                                         0                 0

all measured directly from the current trace returned by M.

Objective.   We instantiate two variants.
Peak-current minimization targets the model inference workload, with objective
                                         fpeak (m) = Ipeak ,                                      (6)
subject to macc ≥ m0acc , i.e., power optimization must not degrade model performance.
Energy minimization targets a fixed-payload wireless transmission (e.g., BLE advertising 16 bytes),
with objective
                                          fenergy (m) = E,                                       (7)
subject to the packet being delivered successfully. In both variants, ties in B are broken by n.




                                                 22
D.1   More Results


Table 11: Per-Model Deployment Success Rate for Power Minimization. Values are successful
iterations (%, YOLO11); higher is better.
                                  (a) Peak-Current ≤ 32mA

                          Model                Sco      Doc      HIL
                          Claude Opus 4.7          10   90       70
                          Claude Sonnet 4.6         0    0       80
                          GPT-5.4                   0   50       60
                          GPT-5.4 mini              0   20       0
                          Gemini 3.1 Pro           40   70       30
                          Gemini 3 Flash           50   0        40


                                  (b) Energy Minimization

                          Model                Sco      Doc      HIL
                          Claude Opus 4.7           0   70       80
                          Claude Sonnet 4.6        70   60       80
                          GPT-5.4                  60   90       80
                          GPT-5.4 mini             20   0        80
                          Gemini 3.1 Pro            0    0       80
                          Gemini 3 Flash            0   10       10


Table 12: Best Peak Current on MAX78000. Values are milliamps (mA) per inference (YOLO);
lower is better. The unoptimized baseline is 37.19 mA.
                            Model                 Sco  Doc HIL
                        Claude Opus 4.7       27.68     17.64     18.89
                        Claude Sonnet 4.6       ✗         ✗       21.25
                        GPT-5.4                 ✗       21.91     20.03
                        GPT-5.4 mini            ✗       21.58       ✗
                        Gemini 3.1 Pro        20.11     17.96     21.69
                        Gemini 3 Flash        19.63       ✗       19.43


Table 13: Best Total Energy on MAX78000. Values are millijoules (mJ) per inference (YOLO);
lower is better. The unoptimized baseline is 242.87 mJ.
                          Model                  Sco    Doc  HIL
                       Claude Opus 4.7        ✗         174.71    171.52
                       Claude Sonnet 4.6    240.50      195.85    243.61
                       GPT-5.4              167.79      137.83    141.56
                       GPT-5.4 mini         175.40        ✗       182.02
                       Gemini 3.1 Pro         ✗           ✗       175.26
                       Gemini 3 Flash         ✗         238.65    610.57




                                              23
Table 14: Per-Model Token Usage for MAX78000 Power Minimization. Values are in millions
(M) of tokens.
                                (a) Total Energy Optimization

                        Model                  Sco       Doc     HIL
                        Claude Opus 4.7       4.80        7.47    9.43
                        Claude Sonnet 4.6     0.99        3.57    6.07
                        GPT-5.4               1.56        5.02    4.86
                        GPT-5.4 mini          1.31        5.66    6.11
                        Gemini 3.1 Pro        4.55       12.46   14.84
                        Gemini 3 Flash        5.62       13.34   15.16


                                (b) Peak Current Optimization

                        Model                  Sco       Doc     HIL
                        Claude Opus 4.7       2.91        8.72    7.51
                        Claude Sonnet 4.6     1.26        3.27    5.77
                        GPT-5.4               1.97        4.47    8.27
                        GPT-5.4 mini          1.88        4.76    4.10
                        Gemini 3.1 Pro        5.65       11.82   14.86
                        Gemini 3 Flash        4.24       14.13   14.23




Table 15: Per-Model Avg Tool Calls per Iteration for MAX78000 Power Minimization. Values
represent the average number of tool calls per iteration.
                                (a) Total Energy Optimization

                          Model                    Sco    Doc    HIL
                          Claude Opus 4.7      16.7       10.8   14.9
                          Claude Sonnet 4.6     4.8        8.2    9.5
                          GPT-5.4              10.4       16.3   13.9
                          GPT-5.4 mini          9.5       16.2   14.1
                          Gemini 3.1 Pro       20.0       19.8   19.1
                          Gemini 3 Flash       19.0       19.3   18.3


                                (b) Peak Current Optimization

                          Model                    Sco    Doc    HIL
                          Claude Opus 4.7      11.1       12.2   10.7
                          Claude Sonnet 4.6     6.4        7.1    7.9
                          GPT-5.4              13.6       15.5   17.1
                          GPT-5.4 mini         10.8       13.7    9.7
                          Gemini 3.1 Pro       19.4       19.8   19.8
                          Gemini 3 Flash       13.5       19.2   17.5




                                              24
D.2   Failure Modes in Power Minimization

Agent-driven power optimization frequently fails due to the profound disconnect between syntactic
software correctness and complex hardware state management. We identified six primary failure
modes:

      • Premature Convergence: Agents over-index on baseline code and prematurely halt opti-
        mization. They routinely ignore explicit prompt directives to utilize deep sleep, disable idle
        peripherals, or restructure execution patterns (e.g., shifting between sequential, parallel, or
        intermittent computing).
      • Cross-Ecosystem Hallucination: Agents conflate APIs from distinct embedded SDKs (e.g.,
        mixing STM32 HAL with Maxim APIs), resulting in invalid register manipulations and
        phantom function calls.
      • Inefficient Search & Tool Exhaustion: Agents fail to balance exploration and exploita-
        tion. They oscillate between destructive fixation (repeatedly attempting a specific breaking
        change) and unstable over-exploration (batching unrelated optimizations). Consequently,
        they frequently exhaust their tool-call budgets on redundant logic, ultimately returning
        unmodified firmware.
      • Reward Hacking (Workload Evasion): Agents artificially minimize power metrics by
        bypassing the mandated sensor workload—disabling physical camera drivers, injecting
        dummy data into the neural accelerator, or hardcoding UART outputs to simulate inference.
      • Execution State Blindness: Successful compilation does not guarantee execution. Without
        runtime feedback, agents cannot detect silent deadlocks, stalled loops, or time-limit vio-
        lations. To bridge this visibility gap, Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL) serial output provides
        necessary debugging traces, while time-series power profiling allows the agent to infer
        functional states and isolate peak consumption phases—ultimately enabling the agent to
        make more effective, targeted decisions in subsequent iterations.
      • Vulnerability to Physical Determinism: Agents lack awareness of intrinsic silicon flaws
        and transient hardware errors (e.g., voltage-induced flash failures, silent SPI bit-flips lacking
        checksums, or truncated serial buffers prior to sleep). Consequently, they fail to write
        defensive firmware and often actively strip existing safeguards. For example, to prevent the
        MAX78000 from locking its debug interface, our baseline firmware includes a 2-second
        boot delay before entering deep sleep. Despite explicit prompt instructions forbidding the
        removal of this safety mechanism, agents deleted the delay to maximize power reduction,
        ultimately locking the board and forcing a manual reset that the agent cannot execute.




                                                  25
E    Thermal Management
                                            Rτ
Heat dissipated during this window is Q =   0
                                                 P (t) dt, linking thermal outcome directly to the power
profile of Eq. (5).
The quantities returned by M are
                                      Tpeak = max Tdev (t),                                          (8)
                                                 t∈[0,τ ]

                                       ∆T = Tpeak − Tamb ,                                           (9)
where ∆T normalizes for ambient conditions.

Objective. Minimizing ∆T alone is susceptible to reward hacking: an agent can reduce peak
temperature by artificially extending task completion time (e.g., by reducing the processor clock
frequency) which lowers instantaneous power draw and allows more heat to dissipate between
operations, without improving the workload efficiency. Thus, the task objective jointly penalizes
peak temperature rise and total task latency:
                                   fheat (m) = w∆T ∆T + wτ τ,                                      (10)
where w∆T , wτ > 0 are weights that reflect application priorities—a wearable may up-weight
w∆T for a strict skin-contact temperature ceiling, while a latency-sensitive inference IoT node may
up-weight wτ . The objective is subject to Φ(s, h) = 1.
We evaluate each device under 1) standard room temperature (Tamb ≈ 295 K) and 2) a surface held at
approximately 306 K to simulate skin contact on a body-worn device.




Figure 7: Thermal Imaging of the ESP32 Under Contact-Heated Conditions. Infrared snapshot
of the ESP32-S3R8 running the unoptimized TinyLLaMA inference on a 32 ◦ C hot plate, reaching a
peak surface temperature of 60.3 ◦ C after 1 min (∆T = +28.3 ◦ C).




                                                   26
E.1   More Results


Table 16: Per-Model Deployment Success Rate for Heat Minimization. Values are successful
iterations (%, ESP32-S3R8); higher is better.
                           (a) Room Temp (Tamb = 25 ◦ C), Tpeak ≤ 37 ◦ C

                            Model                   Sco     Doc     HIL
                            Claude Opus 4.7             0    30       40
                            Claude Sonnet 4.6          20    0        20
                            GPT-5.4                    50    10       70
                            GPT-5.4 mini                0    20       0
                            Gemini 3.1 Pro             10    0        30
                            Gemini 3 Flash              0     0        0


                         (b) Contact-heated (Tcontact ≈ 33 ◦ C), Tpeak ≤ 51 ◦ C

                            Model                   Sco     Doc     HIL
                            Claude Opus 4.7             0    0        50
                            Claude Sonnet 4.6           0    0        30
                            GPT-5.4                    40   100       70
                            GPT-5.4 mini                0    0         0
                            Gemini 3.1 Pro              0    0        50
                            Gemini 3 Flash             20    0        0


Table 17: Best Peak Temperature on ESP32. Values are ∆T = Tpeak − Tamb/contact ; lower is better.
                           (a) Room Temp (Tamb = 25 ◦ C), Tpeak ≤ 37 ◦ C

            Model                       Sco                  Doc                  HIL
            Claude Opus 4.7             ✗              +11.42 (36.42)      +11.04 (36.04)
            Claude Sonnet 4.6     +11.00 (36.00)             ✗             +10.59 (35.59)
            GPT-5.4               +11.59 (36.59)       +11.34 (36.34)      +7.41 (32.41)
            GPT-5.4 mini                ✗              +10.48 (35.48)            ✗
            Gemini 3.1 Pro        +11.85 (36.85)             ✗             +10.86 (35.86)
            Gemini 3 Flash              ✗                    ✗                   ✗


                         (b) Contact-heated (Tcontact ≈ 33 ◦ C), Tpeak ≤ 51 ◦ C

            Model                       Sco                  Doc                  HIL
            Claude Opus 4.7             ✗                    ✗             +12.46 (44.46)
            Claude Sonnet 4.6           ✗                    ✗             +18.44 (50.44)
            GPT-5.4               +16.15 (48.15)       +12.09 (44.09)      +16.43 (48.43)
            GPT-5.4 mini                ✗                    ✗                   ✗
            Gemini 3.1 Pro              ✗                    ✗             +16.03 (48.03)
            Gemini 3 Flash        +17.65 (49.65)             ✗                   ✗




                                                  27
Table 18: Per-Model Token Usage for ESP32-S3R8 Heat Minimization. Values are in millions
(M) of tokens.
                          (a) Room Temp (Tamb = 25 ◦ C), Tpeak ≤ 37 ◦ C

                         Model                     Sco      Doc       HIL
                         Claude Opus 4.7          8.71      9.63       9.46
                         Claude Sonnet 4.6        4.14      5.25       6.74
                         GPT-5.4                  2.86      5.36       5.79
                         GPT-5.4 mini             5.66      3.63       5.82
                         Gemini 3.1 Pro           11.22     10.16     14.70
                         Gemini 3 Flash           10.06     7.91      11.23


                        (b) Contact-heated (Tcontact ≈ 33 ◦ C), Tpeak ≤ 51 ◦ C

                         Model                     Sco      Doc       HIL
                         Claude Opus 4.7          7.34      11.11     12.22
                         Claude Sonnet 4.6        7.50      7.13       5.78
                         GPT-5.4                  5.52      5.77       7.62
                         GPT-5.4 mini             5.75      4.49       7.88
                         Gemini 3.1 Pro           11.00     10.49     13.62
                         Gemini 3 Flash           13.89     10.02     11.32




Table 19: Per-Model Tool Use for ESP32-S3R8 Heat Minimization. Values represent the average
number of tool calls per iteration.
                          (a) Room Temp (Tamb = 25 ◦ C), Tpeak ≤ 37 ◦ C

                           Model                      Sco   Doc      HIL
                           Claude Opus 4.7          11.1    14.1     11.7
                           Claude Sonnet 4.6         7.0     9.1     11.7
                           GPT-5.4                   7.4    12.5     12.4
                           GPT-5.4 mini             17.8    11.7     10.9
                           Gemini 3.1 Pro           20.0    16.3     18.0
                           Gemini 3 Flash           15.4    13.5     12.3


                        (b) Contact-heated (Tcontact ≈ 33 ◦ C), Tpeak ≤ 51 ◦ C

                           Model                      Sco   Doc      HIL
                           Claude Opus 4.7          12.2    14.8     14.0
                           Claude Sonnet 4.6        15.6    14.6      9.9
                           GPT-5.4                  14.2    15.7     16.0
                           GPT-5.4 mini             13.9    14.8     19.5
                           Gemini 3.1 Pro           20.0    20.1     19.0
                           Gemini 3 Flash           19.9    14.8     13.9




                                                 28
E.2   Failure Modes in Thermal Management
                                                                                        Rτ
Because thermal dissipation is intrinsically linked to the underlying power profile (Q = 0 P (t) dt),
the thermal optimization task on the ESP32-S3R8 shares the fundamental failure modes detailed in
Power Minimization (Appendix D). However, the rigid temporal constraints introduce a task-specific
manifestation of these failures:

      • Temporal Deadline Violations: To mitigate heat generation, agents employ valid thermal
        management strategies, such as throttling CPU/APB clocks or injecting task delays. How-
        ever, they sometimes struggle to balance these thermal reductions against the rigid execution
        constraints. While these trials successfully lower peak temperature (∆T ), they can cause the
        complex LLM inference and UDP streaming workload to violate the strict 60 s execution
        window, resulting in a failed evaluation. Crucially, agents do not always recognize that the
        failure is due to a latency violation rather than a firmware error; instead of reverting, they
        may persist down this invalid optimization track and exhaust their iteration budget.




                                                 29
F    Structured Natural Language Feedback Example

After each iteration, the benchmark appends a structured natural-language observation ot to the agent
context. The exact fields depend on the active checks, but the observation always reports which
checks ran, whether they passed, the scalar optimization score, and any diagnostic feedback enabled
for that experiment. The feedback is fully automated and does not depend on human intervention.
Below is an example observation from a MAX78000 peak-current minimization run.

Iteration 4 feedback

Submitted artifact:
{
  "project_dir": "firmware",
  "project_name": "yolo-pico_llm",
  "firmware_behavior_description":
    "Runs five live camera YOLO inference cycles, prints stage timestamps,
     then enters sleep after the completion checkpoint."
}

Check results:
  [PASS] compile_max78000.py
    The firmware project built successfully with the Maxim SDK.
    ELF produced at firmware/build/yolo-pico_llm.elf.

    [PASS] flash_max78000.py
      PPK2 source voltage enabled at 3.3 V.
      Flash mass erase completed.
      firmware/build/yolo-pico_llm.elf programmed successfully over JTAG/SWD.

    [PASS] measure_max78000.py
      Hardware Status:
        capture_power: true
        capture_serial: true
        capture_thermal: false
        duration_ms: 20000
        optimization_metric: peak_uA

     Measurement Results:
       total_energy_j: 0.4128
       peak_uA: 21254.87
       avg_uA: 6254.12

     Firmware Behavior:
       checkpoint: FOUND
       judge: PASS
       reason: UART output shows initialization, five live camera inference
               cycles, post-processing, printed inference results, and final
               sleep. No evidence of dummy input or skipped CNN execution.

     UART Serial Output:
       [0000.000] boot
       [0002.001] camera init complete
       [0002.347] begin inference cycle 1
       [0002.912] yolo inference complete, detections=1
       [0004.913] begin inference cycle 2
       [0005.481] yolo inference complete, detections=1
       ...
       [0014.266] begin inference cycle 5
       [0014.831] yolo inference complete, detections=1


                                                 30
      [0014.935] firmware task complete checkpoint
      [0015.036] entering final sleep

Score:
  metric_value: 21254.87
  normalized_score: 0.9823
  lower_is_better: true

Guidance:
  The firmware is functionally valid and improved peak current relative to
  the previous iteration. The largest current spikes still occur during
  camera capture and CNN setup, so further optimization should focus on
  clocking, peripheral gating, or reducing active time between inference
  cycles without bypassing the live camera path.




                                    31
G     MAX78000 MCU
The MAX78000 is a commercially available MCU with an integrated neural accelerator that has been
widely adopted by the embedded systems community.

G.1   Model Size

We show how model depths (i.e., the number of layers) and channel dimensions affect model size and
runtime characteristics on the MCU (Fig. 8). Contrary to intuition, peak current consumption shows
minimal correlation with model size (Fig. 8b), remaining consistently below 30 mA regardless of
size. Figure 8c-h show that total inference time and power consumption scale approximately linearly
with model size.




Figure 8: Impact of model architecture on size and physical performance. (a) Model size
versus network depth for different channel widths, demonstrating that size scales with depth. (b)
Peak current consumption shows minimal correlation with model size. (c-h) Total cycle time (c),
comprising accelerator setup (d), model weight loading (h), and inference (g), as well as average
current consumption during inference, all scale linearly with model size (N=10).




                                                32
G.2   Clock Frequency

A critical configurable parameter of the MAX78000 is its clock source, which determines both the
CNN accelerator’s execution speed and power profile. The MCU supports two primary clock routing
modes for the neural hardware:

       • System Clock Source: The accelerator clock is derived from the main system clock via a
         hardware ÷2 divider. For instance, configuring a system clock of 60 MHz yields an effective
         CNN clock of 30 MHz.
       • Direct 60 MHz Source: A dedicated 60 MHz oscillator is routed directly to the accelerator,
         bypassing the frequency divider. This is denoted as "60 (Dir)" in our evaluations.

As shown in Fig. 9, the selected clocking scheme creates a counterintuitive trade-off between
instantaneous power and total energy. Operating the accelerator at higher frequencies (e.g., the direct
60 MHz source) predictably increases the peak and average instantaneous current. However, this is
heavily offset by a dramatic reduction in computation latency. Because the inference cycle completes
significantly faster, the total energy consumed per inference is actually minimized at higher clock
speeds. This dynamic is a critical consideration for battery-free deployments: systems should ideally
run at the maximum possible clock frequency to minimize total energy, provided the energy harvester
and power management circuitry can sustain the higher instantaneous peak current demands.




Figure 9: Impact of system clock frequency on model inference performance and energy consumption.
(a, b) Average and peak current consumption (a) and inference and cycle time (b) at different system
clock frequencies (N=10). Higher clock frequencies generally increase instantaneous current but
decrease completion time. (c-e) Plots of average current (c), inference energy (d), and cycle energy
(e) versus time demonstrate that faster completion times result in lower total energy consumption,
despite higher instantaneous current. "60 (Dir)" denotes a 60 MHz clock is set as the system clock and
also applied directly to the CNN accelerator without frequency division. All other labels (including
"60") represent the set system clock frequency, which is then divided by two to produce the final
CNN clock. All measurements were performed on the same YOLO detection model.




                                                  33
H    Wildlife Monitoring: Elk Detection
Camera traps are indispensable tools in ecology, wildlife research, and conservation, enabling non-
invasive observation of animal behavior. However, deployment at scale is limited by cost, battery life,
and maintenance requirements that become prohibitive in large or difficult-to-access locations [18].
We engaged with a commercial farmer in the Pacific Northwest managing multiple agricultural fields
totaling thousands of acres, where elk frequently damage crops. The farmer had deployed five
traditional camera trap units at a capital cost of $1,000 each, but three pain points limited scaling:

      1. Energy and Maintenance. Traditional trail cameras require battery replacement every
         month under active use. For the farmer’s deployment scenario with cameras distributed
         across large, remote fields, this represents substantial labor overhead. While some cameras
         near field edges could be connected to power via wires, this is infeasible for most monitoring
         locations far from electrical infrastructure.
      2. Communication Costs. To enable real-time monitoring without physical visits, cellular-
         connected cameras transmit all captured images to cloud storage, currently incurring approx-
         imately $10 per camera per month. The farmer estimated that camera coverage every 200
         feet would be needed to reliably detect elk near trails along field perimeters. For a single
         200-acre field, this translates to 50 cameras and over $500 monthly communication costs,
         economically unsustainable when scaled across multiple fields.
      3. False Triggers. The cameras produce large volumes of images containing no wildlife of
         interest, triggered by wind-blown vegetation or non-target animals (e.g., deer, birds). These
         false positives consume storage, bandwidth, and review time.

Battery-free model on MCUs directly addresses all three: 1) solar harvesting eliminates battery
replacement, 2) local classification reduces cloud transmission for most images, and 3) accurate
on-device inference filters false triggers before transmission.
We deployed our agentic pipeline to compress a YOLOv8 binary classification model trained on a
curated elk dataset, achieving 96.7% accuracy within the MAX78000’s memory and power constraints.
Deployment challenges remain: the farmer’s traditional camera units failed after a few months when
moisture penetrated the enclosure, and developing weatherproof enclosures for our hardware is
ongoing. Long-term reliability and return on investment relative to current practices require field
validation, which will be reported in follow-up work.




                                                 34
H.1   Custom MCU Platform




Figure 10: Schematic Design. The schematic comprises two primary blocks: a power module and a
functional module. The functional module integrates the MAX78000 SoC, the OVM7692_RYAA
camera, external SRAM, and a SWD interface for programming and debugging.




                 Figure 11: MAX78000 PCB Platform for wildlife monitoring.




                                             35
H.2   Camera

The GC0308 camera module is interfaced with the MAX78000 via the Parallel Camera Interface
(PCIF). The camera’s power consumption and capture time depend on three key parameters: image
resolution, PCIF frequency, and MCU system clock frequency. Frame rate can be set via duty cycle
based on the application.
Resolution, however, affects both camera power consumption and vision model accuracy. Figure 12a-
c shows frame acquisition time across different resolutions and PCIF frequencies. Notably, all
resolutions we evaluated use a hardware-built-in downsampling from the camera’s native output,
which is an unavoidable feature given by the MSDK driver. The acquisition time is determined
primarily by the native sensor resolution rather than the downsampled output size. For example, a
100×100 image downsampled from 400×400 takes longer than a 180×180 image downsampled from
360×360, because the camera sensor must still read and process the full array before downsampling.
Average current consumption per frame (Fig. 12d-f) follows similar patterns.
Lower native resolutions reduce both capture time and total power.

Clock Frequency. Higher PCIF frequencies reduce frame transfer time from the camera to the
MCU memory. With 60 MHz MCU system clock, at 10 MHz PCIF, a 180×180 frame requires 135.5
ms to capture and transfer, while at 5 MHz PCIF this doubles to 267.7 ms (Fig. 12a). However, higher
PCIF frequencies slightly increase instantaneous current draw by 1.19 mA due to increased switching
activity in the PCIF peripheral and I/O buffers.
Compared to the optimal 60 MHz system clock we found, reducing to 30 MHz decreases average
current by 14.4% but doubles the capture and total cycle time, leading to higher overall energy
consumption. At 7.37 MHz, cycle time balloons to over 1 second, a 7× increase, making real-time
applications infeasible despite slightly lower instantaneous power. We note that the system clock
affects DMA throughput and memory access latency during frame buffer transfers. Lower clocks
create memory access bottlenecks that dramatically extend capture time, overwhelming any current
reduction benefits.




Figure 12: Camera acquisition performance on MAX78000 across system clocks, PCIF frequen-
cies, and image resolutions. (a-c) Frame acquisition time (including camera capture and wake-up
overhead) versus PCIF frequency. (d-f) Average current consumption per frame (N=10). Resolutions
are hardware-downsampled from the camera’s native output, demonstrating that metrics mainly
depend on the native sensor resolution rather than the final downsampled output.




                                                36
H.3     LoRa Communication

An SX1279 LoRa transceiver operated at 3.3 V is interfaced with the MAX78000 MCU via SPI.




                 Packet size    Tx time (ms)           Itx,avg (mA)        Etx (mJ)
                 1B             30.122 ± 0.013         58.968 ± 0.027      5.862
                 2B             35.500 ± 0.012         59.148 ± 0.025      6.929
                 16 B           56.836 ± 0.011         59.302 ± 0.026      11.123
                 64,800 B       106,321.2 ± 0.837      57.656 ± 0.027      20229.182

Figure 13: Current consumption profile during LoRA transmission for payload sizes of 1 B, 2 B, 16
B, and 64,800 B (N=10). The 64,800 B case represents a large data transfer segmented into multiple
LoRA packets rather than a single-packet transmission. Peak transmission current remains below 60
mA across all payload sizes. Small payloads complete within 60 ms, while the 64,800 B transmission
continues to 106.3 s (axis truncated for visualization).


H.3.1    SPI Interface Configuration and Debugging
The SPI connection was configured in Mode 0 at 1 MHz. A minimal custom driver was developed
because initial integration attempts using the RadioLib library failed to establish communication. For
connectivity verification, RegVersion (address 0x42; datasheet default 0x12) was read, but the initial
readout deviated from expectation. Oscilloscope measurements of the clock (SCLK), chip select
(CS), master output (MOSI), and master input (MISO) signals confirmed correct timing and frame
formatting from the microcontroller while capturing the transceiver responses. Analysis revealed
that the first byte returned after power-up or upon entering LoRa mode, the first byte returned by the
first read transaction was consistently invalid, whereas all subsequent bytes were correct (0x12 for
RegVersion). To address this hardware quirk, a warm-up procedure was added to the initialization
sequence: a dummy read of RegVersion is performed immediately after reset or mode switching,
with the first returned byte discarded before normal register operations begin. With this step in place,
the register I/O and the TX/RX data path operated reliably and reproducibly.

H.3.2    LoRa Driver Architecture
The custom driver implemented four primary operational phases:

Initialization. Following a hardware reset, the transceiver entered LoRa Sleep mode, then transi-
tioned to Standby. A warm-up dummy SPI read was performed with the first byte discarded.

Configuration. The radio was configured with a center frequency of 915 MHz. Modem parameters
were set as follows: bandwidth (BW) = 125 kHz, coding rate (CR) = 4/5, spreading factor (SF) = 7,
explicit header mode enabled, cyclic redundancy check (CRC) enabled, and preamble length = 12
symbols.

Transmission. From Standby state, the interrupt flags were cleared, the FIFO pointer was config-
ured, payload data and length were written to the buffer, and the radio transitioned to TX mode. The
system awaited the TxDone interrupt (with timeout protection), cleared status flags, and returned to
Standby or Sleep mode.


                                                  37
Reception. Reception follows a similar state machine: flags are cleared, the receive pointer is reset,
continuous or single receive mode is entered, the system waits for reception completion with timeout,
payload integrity is verified via cyclic redundancy check, data is read from the FIFO buffer, flags are
cleared, and the radio optionally enters Sleep mode.

H.3.3         Power Minimization for LoRa Driver
To balance energy consumption with long-range communication reliability, SF7 with BW = 125 kHz,
CR = 4/5, and 12-symbol preamble was selected. At 125 kHz bandwidth, SF7 yielded a symbol
duration of 1.024 ms, reducing time-on-air and per-message energy consumption compared to higher
spreading factors. The CR = 4/5 configuration provided the minimum forward error correction
overhead while maintaining robustness against typical outdoor channel impairments. The 12-symbol
preamble ensured reliable automatic gain control, synchronization, and frequency offset compensation
for multi-kilometer links with a fixed overhead of approximately (12 + 4.25) × 1.024 ms ≈ 16.6 ms
at SF7.
During operation, the transceiver remained in Sleep mode and transitioned through Standby to TX
mode only when data transmission was required. Following each transmission, the radio immediately
returned to Sleep mode. Average system current consumption outside transmission windows was
measured at <65 µA. The DIO0 pin was mapped to the TxDone interrupt, enabling interrupt-driven
completion: the MCU entered sleep mode during transmission, the interrupt service routine set a
completion flag upon TxDone assertion, and the main control loop subsequently cleared flags and
returned the radio to Sleep mode. This approach eliminated polling overhead and minimized CPU
active time.
The first-byte SPI read anomaly mitigation (single warm-up dummy read) is performed only once
during initialization and not repeated in each transmission cycle, avoiding repetitive overhead on a
per-packet basis.

Payload (B)   Driver     Itx,avg (mA)             Iidle (mA)                 Icycle (mA)               Tx time (ms)             Etx (mJ)         Ecycle (mJ)
              Ours       58.968 ± 0.027           0.065± 0.004               1.768 ± 0.004             30.122 ± 0.013           5.862            5.994
1
              Standard   59.866 ± 0.010 (+1.5%)   1.960 ± 0.000 (+2938.8%)   3.610 ± 0.000 (+104.2%)   29.950 ± 0.025 (-0.6%)   5.917 (+0.9%)    12.241 (+104.2%)
              Ours       59.148 ± 0.025           0.061 ± 0.003              2.050 ± 0.000             35.500 ± 0.012           6.929            6.984
2
              Standard   59.870 ± 0.021 (+1.2%)   1.952 ± 0.004 (+3079.2%)   3.878 ± 0.007 (+89.2%)    35.050 ± 0.042 (-1.3%)   6.925 (-0.1%)    13.218 (+89.2%)
              Ours       59.302 ± 0.026           0.060± 0.004               3.210 ± 0.000             56.836 ± 0.011           11.123           11.158
16
              Standard   59.938 ± 0.012 (+1.1%)   1.956 ± 0.005 (+3160.0%)   5.020 ± 0.006 (+56.4%)    55.258 ± 0.075 (-2.8%)   10.930 (-1.7%)   17.451 (+56.4%)


Table 20: Comparison of our optimized low-power versus standard LoRa driver implementations per
transmission across different payload sizes (N=10). Percentages indicate relative difference from the
low-power implementation.




                                                                              38
I   Early Language Development and Phoneme Perception
Understanding how young children acquire language is a central question in developmental science.
To study early language and cognitive development, developmental scientists rely largely on longi-
tudinal naturalistic data, including speech, vocalizations, gestures, and social interactions between
children and caregivers. These data are often collected continuously and passively in real-world
environments, enabling the capture of rich and spontaneous behaviors that are difficult to observe
in laboratory settings. However, such continuous in-the-wild data collection introduces significant
design challenges, requiring the joint optimization of battery life, storage footprint, and on-device
analysis capabilities for specialized applications, while maintaining a lightweight, portable, and
minimally obtrusive form factor during daily activities.
We collaborated with developmental researchers to understand real-world data collection needs and
developed a lightweight, comfortable, and accessible head-worn device for capturing children’s
development data from an egocentric perspective. By jointly optimizing for power consumption,
storage capacity, and thermal constraints, our system enables continuous real-world data collection in
naturalistic settings. This supports applications such as longitudinal observation of infant–caregiver
interactions, phoneme perception in child-focused speech, and early intervention of delayed language
acquisition.
As a preliminary demonstration, we present a 3-second audio snippet featuring speech from both a
toddler and a caregiver, recorded with the wearable in an environment with background noise from
multiple children playing with toys. The audio snippet is de-identified unpublished data collected
through a university IRB approved study provided by an external collaborator. The toddler says “I
can do it for him”, pauses briefly, and the caregiver responds “good job”. The log-mel spectrogram
of this audio snippet (Fig. 14) shows that the compressed model correctly segments the two speech
regions and the intervening non-speech interval. Core phonemes are correctly detected, though errors
remain. In the toddler’s utterance, the onset of “can” is transcribed as /vAn/ rather than /kæ/ because
child stop consonants are often weakly released or produced with reduced closure. Similarly, “do” is
transcribed as /ju/ rather than /du/, reflecting the toddler’s palatalized production where the alveolar
stop approaches a palatal glide — acoustically plausible, but diverging from the adult canonical form
the model was trained on.
Both errors share a common cause: child vocal tract acoustics differ from adult speech. Future im-
provements can focus on fine-tuning using real child recordings collected by our deployed wearables.
Such adaptation could support applications like real-time pronunciation feedback, where caregivers
receive alerts about mispronounced phonemes and can provide immediate correction, an important
feature for early language learning.




Figure 14: Log-mel spectrogram of a 3-second audio snippet of toddler and caregiver speech, with the
timestamped phonetic transcription overlaid. The toddler says “I can do it for him”, pauses briefly,
and the caregiver responds “good job”.




                                                  39
