                                           A Systematic Approach to Multi-Agent AI from Advanced
                                           Regulatory Control Theory: Safe and Auditable LLM Operator
                                           Agents for Process Control
                                           Idelfonso B. R. Nogueiraa,∗ , Sigurd Skogestada
                                           a Department of Chemical Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, 7491, Norway



                                           ARTICLE INFO                                   ABSTRACT




arXiv:2606.30877v1 [eess.SY] 29 Jun 2026
                                           Keywords:                                      Recent literature shows that large language models (LLMs) are useful for general-purpose tasks
                                           Advanced regulatory control                    yet perform poorly on specific domain ones. One reason is the difficulty of supplying narrow
                                           Multi-agent systems                            context to a general-purpose model and of bounding the task it is asked to perform. It is possible
                                           Large language models                          to hypothesise that a multi-agent reformulation under process-control principles offers a route
                                           Selector control                               to address those points, since control theory provides a discipline of decomposing a system into
                                           Process control architectures                  elements of contained scope, each defending one controlled variable, with conflicts resolved
                                           Auditable AI for industrial control            by structural priority: MIN/MAX selector networks for CV–CV switching and split-range
                                                                                          (split-parallel) logic for MV–MV switching. The present work proposes such a reformulation,
                                                                                          derived from Advanced Regulatory Control (ARC) theory. Each feedback loop in the ARC
                                                                                          chain is mapped to one specialised LLM operator agent carrying the loop’s control-theoretic
                                                                                          context (controlled variable, setpoint, chain priority, selector kind). The chain’s interaction
                                                                                          logic (MIN/MAX selectors, override paths) is encapsulated as a single orchestrator agent. Two
                                                                                          orchestrator variants are tested: a deterministic rule chain, and a Claude-based LLM orchestrator
                                                                                          at a slower tier. The control principles limit each agent’s task and inform how its limitations
                                                                                          are handled. The multi-agent system inherits the safety property of the ARC chain: every
                                                                                          constraint conflict is resolved deterministically by the orchestrator, regardless of the LLM output.
                                                                                          Evaluated on a dairy-barn ventilation case over a 4-day mixed-season scenario, Qwen 2.5 7B
                                                                                          Instruct operator agents running offline on a 24 GB consumer GPU at a 5-minute cadence
                                                                                          produce auditable trajectories, each paired with an operator-voice rationale that supports a
                                                                                          control campaign logbook.




                                           1. Introduction
                                               Process systems engineering has long approached the control of complex multivariable plants by decomposing the
                                           problem into a hierarchy of simpler interacting pieces [1–3]. At the regulatory layer, this decomposition is realised
                                           through cascade structures (a master loop setting the setpoint of a faster slave loop) and selector and split-range
                                           structures that allow each feedback loop to defend a single controlled variable, with priority among loops resolved
                                           by MIN/MAX selector networks when several controlled variables compete for one manipulated variable (CV–CV
                                           switching) and by split-range logic when one manipulated variable must be shared in a priority order among loops
                                           (MV–MV switching) [4, 5]. At the supervisory layer, the same discipline produces the well-known plant-wide control
                                           hierarchy, in which real-time optimisation, supervisory regulation, and basic control occupy distinct time-scales and
                                           communicate through a small number of setpoint handoffs [1, 6]. More recent work extends this framework to operating
                                           regions in which the active set of binding constraints changes with time, producing the Advanced Regulatory Control
                                           (ARC) pattern: a network of feedback loops, MIN/MAX selectors for CV–CV switching, and split-range arrangements
                                           for MV–MV switching, which together resolve constraint conflicts by structural priority rather than by online re-
                                           optimisation [7–12]. A related primitive, mid-ranging, is distinct in purpose: it uses a secondary manipulated variable
                                           to assist a primary one for dynamic (speed-of-response) reasons, not to resolve a constraint conflict. In the language
                                           of modern artificial intelligence, it is possible to read every selector-based control structure as a multi-agent system:
                                           each loop can be seen as an agent that owns one controlled variable, publishes a candidate manipulated-variable value,
                                           and yields to higher-priority agents through the selector network. This reading is presented here as a hypothesis, since
                                           the equivalence has not been formally established in the literature. The vocabulary used for several decades by the
                                               ∗ Corresponding author

                                                   idelfonso.b.d.r.nogueira@ntnu.no (I.B.R. Nogueira)
                                                ORCID (s):


                                           Page 1 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

process-control community (coupling, pairing, anti-windup, bumpless transfer) can be read, under this hypothesis, as
a vocabulary of agent decomposition.
     The reverse reading is equally productive: multi-agent systems built from large language models (LLMs) have, over
the past three years, developed a design vocabulary that translates directly into the process-control idiom. In financial
decision-making, frameworks such as FinCon [13] and TradingAgents [14] orchestrate teams of specialist agents
that share verbal reinforcement and collectively outperform single-model baselines on portfolio and trading tasks. In
business administration, hierarchical loan-decision and compliance pipelines deploy supervisor and worker agents to
handle multi-step workflows that are impractical for a single model; the patterns that emerge across these settings have
been catalogued in recent taxonomies of hierarchical multi-agent design [15]. In software engineering and research,
agent-team patterns built on chain-of-thought reasoning [16–18] and on generative-agent simulations [19–21] have
produced a stable design vocabulary of orchestration, append-only workspaces, schema-validated inter-agent messages,
and structured outputs. It is possible to import this vocabulary into process control directly, and the present work does
so, borrowing the orchestrator+advisor pattern from adjacent fields and grounding it in the same deterministic chain
that today’s ARC networks already use.
     Despite the maturity of multi-agent systems in adjacent fields, the systematic application of multi-agent architec-
tures to process systems engineering remains sparse. The regulatory layer has been largely untouched. Early agent-
based work in the chemical industry concentrated on plant-wide process supervision and ontology-driven coordination
across distributed units [22] rather than on the regulatory control layer itself. The recent wave of LLM-agent work
in chemical engineering, summarised in the review of multi-agent systems for chemical engineering [23] and in
the contemporary work on specialised multi-agent LLMs for process systems engineering [24, 25], focuses largely
on modelling, simulation, and design tasks rather than on closed-loop regulatory control. Contemporary work on
autonomous industrial control with LLM agents [26] has explored configurations in which the language model writes
control actions at the inner loop, sometimes generating manipulated-variable commands directly from the process
state and sometimes supervising a numerical controller. Those configurations show that LLM agents are capable of
producing operator-style decisions in industrial settings, and they inform two design questions: where in the control
hierarchy the language model should sit, and how its outputs should be bounded so that safety properties of the
deterministic layer are preserved. The position adopted in the present work places the LLM operator agents at the
regulatory tier behind a structural chain, and the orchestrator at the supervisory tier. From this perspective, a gap is
identified at a specific point: how should a multi-agent regulatory layer be constructed using the toolkit that process
systems engineering has already developed for the same purpose?
     The specialisation of agents in multi-agent large language model systems is commonly achieved through retrieval-
augmented generation (RAG). In RAG, the agent’s context is enriched at inference time by retrieving relevant passages
from a document store and embedding those passages in the prompt alongside the query. Fine-tuning represents
an alternative route to specialisation; its computing-power requirements are substantial, however, and replicating a
fine-tuned model for every specific industrial task is not feasible with current technology. RAG therefore remains
the practical option for most deployments. The evaluation of embedding-based retrieval as a reliable specialisation
mechanism is rarely done against worst-case guarantees. Furthermore, it was not found any theoretical result ensuring
that the context supplied by a RAG system will contain the information the model actually needs: the probability of a
critical passage being omitted is not negligible, particularly when that information is idiosyncratic or appears with low
frequency in the corpus [27]. For process systems engineering applications, those are important points to be addressed.
The decisive information that distinguishes one process unit from another resides, typically, in its peculiarities: the
non-standard operating conditions, the site-specific constraints, the failure modes documented in field notes rather than
textbooks. Those peculiarities are precisely the passages most likely to be displaced during retrieval by semantically
dominant but operationally less relevant material. A multi-agent architecture is capable of addressing this limitation
through a different route. By decomposing the control problem into elements of concise and contained scope, it is
possible to assign each agent a single, well-defined task whose context is narrow enough to be fully specified in a
short, deterministic prompt. The context required by any one agent is limited by construction, and the retrieval problem
that RAG must solve is replaced by a prompt engineering problem that a domain expert can verify by inspection.
Advanced regulatory control theory provides exactly this kind of decomposition. The plant-wide control procedure
produces a roster of specialised feedback loops, each defending one controlled variable with one manipulated variable,
each requiring only its own measurement, setpoint, and selector priority in order to act. The controlled variable a loop
defends is often an inequality constraint, but it need not be: a loop may equally hold a floating setpoint that is itself the


Page 2 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

output of a higher loop. As it will be demonstrated in this work, the correspondence between the ARC decomposition
and the agent context requirement is the foundation of the multi-agent architecture proposed here.
     The question motivates a two-way bridge that the present work attempts to construct. In the first direction, from
process control theory to multi-agent systems, it is possible to recognise that the architectural primitives required to
build a well-behaved multi-agent regulatory layer already exist inside classical control: the variable-coupling logic of
the selector chain defines the message-passing topology; the MIN/MAX selector network is the priority orchestrator;
the back-calculation anti-windup of Åström and Hägglund [28] is the mechanism behind what we term bumpless
agent re-engagement, borrowing the standard ARC term bumpless transfer for an agent that resumes authority without
a step in its manipulated variable; and a safety override is not a separate non-selector guard but the final, most-critical
element of the chain itself, the selector that the others yield to when constraints conflict. In the second direction, from
multi-agent artificial intelligence to process control, the contribution is that the language model can also act as a slow
gain scheduler that retunes the orchestrator’s reasoning parameters in response to the current operating regime, while
leaving the deterministic numerical control chain in charge of every manipulated variable. This proposed architecture
can place the language model at the operator tier: the model receives the current state of its assigned controlled variable
and produces a mode classification and a rationale, while the lower control chain retains authority over the manipulated
variables. This sort of implementation places the language model also at the supervisory tier of the classical hierarchy. If
one uses a time-scale separation of approximately two orders of magnitude relative to the regulatory loop, a separation
of the order conventionally taken to mark the boundary between the supervisory and regulatory layers of the classical
hierarchy [1], the system is protected from possible adverse advice that, in this way, can only nudge the closed-loop
behaviour, not destabilise it within one advisor period.
     Three specific contributions support the bridge. The first is the demonstration that a multi-agent reformulation
of the ARC selector chain produces trajectories indistinguishable from those of the ARC network when the operator
agents’ decision logic is implemented as a SIMC-tuned PI block, formalising the correspondence between classical
selector control and structured agent broadcast. This validation swap isolates any subsequent behavioural difference
as attributable to the operator agents themselves or to the orchestrator’s added capabilities, not to the multi-agent
decomposition itself. The second contribution is the construction of three architectures from the same ARC chain.
Architecture A is the PI baseline, which is the ARC network itself. Architecture B and Architecture C share a common
LLM-operator implementation, in which each of the six operator agents is backed by a local Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct
call, and they differ only at the orchestrator tier: Architecture B uses a deterministic rule-based orchestrator that
applies the MIN/MAX priority chain without LLM involvement, while Architecture C adds a Claude Opus 4.7 LLM-
based orchestrator that classifies the operating regime and tunes the orchestrator’s dwell-time, trend-bias, and memory
parameters on a slow supervisory tier. In both architectures the structural priority chain is preserved deterministically
and the LLM cannot override the chain’s binding-direction decisions. The agent roster is derived from the control-
theory-designed chain through two equivalences: each PI in the chain corresponds to one operator agent that carries
control-theory context (CV, MV, setpoint, priority, SIMC tuning, anti-windup) and acts directly on its proposal target;
the chain’s interaction logic (MIN/MAX selectors, split-parallel, overrides) is encapsulated as one orchestrator agent.
It is possible to see the multi-agent reformulation as a transcription of the plant-wide control procedure into agents,
with the orchestrator-tier LLM operating as a parameter scheduler in the spirit of the classical supervisory layer.
The third contribution is that conflict resolution among agents follows structural priority, not negotiation or online
optimisation. The orchestrator agent encodes the priority order prescribed by the ARC chain: every constraint conflict
is resolved deterministically, without LLM involvement. It is possible to see this property as the agent-level realisation
of Skogestad’s MIN/MAX selector chain [4, 5, 8]; it is also what supports the deployment of LLM agents in real
process control systems with structural soundness: an LLM output that misclassifies the regime can only shift the
proposal magnitude, since the chain’s priority order is enforced by the orchestrator regardless. A second consequence
of the agent-based reformulation is that the SIMC PI tuning step of the classical recipe is replaced by a different design
step. The LLM operator agent does not require numerical gain tuning, since it does not produce a numerical action
through 𝐾𝑐 ⋅ 𝑒; it produces a regime classification that the agent code maps to a proposal. What the operator agent does
require is a curated prompt and a curated context, so that the model is informed of its role in the chain, the selector
kind it serves, the binding direction, and the rolling history of its own past decisions. The PID tuning step of classical
ARC is, in this sense, replaced by a prompt engineering and context curation step, which is described in detail later in
the paper.
     The two contributions above are evaluated empirically on the cow-barn ventilation case introduced in [8], a process
in which freeze protection and CO2 comfort become physically incompatible during deep winter. The case study is the

Page 3 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

evaluation vehicle, not a contribution of its own. The ARC chain is taken as the reference architecture and a multi-agent
system is constructed under the recipe above. The headline architecture (Architecture C) assigns to each PI’s role in
the chain one operator agent backed by a local instruction-tuned LLM (Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct, running offline on a
single consumer GPU), and a Claude-based LLM orchestrator at the supervisory tier that tunes the chain’s parameters
while the structural MIN/MAX priority order remains enforced deterministically. Over a 4-day mixed-season scenario
(winter cold combined with summer warm in 96 hours) the LLM-MAS is capable of producing structurally correct
operator-style decisions at a 5-minute polling cadence, with a narratable audit trail (one operator-voice rationale per
agent per sample): two properties that the monolithic ARC implementation cannot offer.
    The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 presents the cow-barn case study: the plant model,
the 4-day mixed-season disturbance scenario, the construction of the multi-agent architecture from the ARC chain, the
design of the LLM operator agents and their context, the orchestrator agents, and the empirical evaluation of the three
architectures. Section 3 collects the implementation notes common to all architectures and the agent-system limitations
exposed by the multi-agent reformulation. Section 4 closes with the conclusions of the present evaluation.

2. Case study: happy-cow barn
    The architecture proposed in this work follows from the plant-wide control procedure of Skogestad [1, 8]: apply
advanced regulatory control principles to a specific plant, derive the chain, and translate the chain into a multi-
agent system using the equivalences established in Section 2.5.2. The cow-barn ventilation problem introduced in
Skogestad [8] is used here as one concrete instantiation of this general procedure: it offers two manipulated variables,
two competing constraints that become physically incompatible during deep winter, and a natural priority conflict that
the MIN/MAX selector network resolves by structural priority. Those properties make it a representative test case
for the architecture. We work the case end-to-end: process description, plant model, plant imperfections, disturbance
scenarios, the construction of the multi-agent architecture from the ARC chain, the design of the LLM operator agents
and their context, the orchestrator agents (rule-based and LLM-based variants), and the empirical evaluation against
the PI chain baseline.

2.1. The happy-cow case study
    We adopt the happy-cow livestock-housing problem introduced in Skogestad [8]. A modern dairy barn is ventilated
by a fan and warmed by an electrical heater. The CO2 concentration 𝐶 must remain below 1 000 ppm whenever feasible,
a comfort upper bound, and below 3 000 ppm at all times as a health limit; while the temperature 𝑇 must lie between
5 °C and 20 °C whenever feasible and above 0 °C at all times as a freeze-protection lower bound. The plant offers two
manipulated variables: the variable-frequency-drive ventilation fan 𝑢1 ∈ [0, 100] % (which reduces both 𝐶 and 𝑇 by
replacing inside air with outside air) and an electric heater 𝑢2 ∈ [0, 100] % (which raises 𝑇 only). Disturbances enter
through four channels: the outdoor temperature 𝑇out (𝑡), the cow occupancy 𝑛cows (𝑡), an unmeasured CO2 source 𝑞CO extra (𝑡)
                                                                                                                      2
(bedding fermentation, manure-pit gas), and an unmeasured envelope-leak coefficient 𝑈 𝐴extra (𝑡) (a door propped open).
The first two are visible to the operator and the controller; the last two are not.
    The case is interesting because it is constrained-mostly: the bound on 𝑇 is two-sided, the bound on 𝐶 is one-sided,
and during deep winter the freeze-protection limit and the CO2 -comfort limit are physically incompatible. With one fan
and one heater in the −15 °C-outside regime, no combination of (𝑢1 , 𝑢2 ) keeps both 𝐶 ≤ 1 000 and 𝑇 ≥ 5; the controller
must give up one constraint to honour the other. The ARC chain of Skogestad [8] advances a particular solution: a
hierarchical PID-with-selectors network that resolves the conflict implicitly by priority order. We re-implement this
baseline and contrast it with three further architectures. The lowest-priority input to the chain is an operator-defined
desired fan value 𝑢0 , set to 50 % as a representative nominal point; strictly, 𝑢0 is the unconstrained optimum of a
steady-state objective trading fan electrical cost against air quality and acoustic comfort, a problem that is not solved
in this work, though refining 𝑢0 via online unconstrained optimisation, possibly driven by an additional supervisory
agent, represents a logical extension of the present architecture.

2.2. Plant model
    We model the barn as a single well-mixed continuous-stirred-tank reactor (CSTR) with two states (𝐶, 𝑇 ), two
manipulated variables, and four disturbance channels (Figure 1). The mass balance for CO2 and the energy balance
read
                               extra
          𝑉 𝐶̇ = 𝑛cows 𝑞CO2 + 𝑞CO    (𝑡) + 𝑄air (𝐶out − 𝐶),                                                             (1)
                                    2


Page 4 of 37
                             Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

Table 1
Plant parameters used in this study.

                   Symbol              Value                       Meaning
                   𝑉                   3 000 m3                    Air volume of the barn
                   𝑛cows (nominal)     80                          Cow occupancy
                   𝑞CO2                5 × 10−5 m3 /s/cow          Per-cow CO2 generation (≈180 L/h)
                   𝑄cow                1 000 W/cow                 Per-cow sensible metabolic heat
                   𝑄max , 𝑄min         15, 0.5 m3 /s               Fan airflow at 100 % and 0 %
                   𝑃h                  100 kW                      Heater rating at 100 %
                   𝑈𝐴                  1 500 W/K                   Building heat-loss coefficient
                   𝐶out                420 ppm                     Outdoor CO2 concentration
                   𝑇out (nominal)      5 °C                        Outdoor temperature
                   𝜌, 𝑐𝑝               1.2 kg/m3 , 1 005 J/kg/K    Air density, specific heat


                                 𝑢
      𝜌𝑐𝑝 𝑉 𝑇̇ = 𝑛cows 𝑄cow + 𝑃h 2 − 𝜌𝑐𝑝 𝑄air (𝑇 − 𝑇out )
                    (           100  )
                 − 𝑈 𝐴 + 𝑈 𝐴extra (𝑡) (𝑇 − 𝑇out ),                                                                 (2)

with the fan map
                                                𝑢1
      𝑄air (𝑢1 ) = 𝑄min + (𝑄max − 𝑄min )           .                                                               (3)
                                               100
Numerical values used throughout this work are listed in Table 1; they were chosen as plausible defaults for a medium
Norwegian dairy barn, since the source ARC study [8] states its case qualitatively and does not report a numerical
dataset. To anchor the comparison to the source conditions rather than to our own parameter choices, Section 2.6.4
additionally reproduces the exact plant parameters of that study’s Case IIB (the 50 kW heater, 𝑈 𝐴 = 2000 W/K, and
the 0 → −40 → +15 °C ramp of its Table 2). Those parameters are the ones under which the 3000 ppm sick-CO2
limit becomes an active constraint: the per-cow heat release and CO2 production are tied through the same combustion
stoichiometry and cannot be varied independently, so it is the deep-cold heater saturation, not a change in occupancy,
that forces the CO2 ceiling to bind.
    The two natural time constants at the nominal operating point (𝑢1 = 50 %) are

              𝑉                             𝜌𝑐𝑝 𝑉
      𝜏𝐶 =        ≈ 387 s,      𝜏𝑇 =                    ≈ 334 s,                                                   (4)
             𝑄air                      𝜌𝑐𝑝 𝑄air + 𝑈 𝐴

both lying in the 5–7 minute range, dictating the choice of controller sample time and tuning band.




Page 5 of 37
                           Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control




Figure 1: Cow-barn well-mixed CSTR: two MVs (𝑢1 , 𝑢2 ), two CVs (𝐶, 𝑇 ), four disturbance channels (two known, two
unmeasured).




Page 6 of 37
                                    Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

2.3. Plant imperfections imposed in this study
    To stress the architectures under realistic operating conditions, the ideal plant of (1–2) is wrapped in an imperfect-
plant simulator that adds three classes of imperfection identically across all controllers:
   1. Measurement noise. Independent zero-mean Gaussian noise with 𝜎𝐶 = 15 ppm and 𝜎𝑇 = 0.1 °C is added to each
      CV sample the controller receives.
   2. Actuator deadtime. Both 𝑢1 and 𝑢2 are filtered through identical first-order lags with 𝜏act = 20 s before reaching
      the plant, representing realistic VFD ramp-up and heater contactor dynamics.
   3. Random-number seed. All controllers see the exact same noise realisation (seed = 11), so any difference in their
      trajectories is attributable to the controller alone.

2.4. Disturbance scenario
    Throughout this paper, the controllers are evaluated on a 4-day mixed-season scenario (96 hours) designed to
exercise the cold regime, the hot regime, the freeze/CO2 infeasibility, and the noise-chatter regimes in a single run,
precisely where the architectural choices we compare are predicted to differ. The outdoor temperature is bounded at a
−5 °C floor on day 1 and at a +20 °C ceiling on day 3, with day 2 acting as a transition and day 4 as a summer cool-down
with a door-open event. Two unmeasured CO2 bursts (one in each regime) and one 𝑈 𝐴 spike are added at predefined
times in the disturbance scenario. The disturbance events of a representative 24-hour window are summarised in
Table 2: two operator-visible (known) disturbances, two unmeasured disturbances, and six operator-issued setpoint
changes through the day. The full 96-hour sequence repeats the same event grammar across the four days at the outdoor-
temperature levels described above.
    The piecewise-linear 𝑇out profile is the dominant slow disturbance: its lowest excursion to −15 °C occurs in the
early hours and drives the architecture into the freeze-protection regime where heater and fan trade off explicitly. The
CO2 burst and the 𝑈 𝐴 spike are deliberately unannounced: they are precisely the events where feed-forward fails and
the closed-loop dynamics dominate.

2.5. Control architectures
    We implement and evaluate four controller architectures (Table 3) on the same cow-barn plant, run over the same
case study and scenarios with the same plant imperfections and noise seed. Architecture D is a separate ablation that
removes the decomposition entirely.

2.5.1. Deriving the agent roster from the control-theory-designed chain
    The agent roster is derived directly from the ARC chain that Skogestad has proposed for the cow-barn case [1, 8]:
seven SIMC-tuned PI controllers, a four-layer MIN/MAX selector chain on 𝑢1 , and a split-parallel arrangement at the
heater.1 The chain is the input to the multi-agent design, not something to design around. Two rules then exhaust the
agent roster.
    The first equivalence: each PI in the chain corresponds to one operator agent. The PI controller is the basic
regulatory unit of the chain, and it defines a natural unit of agent responsibility: one CV, one MV, one setpoint, one role
in the priority order, and one decision per control sample. The multi-agent reformulation assigns one operator agent
to each PI’s role in the chain. There are exactly as many operator agents as PIs; on the cow case the roster is fixed by
the ARC chain described in the previous subsection (Architecture A, Figure 2): six constraint defenders on the fan (𝑢1 )
plus one heater-loop PI on 𝑢2 , with priority ordering MIN/MAX-MIN-MAX from operator default to safety overrides:
                                        tc_5, cc_1000, tc_20, tc_0, cc_3000, tc_heater.
What the agent does have is operator-like context: knowledge of what a PI controller is and how it relates a measurement
to an MV, knowledge of the SIMC tuning rule (Eq. 7) [29] and the principle of back-calculation anti-windup [28], and
the agent’s own (CV, MV, SP, priority, selector kind) identity. Each control sample, the agent uses this context directly
to turn its measurement into a candidate MV value, exactly as a trained operator at a control panel would. The agent
     1 We use the term selector chain (or series), rather than cascade, for the MIN/MAX selector network. The selectors operate on the same time

scale: every controller in the network is tuned with the same 𝜏𝑐 , and there is no master-to-slave setpoint handoff between them. We reserve cascade
for a genuine hierarchical arrangement in which a slow master loop sets the setpoint of a fast slave loop, as in the relation between the supervisory
orchestrator and the regulatory layer. The selectors form a one-way priority chain: the last selector in the chain is the most critical, and the others
may be given up when constraints conflict.

Page 7 of 37
                                  Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

Table 2
Representative 24-hour window of the 4-day mixed-season scenario: every event class the controllers face. The full 96-hour
sequence repeats this event grammar across the four days at the outdoor-temperature levels described in Section 2.4. Known
disturbances are visible to the operator and to any feed-forward logic; unmeasured disturbances are felt only through their
effect on the controlled variables (𝐶, 𝑇 ). 𝑢0 is the operator-defined desired fan setpoint that enters the chain at the lowest
priority (Section 2.5.3); it is nominally 50 % and is changed by the operator on a daily schedule.

      Type            Channel                       Profile / event               Purpose in the test
      Known           𝑇out (𝑡)                      piecewise-linear              exercises the cold regime; stresses
                                                    −5 → −15 → +2 → −8 °C         heater and freeze protection
      Known           𝑛cows (𝑡)                     two-step 80 → 100 → 80        shifts metabolic CO2 and heat load
                                                    across milking                on a known schedule
      Unmeasured       ext
                      𝑞CO  (𝑡)                      2-hour CO2 burst, 06:00–      forces ventilation to react to a CO2
                          2
                                                    08:00    (bedding     off-    excursion with no advance warning
                                                    gassing)
      Unmeasured      𝑈 𝐴ext (𝑡)                    10-min 𝑈 𝐴 spike at 14:00     sudden heat-loss transient that must
                                                    (door propped open)           be rejected by feedback alone
                                                                                  (Zoom B)
      SP change       𝑢0 (operator default fan)     50 → 40 % at 03:00 (night     lowest-priority chain input changed
                                                    mode, quieter fans)           by the operator
      SP change       𝑢0 (operator default fan)     40 → 55 → 65 % at 08:00       two ventilation regime switches as
                                                    / 10:00 (morning / day)       the day starts
      SP change       CO2 SP of cc_1000             1 000    →      1 200  →      farmer relaxes then restores comfort
                                                    1 000 ppm at 16:00 /          SP around milking peak
                                                    19:00
      SP change       𝑢0 (operator default fan)     65 → 50 % at 21:00            return to nominal default; tests
                                                    (evening reset)               bumpless transition


owns nothing beyond its own context and decision logic; it does not see the other agents’ state, the other constraints, or
the structure of the chain above it. An alternative realisation in which an agent’s decision step is delegated to an LLM
that reads the same context is the position occupied by the LLM operator architecture described in Section 2.5.5.
     The second equivalence: the chain’s interaction logic becomes one orchestrator agent. The selector network, the
split-parallel arrangement, and any override path are structural elements that define how the PIs combine. Yet they
are part of the control architecture as firmly as the PIs themselves: they encode the priority order in which constraints
are honoured under conflict, the operator’s desired 𝑢0 , the hand-off between fan-driven and heater-driven temperature
control, and the freeze-protection guard. This logic does not fit into any single operator agent (no operator owns more
than one constraint), but it has to live somewhere in an agent system. The orchestrator agent receives the operator
agents’ proposals every sample, applies the MIN/MAX selectors, the split-parallel rule, and the override layer in the
order prescribed by the ARC chain of Architecture A (Figure 2), and emits the actually-applied (𝑢1 , 𝑢2 ). The orchestrator
is the agent-level encoding of the parts of the chain that are not PIs.
     The orchestrator does not take on a PI’s role; it represents the inter-PI logic. In Architecture A (the monolithic ARC)
this logic is realised as hard-coded MIN/MAX statements; in Architecture B it is realised as a configurable rule-based
component that always runs the same priority chain as ARC and adds dwell-time hysteresis, trend anticipation, and
deterministic parameter scheduling; in Architecture C the same priority chain is preserved deterministically and a
Claude Opus 4.7 LLM-based supervisor is added on top of it, taking the chain-state snapshot as context and emitting
bounded scalar tuning parameters (dwell time, trend gains) every supervisory tick. Its inputs are the operator agents’
proposals (and, for Architecture C, the chain-state snapshot fed to the LLM supervisor); its outputs are the chain’s
prescribed (𝑢1 , 𝑢2 ) commands. The orchestrator’s arbitration logic is given by control theory, not learned or guessed.
     The multi-agent reformulation, though prescribed by control theory, adds value in two ways. First, it makes
the chain’s state distributed and auditable: every agent owns a small workspace and writes an append-only log of
its proposals, so any control decision can be replayed from the filesystem alone (Section 3). Second, it makes the
architecture pluggable along well-defined interfaces: agents can be swapped between PI and rule-based variants without


Page 8 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

Table 3
The three evaluated architectures, derived from the same ARC chain and forming a stepwise ablation: A is the monolithic PI
baseline; B replaces the PIs with Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct operator agents while the orchestrator stays rule-based; C additionally
introduces a Claude-Opus 4.7 LLM at the orchestrator-tuning tier while the structural priority chain is preserved in every
case.
            #    Architecture                   Operator                     Orchestration
            A    ARC (PI chain)                 PI controllers               rule-based MIN/MAX
            B    LLM-MAS (Qwen 7B) +            Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct         rule-based MIN/MAX
                 rule orchestrator
            C    LLM-MAS (Qwen 7B) +            Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct         Claude Opus 4.7 supervises MIN/-
                 LLM orchestrator                                            MAX
            D    Single-LLM     (monolithic,    one Qwen 2.5 7B (all         none: the model sets 𝑢1 , 𝑢2 directly
                 ablation)                      constraints)


modifying the orchestrator (Architectures A–B), and the orchestrator can be swapped between rule and smart variants
without modifying the agents (Architectures B and C).
    The agents in this paper fall into two categories that occupy different tiers of the control hierarchy and play different
roles relative to the PI controllers of the chain:

   • Regulatory operator agents (tc_5, cc_1000, tc_20, tc_0, cc_3000, tc_heater) and the orchestrator agent.
     These run on the fast 2 s control loop. Each operator agent acts as the equivalent of one PI in the chain: it follows
     the ARC principles and uses its control-theory context (CV, MV, setpoint, priority, selector kind, and the rolling
     memory of its own past proposals) to translate the current measurement into a proposal directly. The orchestrator
     agent encapsulates the chain’s interaction logic (MIN/MAX selectors, split-parallel, overrides) and applies it to
     the operator agents’ proposals.
Three architectures are constructed from the same ARC chain, each serving as one ablation step in the evaluation
of the proposal made in this work. Architecture A is the classical monolithic baseline: six PI controllers in a hard-
coded MIN/MAX chain, no agents. Architecture B introduces the LLM operator agents while keeping the orchestrator
deterministic: each PI’s role in the chain is taken by one Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct operator agent, and the MIN/MAX
chain is encapsulated as one rule-based orchestrator agent that applies the structural priority order without LLM
involvement. Architecture C, the headline of this work, additionally delegates the orchestrator-level reasoning to an
LLM. The operator agents are the same Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct ensemble used in Architecture B; a Claude Opus 4.7
supervisor classifies the operating regime and tunes the orchestrator’s dwell-time, trend-bias, and memory parameters
at each supervisory tick, while the structural MIN/MAX priority order remains enforced deterministically. The three
architectures share a common agent roster (one operator agent per PI in the chain, one orchestrator agent for the chain’s
interaction logic) and are evaluated on the same disturbance scenarios.
    Architectures A–C form a stepwise capability ladder built from the same ARC chain; Architecture D is a separate
ablation that removes the decomposition itself. A single Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct model receives the entire control
problem (every measurement, every constraint and its priority, and both manipulated variables) and must output 𝑢1
and 𝑢2 directly, with no operator agents, no MIN/MAX chain and no orchestrator. It tests the Introduction’s claim
that the ARC-style decomposition is what keeps each agent’s context narrow enough to be specified and verified;
Architecture D is described in Section 2.5.6 and evaluated in Section 2.6.4. Table 4 summarises the mapping between
the agent-level constructs used in this work and their established counterparts in classical process control theory. Each
row names a familiar process-control object on the left, the agent-level counterpart used in the present work in the
middle, and the canonical reference on the right.

2.5.2. Systematizing multi-agent construction: a four-step recipe
    The agent roster of Section 2.5.1 was derived from a control-theory-designed chain. The same derivation generalises
to any plant for which a plant-wide regulatory design exists, and produces a four-step recipe for constructing a multi-
agent regulatory layer:



Page 9 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

Table 4
Translation grammar: every agent-level construct in this work has an established counterpart in classical process control
theory.

                Process-control construct                      Agent-level counterpart in this work
                PI controller targeting one constraint set-    Operator agent (one agent per PI in the
                point                                          chain)
                MIN/MAX selector network                       Orchestrator agent’s priority-grouped deci-
                                                               sion rule
                Back-calculation anti-windup                   Bumpless agent re-engagement
                Split-range / split-parallel                   Two-MV decomposition (fan / heater)
                Supervisory layer (gain scheduler)             LLM advisor on slow tier
                Active-constraint switching                    Priority-chain reordering by orchestrator
                Plant-wide design procedure                    Recipe for the agent roster (Section 2.5.2)


  1. Design the regulatory layer with the plant-wide procedure [1, 8]. Identify the controlled variables, the manip-
     ulated variables, and the active inequality constraints; determine where a constraint conflict requires CV–CV
     switching (MIN/MAX selectors) and where one manipulated variable must be shared by MV–MV switching
     (split-range or split-parallel); and add override paths for the safety constraints. The output of this step is the set
     of logical control blocks and the interaction logic that binds them.
  2. Assign one operator agent to each control loop. The agent inherits the loop’s external interface (measurement →
     requested MV) and its place in the priority order, and acts as an operator carrying control-theory context rather
     than a numerical gain. There is one operator agent per loop, and the agents inherit the priority structure through
     their proposal tags.
  3. Encapsulate the interaction logic as one orchestrator agent. The MIN/MAX selectors, the split-parallel, and any
     override paths are not control loops and do not fit inside any operator agent, yet they are part of the architecture.
     The orchestrator agent receives the operator agents’ proposals every sample and emits the prescribed (𝑢1 , 𝑢2 )
     commands; it does not replace a loop, it represents the logic that binds them.
  4. (Optional) Add supervisory agents on top of the orchestrator. The plant-wide hierarchy already separates
     regulatory control from supervisory control [1, 6]. In the agent system, this translates to additional agents that
     run on a slower time-scale and write their advice into bounded scalar parameters of the orchestrator, never into
     𝑢1 or 𝑢2 directly. The smart-orchestrator’s dwell-time and trend gains are an instance of this fourth tier and are
     exercised by Architecture C.
Steps 1–3 produce the basic agent system and account for Architectures A and B in this paper: A is the monolithic
implementation of the chain, B is the multi-agent reformulation under the recipe above with rule-based operator
agents and a rule-based orchestrator. Architecture C exercises step 4 by using LLM-backed operator agents under
the smart orchestrator. A validation swap in which the operator agents’ decision logic is implemented by SIMC-tuned
PI blocks for debugging purposes only reproduces ARC bit-for-bit, certifying that steps 1 and 3 (the chain design and
the orchestrator-agent encoding of the interaction logic) are faithful.
    The multi-agent reformulation rests on two structural equivalences: each PI in the chain corresponds to one
operator agent that uses control-theory context to act directly on its proposal, and the chain’s inter-PI logic becomes one
orchestrator agent. The reformulation is extended by a prompt engineering and context curation step, which replaces
the PID tuning step of classical ARC.

2.5.3. Architecture A: Advanced Regulatory Control (ARC)
    This is the baseline: a faithful re-implementation of Figure 10 of Skogestad [8]. Six PI controllers each watch
a single CV and target a single constraint setpoint. Their output candidates are routed into a four-layer MIN/MAX
selector chain on 𝑢1 , while a seventh PI controls 𝑢2 directly through a split-parallel arrangement [12] (Figure 2). Six PI
controllers are assigned to the chain, each defending a single constraint setpoint: tc_5 (T, SP=5, MIN); cc_1000 (C,
SP=1000, MAX); tc_20 (T, SP=20, MAX); tc_0 (T, SP=0, MIN, freeze override); cc_3000 (C, SP=3000, MAX,
sick-cow override); tc_heater (T, SP=5 − Δ = 4 °C, drives 𝑢2 ).

Page 10 of 37
                             Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

   The four-layer MIN/MAX selector chain on 𝑢1 , reading from lowest priority (operator default) to highest (safety
overrides), is implemented as follows:
  u <- u0 = 50%                                             # operator default
  u <- MIN(u, tc_5.out)                                     # happy low-T
  u <- MAX(u, cc_1000.out, tc_20.out)                       # happy CO2 / happy high-T
  u <- MIN(u, tc_0.out)                                     # freeze protection
  u <- MAX(u, cc_3000.out)                                  # sick-cow protection
  u1 <- clip(u, 0, 100)

The split-parallel heater path is independent: 𝑢2 ← clip(tc_heater output, 0, 100). The Δ = 1 °C offset between tc_5
and tc_heater ensures the cheap option (reducing fan to retain heat) is exhausted before the expensive option (turning
the heater on) is engaged.
    The split-parallel arrangement adopted here differs from conventional split-range control in a way that is not
innocuous for the chain’s clean operation: the conventional MV–MV switch for temperature is split-range control
with one setpoint at 𝑇 = 5 °C and the heater turned on by a deadband on the negative-error half. We adopt the
split-parallel arrangement of Forsman [12] (two setpoints separated by Δ = 1 °C) because it lets the fan and the heater
operate as cleanly decoupled SISO loops without a deadband-and-hysteresis pair: the chain simply hands 𝑢1 off via the
MIN/MAX selectors, while tc_heater drives 𝑢2 to its own slightly-lower setpoint. A pure split-range implementation
with a single 𝑇 = 5 °C target is a defensible alternative that we do not evaluate here.
    The chain above does not currently impose a backoff on the cc_1000 or tc_5 setpoints. That is, the constraints
𝐶 ≤ 1 000 and 𝑇 ≥ 5 are tracked at exactly 1 000 ppm and 5 °C. In practice the noise+actuator-lag dynamics produce
short-term overshoots, and the standard remedy is to tighten the operating SP by a backoff Δ𝐶 , Δ𝑇 so the constraint is
honoured even at the peak of the disturbance response [8]. Δ𝐶 and Δ𝑇 are tunable: an operator (or a supervisory agent)
can reduce them during quiet periods to save energy and increase them when disturbances are expected. In the agent
reformulation, this knob is the most natural target for a strategy-level supervisor; we treat it as a planned extension for
future work.




Page 11 of 37
                               Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control




Figure 2: Architecture A: Advanced Regulatory Control. Seven PI controllers, a four-stage MIN/MAX selector chain on
the fan (𝑢1 ), and a split-parallel heater branch (𝑢2 ). The selector chain is drawn horizontally on purpose: the four selectors
form a one-way priority series on a single time scale (every loop tuned with a common 𝜏𝑐 , with no master-to-slave setpoint
hand-off), so it is a chain rather than a cascade. Priority increases from left to right, and the right-most selector is the
most critical: it overrides the others when constraints conflict. CO2 and the high-T comfort target share the second-stage
MAX. The heater is a separate split-parallel branch (MV–MV switching, fan used before heater). Based on the author’s
re-implementation following the architecture described in [8].




Page 12 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

2.5.4. PI controllers and SIMC tuning
    The SIMC procedure described below serves two purposes in this work. It informs the gain selection for the PI
controllers of Architecture A, and it also informs the operator agents of Architectures B and C: the SIMC tuning results,
the binding direction, and the proportional-band interpretation are all part of the context that each LLM operator agent
receives in its prompt. Each PI uses the Åström-form parallel-incremental algorithm:

      𝑢raw (𝑘) = 𝐾𝑐 𝑒(𝑘) + 𝐼(𝑘),        𝑒(𝑘) = 𝑆𝑃 − 𝑦(𝑘),                                                                 (5)

with the integrator updated by back-calculation anti-windup [28]:
                              [                                 ]
                                𝐾
      𝐼(𝑘 + 1) = 𝐼(𝑘) + Δ𝑡 ⋅ 𝑇 𝑐 𝑒(𝑘) + 𝑇1 (𝑢act (𝑘) − 𝑢raw (𝑘)) .                                                        (6)
                                   𝑖         𝑡

Here 𝑢act is the MV value actually applied to the plant, which may differ from 𝑢raw because of selector overrides or
saturation, and 𝑇𝑡 = 𝑇𝑖 is the tracking time constant. This keeps overridden controllers’ integrators tracking reality so
they re-engage cleanly when activated.
    Gains are computed by Skogestad SIMC tuning [29] of the linearised plant about the nominal operating point. It
is possible to verify from Table 5 that the CO2 –fan loop (𝐾𝑐 = −0.173 %/ppm) requires a negative proportional gain:
a positive error 𝑒 = 𝑆𝑃 − 𝐶 means 𝐶 < 𝑆𝑃 , so 𝑢raw > 0 requests less fan, which is correct for a MAX-type agent that
should request fan only when 𝐶 is above its setpoint. The temperature–fan loops use the same sign convention with
𝐾𝑐 < 0 for TC agents, while the heater loop uses 𝐾𝑐 > 0 because increasing 𝑢2 raises 𝑇 directly. The three distinct
loop gains are summarised in Table 5.

             1     𝜏
      𝐾𝑐 =             ,       𝑇𝑖 = min(𝜏, 4(𝜏𝑐 + 𝜃)),                                                                    (7)
             𝐾𝑝 𝜏𝑐 + 𝜃

The well-mixed plant model has no transport delay, but the 𝜏act = 20 s first-order actuator lag (Section 2.3) acts as an
effective delay 𝜃eff ≈ 20 s as far as the controller is concerned. We choose 𝜏𝑐 = 0.6 𝜏 (mildly aggressive; closed-loop
≈ 1.7× faster than open-loop) and equivalently set 𝜏𝑐 + 𝜃eff = 0.6 𝜏; since 𝜃eff ≪ 𝜏 ≈ 387 s, the resulting 𝐾𝑐 and 𝑇𝑖
agree with the 𝜃 = 0 choice to all reported digits.
    All PIs use the same Δ𝑡 = 2 s sample period.

2.5.5. Architectures B and C: LLM operator agents on the regulatory tier
     Architecture A keeps the operator agent’s decision logic deterministic as a SIMC-tuned PI block. Architectures B
and C share a common implementation of the LLM operator agents that replaces this deterministic decision logic with
a local instruction-tuned language model: each of the six operator agents tc_5, cc_1000, tc_20, tc_0, cc_3000,
tc_heater is backed by Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct (7.62 B parameters, FP16, served by a single shared inference
backend running offline on a 24 GB consumer GPU). The two architectures differ only at the orchestrator tier:
Architecture B uses a deterministic rule-based orchestrator that applies the MIN/MAX priority chain exactly as
described in Section 2.5.3 and makes no further reasoning step; Architecture C adds a Claude Opus 4.7 supervisor
that classifies the operating regime and tunes the orchestrator’s dwell-time, trend-bias and memory parameters at each
supervisory tick. In both cases the structural MIN/MAX priority chain is preserved deterministically and the LLM
cannot override the chain’s binding-direction decisions; the operator-tier LLM contributes a regime classification and
a rationale, the orchestrator-tier LLM (when present) contributes parameter tuning, and the chain enforces structural
priority regardless of either output. This is the architectural realisation of conflict resolution by structural priority that
motivates the paper.
     The construction of Architectures B and C is fully prescribed by the four-step recipe of Section 2.5.2: design the
chain with the plant-wide procedure, assign one operator agent to each PI’s role, encapsulate the inter-PI logic as one
orchestrator agent, and (optionally) add an LLM-based supervisory agent on a slow tier. Architecture B exercises the
first three steps; Architecture C additionally exercises the fourth.
      Architecture C runs at Δ𝑡ctrl = 5 min, an order of magnitude slower than the regulatory tier of Architectures A–D
(Δ𝑡 = 2 s). This is the natural cadence of an operator glancing at a SCADA panel rather than the cadence of a fast PI
loop. The plant time constants are 𝜏𝐶 ≈ 387 s and 𝜏𝑇 ≈ 334 s, so Δ𝑡∕𝜏 ≈ 0.83; the plant is partially settled between
samples but not fully (which would otherwise drive the chain into bang-bang behaviour). The plant itself integrates
continuously between samples through a stiff ODE solver; only the controller’s polling rate slows.

Page 13 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

Table 5
SIMC PI gains at the nominal operating point (𝑢1 = 50 %, 𝑛cows = 80).

                       Loop                              𝐾𝑝         𝜏 [s]         𝐾𝑐          𝑇𝑖 [s]
                       CO2 ↔ fan (cc_*)            −9.66 ppm/%      387     −0.173 %/ppm      387
                       T ↔ fan (tc_5/0/20)         −0.119 K/%       334      −14.02 %/K       334
                       T ↔ heater (tc_heater)      +0.092 K/%       334      +18.08 %/K       334


     We chose Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct as the headline backend for four reasons. (i) Instruction-following capacity. The
agent’s task is to classify the regime (IDLE / ACTIVE / SATURATED) from a pre-formatted state report and return a
JSON object with a short operator-style rationale. At 7 B parameters Qwen 2.5 follows this format reliably: across the
4-day run reported in Section 2.6.3, 0 of the LLM calls failed schema validation. A 3 B-parameter version of the same
family (Qwen 2.5 3B Instruct) was also exercised in development; it satisfied the schema but produced wrong-direction
proposals on ∼60 % of saturated MAX agents in an earlier prompt design, behaviour we explicitly engineered out via
the deterministic-direction mapping described below (Lever A). A plausible hypothesis for the 3B-model failure is
that the instruction-tuning corpus carries little process-control vocabulary, so the model pattern-matches phrases such
as “high CO2 ” to a general “reduce activity” response rather than to the loop-specific “increase ventilation” action,
and the 3-billion-parameter ceiling appears to be insufficient for the multi-constraint long-context reasoning that the
saturated-MAX case requires. The 7B variant retains the same general-purpose instruction-tuning bias but is capable
of integrating the explicit binding-direction line of the system prompt without inverting it, which is consistent with
the 0 % schema-validation failure rate observed on the 4-day run. (ii) Open weights, offline-deployable. Qwen 2.5 is
released under the Apache-2.0 licence; the model weights are downloaded once (∼ 15 GB on disk in FP16) and the
entire run is offline. This matters for industrial process control, where cloud connectivity may be restricted, where
data-access constraints may forbid the transmission of operating-point data outside the plant boundary, and where
security and intellectual-property concerns require that the inference layer remain on the plant network rather than on
a third-party cloud. It also matters for paper reproducibility: the model weights are pinned, no API drift is possible,
and one with the same GPU class is capable of reproducing every (𝐶, 𝑇 , 𝑢1 , 𝑢2 ) trajectory of this section by cloning
the repository and downloading the same checkpoint. (iii) Single consumer GPU. In FP16 the model fits in ∼15 GB of
VRAM with ∼9 GB of headroom for the shared system-prompt KV cache and the per-sample suffix processing, well
within a 24 GB-class GPU. (iv) Marginal cost is electricity. No API spend; the entire 4-day mixed-season scenario
completes in approximately one hour of GPU time.
      A useful framing of the LLM operator agent, contrasted with the classical PI block of Architecture A, is that the
LLM agent does not require gain tuning in the SIMC sense. What it requires instead is to be educated: a prompt-
engineering step that fixes the agent’s role and a context-curation step that supplies the loop-specific reference material
the agent reasons against. The prompt engineering replaces the SIMC tuning step of the classical pipeline, and is
itself the human design effort that turns a general-purpose instruction-tuned model into a specialised operator agent.
Each LLM operator agent receives a three-layer prompt at every control sample: a static system prompt shared across
all six agents (∼1 400 tokens, KV-cached), a per-agent identity prompt (∼80 tokens, fixed for one agent across a
scenario), and a per-sample user prompt (∼140 tokens, refreshed each control tick). The three layers together limit
the agent’s context to its own constraint, setpoint, chain priority, the last few measurements, and its own past mode
classifications; the agent does not see other agents’ state and does not see the chain structure above it. This is the
engineering-handcraft alternative to RAG that the Introduction motivates: the specialisation problem is solved once,
at design time, by encoding the agent’s role in its system prompt, and the context required by any one agent is limited
by construction.
     The system prompt is reproduced verbatim below. It is the agent’s operator-style training material, distilled from
Skogestad’s 2023 review of advanced regulatory control [7], which is included verbatim in the operator agent’s context
as the canonical reference for the chain vocabulary and the selector rules the agent is part of. The two foundational
selector rules from that review are quoted as canonical references inside the prompt so the LLM understands the chain
it is part of, but the selector vocabulary is reserved for the orchestrator.
  You are an operator agent in a multi-agent regulatory control system for a
  dairy barn. The architecture follows the Advanced Regulatory Control (ARC)
  pattern of Skogestad (Annual Reviews in Control, 2023).


Page 14 of 37
                          Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control


 You and five peer agents each defend ONE inequality constraint on the plant.
 A separate Orchestrator agent collects your proposals and applies the
 priority chain described below; you do not need to know the chain rules
 to do your job. You only need to defend YOUR own constraint.

 PLANT
   C = CO2 concentration in the barn [ppm]
   T = barn air temperature [degC]
   u1 = fan speed [0..100 %]   (increasing u1 LOWERS both C and T)
   u2 = heater [0..100 %]      (increasing u2 RAISES T)

 CONSTRAINT-CHASING DIRECTIONS (your identity tells you which is yours)
   Each constraint is "satisfied by a LARGE MV" or "satisfied by a SMALL MV".
   This is Skogestad 2023 Selector Rule 1, which the chain uses to decide
   MIN vs MAX selectors. For YOU as an operator the meaning is simple:
     "satisfied by LARGE MV" == when violated, you push the MV UP.
     "satisfied by SMALL MV" == when violated, you push the MV DOWN.
   In both cases your identity provides two concrete numbers:
     u_idle      = the value you propose when your constraint is comfortably
                   satisfied (NON-binding; lets other agents win the chain).
     u_saturate = the value you propose when your constraint is clearly
                   violated (FULL bind).

 YOUR JOB EACH CONTROL SAMPLE
   You receive (in the user prompt):
     - the current measurement of your CV
     - your setpoint SP
     - the signed violation v = (unsafe-side excess), positive = violated
     - the half-width of your proportional band PB/2
     - a pre-computed mode hint based on |v| vs PB/2

   Decide which of three regimes you are in:
     IDLE       v < -PB/2          your CV is comfortably on the safe side
     ACTIVE     -PB/2 <= v <= PB/2 your CV is inside the band; bind proportionally
     SATURATED v > +PB/2           your CV has clearly violated the constraint

   Then write a short operator-voice rationale (one sentence, <= 80 chars).
   THE NUMERIC u_request IS COMPUTED BY THE AGENT CODE FROM YOUR MODE.

 OPERATOR MEMORY (will appear in your user prompt as a "MEMORY" block)
   You also have memory of how long the constraint has been violated and
   the integrated drift since the last comfortably-safe interval. Use this
   when picking ACTIVE intensity: if u_extra is already large, pick a
   moderate intensity rather than 1.0 to avoid double-strength action.

 SITUATIONAL AWARENESS ("RECENT HISTORY" block)
   You also see your own last few mode classifications and the resulting
   CV trajectory. If you have been flipping IDLE <-> SATURATED rapidly
   and the resulting CV peak-to-peak is large, your decisions are causing
   bang-bang. When the user prompt flags oscillating: true, prefer ACTIVE
   with a moderate intensity over the recommended mode.

 OUTPUT FORMAT (return EXACTLY one JSON object):
   {"mode": "IDLE|ACTIVE|SATURATED",
    "intensity": <float 0..1, used only for ACTIVE>,
    "rationale": "<one short operator sentence, <= 80 chars>"}

   The per-agent identity prompt for cc_1000 (the CO2 comfort agent) is:
 YOUR IDENTITY
   name      = cc_1000
   CV        = C
   MV        = fan
   setpoint = 1000 ppm
   constraint: C <= 1000 ppm

Page 15 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

    binding direction: push MV UP when violated
    proportional band PB = 100 ppm
    u_idle      = 0 % (when not binding)
    u_saturate = 100 % (when fully binding)

  You only emit {mode, intensity, rationale}; the agent code
  will set u_request from your mode and the two values above.

    A representative per-sample user prompt for cc_1000 at 𝑡 = 1200 s with the constraint approaching its limit reads:
  CURRENT STATE (t = 1200 s)
    measurement = 985.0 ppm
    setpoint    = 1000 ppm
    v           = -15.00 ppm (positive = unsafe side), trend = +2.30 ppm/min
    zone        : |v|=15.0 <= PB/2=50.0, inside band (linear alpha = 0.35)
    recommended mode (from rule) : ACTIVE
    previous u_request = 12.0 %

  MEMORY (your operator log; updates every sample):
    binding duration : 0 s continuous on the unsafe side
    integrated drift : 0.000 ppm*s
    u_extra applied : +0.00 % (already added; Ti=600 s)

  RECENT HISTORY (your own last 12 samples = ~60 min):
    your modes (oldest -> newest, I=IDLE A=ACTIVE S=SATURATED):
      IIIIIIIIIAAA
    resulting C measurements: [850.0, 860.0, 870.0, 880.0, 890.0, 910.0,
                                930.0, 950.0, 960.0, 970.0, 975.0, 985.0] ppm
    peak-to-peak: 135.00 ppm     mode flips: 2

  Return one JSON object (mode, intensity, rationale).
  You are STRONGLY encouraged to follow the recommended mode.

    Three elements of the user prompt warrant emphasis. The recommended mode is a deterministic hint computed
from the signed violation 𝑣 and the proportional band PB∕2; the LLM is encouraged to follow it but may override it on
the basis of trend or recent history. The memory block surfaces the agent’s integral state 𝑢extra = 𝐾𝑖 ⋅𝑒int , already applied
by the agent code (Lever B, Eq. 10); the LLM uses this to avoid double-counting accumulated stress when choosing
intensity. The recent history block carries the last twelve mode classifications and CV measurements (Lever D); when
the mode-flip rate exceeds 40 % of the window, the block is annotated oscillating: true and the LLM is explicitly
authorised to break the recommended-mode default and stabilise on a moderate ACTIVE intensity.
    Each LLM call returns exactly one JSON object with three fields:
  {"mode":      "IDLE | ACTIVE | SATURATED",
   "intensity": <float 0..1, used only for ACTIVE>,
   "rationale": "<one short operator sentence, <= 80 chars>"}

The agent code then computes 𝑢request deterministically from the agent’s identity:

                 ⎧𝑢                                    if mode = IDLE
                 ⎪ idle
      𝑢request = ⎨𝑢saturate                            if mode = SATURATED                                                (8)
                 ⎪𝑢 + intensity ⋅ (𝑢
                 ⎩ idle             saturate − 𝑢idle ) if mode = ACTIVE.

The result is post-clamped to the slew-rate budget |𝑢 − 𝑢prev | ≤ ratemax Δ𝑡 and to [0, 100]%.
    This mapping is the architectural fix we call Lever A. The reasoning behind it follows the storytelling of how the
prompt evolved across earlier trials, and is presented here because the design choices are easier to follow when the
failure modes that motivated them are visible. The first prompt design asked the LLM to emit 𝑢request directly, as a
numerical fan or heater value between 0 and 100. The result was a high rate of direction-inversion failures, around

Page 16 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

60 % on saturated MAX agents under stress: the model pattern-matched “high CO2 ” to “shut something down” or
“reduce the action”, even when the correct numerical value was listed in the prompt and the binding direction was
stated in words. The model was being asked to do two things at once: read the regime and produce a number consistent
with the binding direction, and it was making the second decision incorrectly. Lever A separates those tasks. The
binding direction is encoded in the pair (𝑢idle , 𝑢saturate ), which is fixed in the agent’s identity, not in the JSON the
LLM returns. The LLM cannot get the binding direction wrong by construction: if it says SATURATED on a cc_1000
agent with 𝑢idle = 0, 𝑢saturate = 100, the resulting 𝑢request is 100 regardless of any wrong-direction language in the
rationale. Lever A removes this failure mode structurally; the LLM contributes regime classification and an operator-
voice rationale, and direction is the agent’s identity, not the LLM’s choice. The same storytelling motivates Levers
B and D: each lever was added in response to a specific failure mode observed in development. Lever B was added
after trials in which the agent reached a steady-state offset on long disturbance episodes and could not settle at an
intermediate 𝑢. Lever D was added after trials in which the agent flipped between IDLE and SATURATED every
sample with no awareness of its own oscillation history.
    A pure proportional band like Eq. 8 reaches a steady-state offset on any sustained disturbance whose recovery
requires an intermediate 𝑢: the LLM’s mode toggles between IDLE and SATURATED but the agent has no memory
of how long the constraint has been violated, so it cannot settle at an intermediate 𝑢 between 𝑢idle and 𝑢saturate . This
is the same offset that the I term of a PI controller eliminates by integrating the tracking error. In our case study
it would otherwise produce bang-bang freeze excursions when the heater alone cannot keep 𝑇 ≥ 5 °C during a
sustained −10 °C cold day in the 4-day mixed-season scenario: the agent oscillates between fan-off (saturate) and
fan-on (cc_1000 winning the chain because CO2 climbs while the fan is off), and the small steady 𝑢 that would settle
𝑇 near the constraint boundary is never explored.
    We close this gap with a second architectural lever, Lever B: an operator memory term carried by each LLM
operator agent. Each agent maintains a standard integral of the signed violation 𝑣 (positive on the unsafe side), clipped
at zero so it cannot push the manipulated variable in the wrong direction:
                    {       (                  )
                      max 0, 𝑒int (𝑘) + Δ𝑡 𝑣(𝑘) if not at saturation,
       𝑒int (𝑘+1) =                                                                                                    (9)
                      𝑒int (𝑘)                     if 𝑣(𝑘) > 0 and 𝑢prev at saturate.

The integrator contributes a small extra term that is added to the deterministic mode mapping of Eq. 8 before the slew
and clip stages:
                           (                        )      𝑢         − 𝑢idle
      𝑢request = clip[0,100] 𝑢(Lever
                              request
                                      A)
                                         + 𝐾𝑖 ⋅ 𝑒int , 𝐾𝑖 = saturate         .                                    (10)
                                                                PB ⋅ 𝑇𝑖
The integral gain 𝐾𝑖 inherits the binding direction from the agent’s identity (sign of 𝑢saturate −𝑢idle ); the agent code does
not pick a direction. 𝑇𝑖 is an integral time constant in the spirit of SIMC tuning [29]: 𝑇𝑖 = 30 min for the temperature-
loop agents (tc_5, tc_20, tc_heater), 𝑇𝑖 = 15 min for the freeze-protection agent tc_0, and 𝑇𝑖 = 10 min for the
faster CO2 -loop agents (cc_1000, cc_3000).
    Equation 9 is a standard PI integral with one modification: the max(0, ⋅) clip ensures 𝑒int ≥ 0 at all times. This is the
right choice for one-sided ARC constraints like “𝑇 ≥ 5 °C”: the integrator accumulates only on the unsafe side, and on
the safe side (𝑣 < 0) it bleeds back to zero linearly in proportion to how safe we are, then locks at zero. This matches
operator intuition. An operator accumulates stress about a constraint going wrong, not about it going extra-right, and is
also the right controls choice: a bidirectional integrator would build up “safe-side debt” that sabotages the next violation
episode. Anti-windup is conditional integration: when 𝑢prev is already at the saturate end and 𝑣 is still positive, 𝑒int is
held; we also hard-clip |𝐾𝑖 ⋅ 𝑒int | ≤ 100 % so the integral term alone cannot demand more than full range.
    The integrator state is surfaced to the LLM in the user prompt as a MEMORY block listing the binding duration,
the integrated drift, and the current 𝑢extra = 𝐾𝑖 ⋅ 𝑒int . The LLM is told that 𝑢extra has already been added to its mode-
mapped output and that it should choose intensity for ACTIVE mode taking this into account; this prevents the LLM
from double-counting accumulated stress when picking intensity. Together with Lever A, this gives the LLM operator
agent the same structural role as a PI controller, with the operating point selected by reasoning rather than by 𝐾𝑐 ⋅ 𝑒,
and with the operator-style rationale preserved as an audit-trail output.
    Lever A and Lever B together address two of the three failure modes of an LLM operator at the regulatory tier:
direction-of-binding (Lever A) and slow-frequency steady-state offset (Lever B). A third failure mode, high-frequency
bang-bang at the discrete-mode classification boundary, arises when the LLM is asked to make a fresh classification

Page 17 of 37
                             Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

every sample with no awareness of its own past decisions or their cumulative effect on the controlled variable. An
operator looking at a SCADA trend chart for an hour would notice “𝑇 has been flipping between −5 and +15 °C and I
have been flipping mode every other sample”; the agent as specified above has no such situational awareness. Lever D
supplies it. Each operator agent maintains a rolling window of its last 𝑁 mode classifications and the corresponding
CV measurements (we use 𝑁 = 12, so the window covers the last hour at Δ𝑡 = 5 min), and the user prompt includes a
RECENT HISTORY block listing the mode sequence (compact codes I/A/S), the measurement values, the peak-to-peak
amplitude, and the count of mode flips. When the mode-flip rate exceeds 40 % of the window length (≥ 5 flips in 12
samples), the block is annotated «- OSCILLATING, and the system prompt explicitly authorises the LLM to override
the rule-derived recommended mode: pick ACTIVE with a moderate intensity (∼ 0.5) and stay there for several samples
to let the plant settle into an intermediate steady state. This is operator situational awareness as a prompt mechanism:
the LLM is given enough long-horizon context to recognise that its own decisions have been causing oscillation, and is
given explicit permission to break the recommended-mode default in response. Lever D is purely a prompt-engineering
lever (it does not modify the agent’s control law) and is therefore an empirical test of whether a 7 B-class instruction-
tuned model can use long-horizon context to self-regulate at the regulatory tier.
    Each control sample, each agent appends one JSON record containing the timestamp, measurement, setpoint,
𝑢request , mode, the LLM’s rationale, and a fallback flag. Across the 4-day mixed-season scenario reported below this
produces 6 time-aligned chains of operator rationales, 1 152 entries each: a process-engineer’s logbook of why each
operator proposal was issued, not just what it was. This is the operational contribution of the LLM-as-operator pattern
that the deterministic Architecture A cannot match without a separate explanation layer.
    The LLM call sits behind five layers of safety: (i) JSON schema validation; (ii) a clip-and-slew clamp on 𝑢request
to [0, 100] % with |𝑢 − 𝑢prev | ≤ ratemax Δ𝑡; (iii) Lever A’s deterministic-direction mapping (Eq. 8); (iv) Lever B’s
anti-windup; conditional integration freezes 𝑒int when the actuator is saturated and the constraint is still violated, plus
the hard clip |𝐾𝑖 ⋅ 𝑒int | ≤ 100 % so the integral term alone cannot demand more than full range; (v) a fallthrough to
the rule operator’s proportional-band proposal (with 𝑢extra still applied) on any LLM exception, schema violation, or
JSON-parse failure. Empirically the fallthrough is rarely exercised (0 fallthroughs in the 4-day run reported below);
the deterministic fallback exists so a misbehaving model cannot leave the chain without a proposal.

     The two architectures differ only in the orchestrator. Architecture B uses the deterministic rule orchestrator
described above: at every control sample it groups the operator agents’ proposals by chain priority and applies the
MIN or MAX selector at each priority level in sequence, producing the two manipulated-variable commands (𝑢1 , 𝑢2 )
without any LLM call. The orchestrator’s context is limited by construction to the current sample’s proposals plus the
agents’ static identities; the orchestrator does not reason about the operating regime and does not vary its parameters
during a scenario.
     Architecture C introduces an LLM-based supervisor at the orchestrator tier. A Claude Opus 4.7 advisor is called
every llm_period𝑠 = 600 s (every 10 minutes of simulated time) on a snapshot of the chain state. The advisor classifies
the current operating regime and returns three scalar tuning parameters (a dwell time and two trend gains) that the
orchestrator uses for the next 10-minute window. The advisor’s context is limited to the slow tier: it cannot set 𝑢1 or 𝑢2
and its outputs are bounded scalars validated against a fixed schema before they are accepted by the orchestrator. The
structural MIN/MAX priority chain remains in effect throughout; the freeze-safety guard at 𝑇 < 3 °C zeroes out the
MAX-fan trend push regardless of the advisor’s recommendation.
     The Claude advisor’s verbatim system prompt, the canonical reference for the LLM-based orchestrator’s context,
is reproduced below:
  You are an expert supervisor for a multi-agent process control system
  running inside a Norwegian dairy cow barn. Your task is to classify the
  current operating regime and recommend tuning parameters for the smart
  orchestrator.

  SYSTEM CONTEXT
  ==============
  The barn is controlled by six operator agents plus one orchestrator.
  Operators propose requests for the fan (u1) or heater (u2); the
  orchestrator resolves conflicts using a MIN/MAX selector chain by
  priority, where higher priority is closer to the MV (more override
  authority).



Page 18 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

  Agents (from highest priority to lowest):
    Priority 4 cc_3000    MAX   CO2 <= 3000 ppm  sick-cow safety
    Priority 3 tc_0       MIN   T   >= 0    C    freeze protection
    Priority 2 cc_1000    MAX   CO2 <= 1000 ppm  happy CO2
    Priority 2 tc_20      MAX   T   <= 20 C      happy high temperature
    Priority 1 tc_5       MIN   T   >= 5    C    happy low temperature
    Priority 0 tc_heater (direct) split-parallel heater SP=4 C

  The smart orchestrator has three knobs you adjust:

    dwell_s     : seconds an active-bind agent holds control after its raw
                  proposal stops binding. Larger = smoother under noise,
                  slower to react. Range [10, 600].
    k_trend_T   : gain on dT/dt biasing temperature proposals toward an
                  approaching constraint. Range [0, 500].
    k_trend_C   : same for CO2 proposals. Subject to a hard safety guard:
                  when T < 3 C, the orchestrator zeroes out the MAX-fan
                  trend push regardless of your recommendation.

  REGIME TAXONOMY
  ===============
  Classify the current snapshot into exactly one of:
    nominal          - CVs comfortable, no active binding
    cold regime     - T dropping or below 5 C, heater saturated
    hot-saturation   - T rising near 20 C, fan at or near 100 %
    noise-chatter    - both CVs near a selector boundary, flipping
    sick-risk        - CO2 above 1500 ppm and climbing
    transient        - fast transition; keep moderate defaults

  OUTPUT (strict JSON, validated by schema)
  ========================================
  Return exactly:
    mode:       one of the six regimes above
    dwell_s:    float in [10, 600]
    k_trend_T: float in [0, 500]
    k_trend_C: float in [0, 500]
    rationale: one short sentence explaining the choice (<=240 chars)

  You have no access to u1 or u2. You cannot set MVs. Your output only
  tunes the orchestrator’s reasoning heuristics. The numerical MIN/MAX
  chain retains final authority, and the freeze-safety guard is always
  on regardless of your advice.

     The supervisor’s user prompt at each tick is a compact snapshot of the chain state: simulated time, the two CV
measurements with their derivatives, the currently active priority level, the current regime classification, and a per-
agent table of proposals (CV, MV, 𝑢request , selector kind, priority). The output is constrained to a fixed schema (a mode
label, a dwell time, two trend gains, and a rationale string) and the call uses prompt caching for the static system prompt.
The supervisor sees only the chain state; it never sees the LLM operator agents’ rationales.
     The two architectures are designed so the only difference is the orchestrator-level reasoning. Architecture B
has a single LLM in the loop, at the operator tier, and the orchestrator applies the priority chain deterministically.
Architecture C adds a second LLM at the supervisory tier; the structural priority chain is still enforced deterministically
by the orchestrator at the regulatory tier, and the supervisor’s role is to slowly retune the orchestrator’s dwell-time and
trend-bias parameters in response to the operating regime. The multi-tier LLM architecture preserves conflict resolution
by structural priority at the regulatory tier and uses LLM reasoning only for parameter scheduling at the supervisory
tier. Figure 3 places Architectures A and C side by side: they share an identical structural skeleton and differ only inside
the constraint-defender boxes and in how the priority chain is implemented.




Page 19 of 37
Page 20 of 37




                                                                                                                                                                                       Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control




                Figure 3: Structural twins: Architecture A (top, ARC) and Architecture C (bottom, LLM-MAS). Both share an identical structural skeleton: plant, six constraint-
                defenders, the four-stage MIN/MAX selector chain drawn horizontally as a one-way priority series on a single time scale (priority increasing left to right,
                right-most selector most critical), the split-parallel heater branch, the clip and the plant feedback. The only differences are inside the constraint-defender boxes
                (PI controller versus LLM operator agent calling a shared Qwen 2.5 7B backend) and the chain implementation (hard-coded code in A versus the orchestrator
                agent in C). The orchestrator agent is highlighted in the bottom panel with a dashed amber boundary.
                             Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

2.5.6. Architecture D: monolithic single-LLM controller (ablation)
     Architectures A–C all rest on the same decomposition: the plant-wide problem is split into six narrow operator
roles, each defending a single constraint with a single manipulated variable and requiring only its own measurement,
setpoint and chain priority (Section 2.5.1). The Introduction argues that this decomposition is precisely what keeps
each agent’s context narrow enough to be specified in a short, verifiable prompt. Architecture D is the ablation that
tests that argument directly by removing the decomposition.
     At each control step a single Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct model receives, in one context, both measurements (𝐶 and
𝑇 ), every constraint and its priority, both manipulated variables, and a short rolling history; it must return the fan
command 𝑢1 and the heater command 𝑢2 directly. There is no operator agent, no MIN/MAX selector chain and no
orchestrator: the single model alone must perform the multi-constraint priority coordination that the chain performs
structurally in A–C. Everything else is held identical: the same plant, parameters, disturbance scenario, noise seed, 60 s
control cadence, and the same MV move-suppression limit applied to 𝑢1 and 𝑢2 , so that any difference in closed-loop
behaviour is attributable to the loss of decomposition alone, and not to a change in actuator authority, sampling rate
or measurement information. The monolith is given exactly the information the operator team collectively holds (the
two measurements, the operator’s comfort CO2 setpoint and the default fan level) and no more; in particular it is not
shown the outdoor temperature or the cow count, which the operator agents also do not see.
     The fixed system prompt (prefix-cached for the whole run) encodes the full problem that Architectures A–C
distribute across six identity prompts:
  You are the sole automatic controller of a Norwegian dairy-cow
  barn. You directly set BOTH actuators every control step.

  ACTUATORS (you output both, each 0-100%)
    u1 = fan:    MORE fan -> LOWER CO2 and LOWER temperature (cheap)
    u2 = heater: MORE heater -> HIGHER temperature only
                 (expensive, max 50 kW; may saturate when very cold)

  CONSTRAINTS, in priority order (highest wins on conflict)
    1. SAFETY sick:    C <= 3000 ppm (raise fan even if it cools)
    2. SAFETY freeze: T >= 0          (lower fan; accept CO2 > 1000
                                       but still < 3000)
    3. COMFORT air:    C <= 1000 ppm (raise fan)
    4. COMFORT warm:   T >= 5         (lower fan and/or raise heater)
    5. COMFORT cool:   T <= 20        (raise fan)
    Nominal/default fan is about 50% when nothing binds. Prefer the
    cheap option first: reduce the fan to retain heat before raising
    the heater (split-parallel).

  OUTPUT one line of strict JSON and nothing else:
    {"u1": <0-100>, "u2": <0-100>, "rationale": "<one sentence>"}

   A real per-sample user prompt at the coldest point of the run (𝑡 = 7.0 h, 𝑇out = −40 °C) reads:
  STEP at t = 25200 s (7.00 h).
  Measurements now:
    CO2 C    =   871.0 ppm (comfort target <= 1000, sick limit 3000)
    Indoor T =   -32.3 C    (comfort 5..20, freeze limit >= 0)
    Default fan when idle = 50%
    Your previous command: u1=58.0%, u2=32.0%
  Recent history (oldest first):
    t=6.83h: C= 920 ppm T=-26.1 C -> u1=54.0% u2=36.0%
    t=6.90h: C= 905 ppm T=-29.2 C -> u1=56.0% u2=34.0%
    t=6.97h: C= 884 ppm T=-31.4 C -> u1=58.0% u2=32.0%
  Choose u1 (fan %) and u2 (heater %) now. Respond with JSON only.




Page 21 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

Here CO2 is comfortably in range (871 ppm) and the barn is catastrophically cold (−32 °C); the freeze-protection
action is to cut the fan and saturate the heater. The monolith instead responds with 𝑢1 = 60 % (more ventilation) and
𝑢2 = 30 % (less heat), the failure analysed in Section 2.6.4.
    The decisive difference from Architectures B and C is structural rather than informational. The monolith is told
the same priority order that the MIN/MAX chain encodes, but it must apply that order itself, at every sample, while
simultaneously tracking five constraints and choosing two actuators; in A–C the order is enforced by the selector
network regardless of any single agent’s reasoning, and each agent reasons about only one constraint. Whether a 7 B
model can hold and correctly resolve the full priority logic in one context (particularly the cold regime trade-off where
ventilating for CO2 conflicts with freeze protection) is exactly the hypothesis the ablation tests. The result is reported
in Section 2.6.4.

2.6. Results
    We evaluate the three architectures (PI baseline, rule-based MAS, LLM-MAS) on the same 4-day mixed-season
disturbance scenario described in Section 2.4. All controllers see exactly the same plant, the same noise realisation
(seed = 11), and the same disturbance and operator-event sequence over the 96-hour run. Architecture A (PI baseline)
and the deterministic rule-based MAS are fully deterministic and their results are reproducible to the bit on any platform
with the same random seed. Architecture C (LLM operator agents under the LLM-supervised orchestrator) involves
on the order of 6 912 nondeterministic LLM operator calls per 4-day run (six agents at a 5-minute polling cadence over
96 hours); the reported metrics represent a single run, and the variance of these metrics across repeated runs has not
yet been quantified. It is recommended that the reader treats the positioning of Architecture C as indicative, pending a
Monte Carlo replication across multiple independent runs.

2.6.1. Architectural progression: what each step buys
    The decomposition step from monolithic ARC (Architecture A) to a deterministic rule-based MAS introduces an
agent-style chattering cost when paired with the simplest possible orchestrator: rate-limited rule operators cross the
selector boundary many times per minute under measurement noise. This chattering is the agent-level analogue of what
classical PID systems handle with override controllers [5, 8]; it motivates the introduction of LLM operator agents
(Architectures B and C) that classify the binding regime instead of binding at every sample.
    The LLM operator agents of Architectures B and C are evaluated on the 4-day mixed-season scenario reported in
Section 2.6.3. The structural priority chain is preserved across all three architectures; only the operator decision logic
(Architecture B) and the orchestrator-level reasoning (Architecture C) change.

2.6.2. Harsh-day stress test
    The 4-day mixed-season scenario evaluated above is a typical Norwegian profile, with 𝑇out touching −15 °C only
briefly and a 100 kW heater that is comfortably oversized for the building envelope. Under those conditions, the freeze-
safety guard never trips and the 𝐶>3000 ppm sick limit is never approached, so the architectures’ design differences
only manifest as small numerical shifts in the metrics. To exercise the freeze/CO2 conflict that motivates the entire
chain design, we constructed a harsh scenario in which (i) 𝑇out ramps to −25 °C and is held for an 8-hour deep-cold
window straddling the unmeasured CO2 burst, and (ii) the heater capacity is reduced to 50 kW (half the nominal value),
so that the cold regime cannot rely on heater oversize to absorb the conflict. Everything else (noise seed, actuator lag,
operator schedule, 𝑈 𝐴ext door-open event) is identical to the nominal scenario.
    Table 6 reports the headline metrics for the deterministic architectures (A and B). The MAS variants under the smart
orchestrator (Architecture C) are evaluated on the 4-day mixed-season scenario reported in Section 2.6.3; that scenario
stays within the nominal heater envelope (𝑇out ≥ −10 °C) in order to keep the comparison inside the regime where
every controller remains feasible. Three observations follow, all of which illustrate how the architectures behave under
hard infeasibility, not which one is preferable. First, the freeze-safety guard is exceeded in both architectures: 𝑇 is below
0 °C for 5.16 h in ARC and for 12.78 h in Rule-MAS. Deeper cold and a weakened heater push every controller into
hard infeasibility, and the architectures differ in how that infeasibility is distributed across the constraint set. Second,
the agent-based variant and ARC trade the freeze and CO2 constraints differently: relative to ARC, Rule-MAS reduces
CO2 -over-SP time on the harsh day from 17.67 to 14.53 h and increases time below freeze by 7.6 h (5.16 → 12.78).
ARC retains freeze headroom and accepts 3.1 h more CO2 comfort breach. The split is mechanical: the PI integrator
in ARC’s tc_5 pushes the heater harder when 𝑇 is below 5 °C than the rate-limited rule operator does, so the same
priority order produces different distributions of the constraint deficit. Third, 𝐶 never approaches the 3 000 ppm sick


Page 22 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

Table 6
Harsh stress-test metrics (24 h, 𝑇out → −25 °C held for 8 h, heater capacity 50 kW, all other settings as in the nominal
4-day mixed-season scenario of Section 2.6.3). Violation counts use the same back-off convention as Table 7 (CO2
above 1050 ppm, cold below 3.5 °C); under the deliberately undersized 50 kW heater both designs are driven into genuine
freeze/CO2 infeasibility, so the differentiating metric here is the freeze time 𝑇 < 0, on which the PI baseline is better.

 Architecture            IAE𝐶 𝐶>1050 [h] 𝐶>3000 [h] 𝑇 <3.5 [h] 𝑇 <0 [h] Heat [kWh] Fan-h Switches
 A. ARC (PI) 33 488 743                 15.89               0        15.73       5.16           873.7     8.14         369
 B. Rule-MAS 31 949 190                 15.84               0        15.95      12.78           898.8     8.28      17 064


Table 7
Bounded 4-day mixed-season scenario (outdoor lows clipped to −5 °C, highs clipped to +20 °C, both bounds chosen so
the cold-comfort and hot-comfort SPs sit at the boundary of physical feasibility), Δ𝑡 = 5 min, ARC vs Rule-MAS vs
Architecture C (LLM-MAS, Qwen 2.5 7B). Same plant, same noise seed. Day 1 winter cold (−5 °C low), day 2 transition,
day 3 summer warm (+20 °C high), day 4 summer cool-down with door event. Two unmeasured CO2 bursts (one in each
regime) and one door-open event. Violation counts use a back-off margin so they reflect genuine excursions rather than the
dither an ideal controller produces while sitting on its setpoint: the CO2 count is the time above 1050 ppm (the 1000 ppm
comfort target plus a 50 ppm back-off), and the cold count is the time below 3.5 °C (the split-parallel arrangement makes
the 4–5 °C band acceptable, so the genuine cold violation begins below 4 °C, here with a further 0.5 °C back-off). Heater
energy uses the 𝑃h = 100 kW rating of Table 1.

 Architecture                         IAE𝐶 𝐶>1050 [h] 𝑇 <3.5 [h] 𝑇 <0 [h] 𝑇 >20 [h] Heat [kWh] Mode flips
 A. ARC (PI)          3.45 × 107                     0.33         0.17       0.00       32.42            103            22
 B. Rule-MAS          4.21 × 107                     8.50         3.67       0.00       35.75            422           132
 C. LLM-MAS (Qwen 7B) 3.90 × 107                     2.42         0.83       0.00       33.67            440            70


limit even in the harsh scenario, because the cold regime ultimately suppresses the fan to save heat; the constraint that
gets given up is the freeze limit, not the sick limit. This is consistent with the qualitative analysis in Skogestad [8]: the
priority order of the chain encodes which constraint is sacrificed when no MV combination can satisfy all of them.

2.6.3. Headline 3-way comparison on the 4-day mixed-season scenario
    The three architectures (PI baseline, rule-based MAS, LLM-MAS) are evaluated on the same 4-day mixed-season
scenario. The LLM-MAS uses Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct as the operator-tier model and a Claude Opus 4.7 LLM-based
orchestrator on the slow supervisory tier. The scenario is deliberately compact and exercises both regulatory regimes in
one run: the outdoor-temperature profile is bounded at a −5 °C floor (winter day 1) and a +20 °C ceiling (summer day
3), with both bounds chosen to sit at the physical-feasibility boundary of the cold-comfort and hot-comfort setpoints
(tc_5’s 5 °C SP is achievable when 𝑇out ≥ −5 given heater capacity and cow body-heat input, and tc_20’s 20 °C
SP is achievable when 𝑇out ≤ +20 given fan capacity). The freeze-protection (𝑇 < 0) and heat-stress (𝑇 > 20)
metrics therefore measure controller quality rather than physical-limit avoidance. Day 1 exercises the cold regime
(tc_5, tc_heater, tc_0); day 3 exercises the hot regime (tc_20 + cc_1000 cooperation); day 2 is a transition;
day 4 is a summer cool-down with a door-open event. Two unmeasured CO2 bursts (one in each regime) are added at
predefined times in the disturbance scenario. All three architectures run on the same plant with the same noise seed at
Δ𝑡 = 5 min polling cadence (96 h ∕ 5 min = 1 152 samples per architecture).
    Table 7 reports the metrics for the three architectures on the 4-day mixed-season scenario. All three see the
same disturbance schedule and the same noise realisation; ARC uses SIMC-tuned PI controllers, Rule-MAS uses
proportional-band rule operators with no LLM, and Architecture C uses Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct as each operator agent’s
decision logic.
    Five observations on Table 7, with the trajectories overlaid in Figure 4, stand out.
    All three controllers are freeze-perfect (𝑇 < 0 = 0 h). The −5 °C floor on the disturbance is within the heater’s
nominal capacity envelope, so all three controllers: including the bare-proportional Rule-MAS: keep 𝑇 above 0 °C
throughout. Freeze-protection is therefore not the differentiating metric on this scenario.


Page 23 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

     Once a back-off margin is applied, the PI baseline is the near-ideal reference, as the scenario is constructed to
make it. This case is deliberately set up so that a well-tuned ARC solution is almost optimal: the operating point sits
at the physical-feasibility boundary of the comfort setpoints, and a SIMC-tuned PI tracking those setpoints is close
to the best any controller can do. This is visible in the back-off columns of Table 7. The earlier impression that the
comfort metrics favour the LLM-MAS was an artefact of counting at exactly the setpoint, where a controller that holds
a constraint tightly registers as “violating” for roughly half of the time its output dithers around the target. With a
50 ppm CO2 back-off the ARC time above 1050 ppm collapses to 0.33 h (against 2.42 h for the LLM-MAS and 8.50 h
for the rule-based MAS), and with the 4–5 °C acceptable band plus a back-off the ARC time below 3.5 °C is 0.17 h
(against 0.83 and 3.67 h). On the constraint accounting that matters, the PI baseline is therefore the best of the three,
which is the expected result on a problem constructed to favour it. The point of Architectures B and C is not to beat
ARC on this scenario but to reproduce its behaviour while carrying the machinery (an auditable per-agent rationale,
an integrator that can be retuned online, an orchestrator that can be gain-scheduled) that lets the same decomposition
address a wider range of specifications and trade-offs than a fixed PI set.
     The LLM lever reduces the chatter of the rule-based reformulation. Among the two multi-agent variants, the number
of mode flips through the 𝑇 = 5 °C boundary drops from 132 (Rule-MAS) to 70 (Architecture C, Lever A+B+D): a
47 % reduction. This is the empirical signature of Lever D: when an agent’s recent-history block flags oscillating:
true, the LLM is permitted to override the rule-derived recommended mode and pick ACTIVE with a moderate
intensity. A representative LLM rationale from the run: “T trending up; moderate fan to damp oscillation.” That phrase,
damp oscillation, is the LLM literally reasoning about its own past decisions producing chatter and choosing a different
classification for that reason. The integrator (Lever B) inside each operator agent plays the role of the “I” term of a PI,
biasing the corresponding MV through 𝑢extra = 𝐾𝑖 ⋅ 𝑒int so a sustained excursion is pulled back; this is what brings the
LLM-MAS back-off counts close to the PI baseline rather than to the rule-based variant.
     Hot-regime behaviour. On day 3 (summer warm, 𝑇out peaking at +20 °C with 100–120 cows adding ∼ 10 kW of
body heat), all three controllers spend ∼ 32–36 h above the 𝑇20 setpoint: the bulk of this is the structural offset of barn-T
above outdoor-T due to cow body heat, against which the only mitigation is full ventilation. The three controllers are
comparable on this metric (ARC 32.42 h, Architecture C 33.67 h, Rule-MAS 35.75 h), all correctly recognising the
hot-saturation regime and ventilating aggressively.
     The comfort figures are bought with heater energy. The heater-energy column makes the trade-off explicit and
confirms the suspicion that the multi-agent variants do not get their comfort for free: ARC holds the comfort band on
103 kWh of heat over the four days, while Rule-MAS and Architecture C each spend about four times as much (422
and 440 kWh). The discrete IDLE/ACTIVE/SATURATED mode classification is the cause: at the boundaries between
modes the operator agent may briefly flip when 𝑣 crosses the proportional-band threshold, even with Lever D’s anti-
oscillation override, and each flip is paid for with extra heater on-time (70 flips for Architecture C against 22 for ARC).
The continuous proportional-plus-integral output of the PI controllers rides these regions more smoothly, which is
the other face of ARC being the efficient near-ideal solution here; the discrete-mode reformulation inherits residual
classification chatter at the boundary. We retain this gap as an honest limitation; a future Lever C (boundary hysteresis
on mode transitions or continuous 𝑢target output alongside the mode) is the natural next step.
     A natural next architectural lever (Lever C, deferred to future work) would attack this remaining failure mode at
its source: either boundary hysteresis on the mode classification (a SATURATED → IDLE transition only fires after 𝑇
rises above SP by a margin, rather than at the SP itself), or letting the LLM emit a continuous 𝑢target alongside the
mode that the integrator nudges around, so that the operator’s proposal lives on a continuous axis between 𝑢idle and
𝑢saturate rather than at three discrete values. Either fix would narrow the energy and switching gap to the PI baseline
while preserving the audit-trail contribution of the LLM rationales; we report Architecture C here without it because
the mode-classification paradigm is what the recipe of Section 2.5.2 prescribes : discretize the regime, do not hand the
LLM a continuous knob : and the mode-bang-bang is the honest failure mode of that recipe under severe disturbances.




Page 24 of 37
                             Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control




Figure 4: 4-day mixed-season overlay: ARC (blue), Rule-MAS (orange faded), and Architecture C with operator memory
and situational awareness (green) on the same plant and noise seed. Top to bottom: CO2 , barn temperature 𝑇 with the
freeze region 𝑇 < 0 °C shaded red, fan 𝑢1 , and the outdoor temperature 𝑇out disturbance (bounded at −10 °C overnight
low). ARC keeps 𝑇 entirely above the freeze threshold; Architecture C closely tracks ARC; bare proportional Rule-MAS
still dips below during cold days because it lacks the integral action and situational awareness that let a PI (or an LLM
operator with Lever B+D) settle at an intermediate fan opening.




Page 25 of 37
                            Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

    Across the 4-day run, the LLM made 6×1152 = 6 912 JSON-schema-validated calls and produced 0 fallthrough(s)
to the rule baseline. The deterministic-direction mapping of Eq. 8 guarantees that every SATURATED response on
cc_1000 maps to 𝑢request = 100 (push fan up to ventilate) and every SATURATED response on tc_5 maps to 𝑢request = 0
(pull fan down to retain heat) regardless of any wrong-direction language the LLM might emit. Direction-error failure
mode is therefore impossible by construction (compare an earlier prompt design that asked the LLM to emit 𝑢request
directly: a 3 B model in that design produced wrong-direction proposals on ∼ 60 % of saturated MAX agents in the
same scenario).
    Figure 5 shows the regime classification of each of the six agents over the 4 days. The agents transition between
IDLE, ACTIVE, and SATURATED in response to the variable-weather disturbances: tc_5 and tc_heater saturating
during cold snaps, cc_1000 cycling between IDLE and SATURATED during the CO2 bursts, and the override agents
tc_0 and cc_3000 remaining IDLE throughout (no freeze-floor or sick-limit violation in this run).




Page 26 of 37
                            Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control




Figure 5: Per-agent mode classification over the 4-day run. Each row is one operator agent; each marker is one control
sample colour-coded by mode (blue = IDLE, orange = ACTIVE, red = SATURATED). Architecture C’s classifications
align with the deterministic rule classifications throughout the run.




Page 27 of 37
                             Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

    The LLM operator agents’ rationales form a process-engineer’s logbook of the 4-day operation. Representative
entries drawn from the run (one per agent, sampled across the scenario):

      tc_5 (cold-comfort, sustained cold day, SATURATED): “T well below SP; pull fan down strongly.”
      cc_1000 (CO2 comfort, after a burst, SATURATED): “C above SP; vent fully.”
      tc_20 (hot-comfort, throughout the run, IDLE): “T well below SP; non-binding.”
      tc_0 (freeze guard, throughout, IDLE): “T well above freeze SP; non-binding.”
      cc_3000 (sick-limit guard, throughout, IDLE): “C well below SP; non-binding.”
      tc_heater (split-parallel heater, sustained cold day, SATURATED): “T below SP; heater fully on.”

    The rationale comes for free with each LLM call: the model emits one because the prompt asks for one, at the
same per-sample latency (∼ 1 s on the consumer GPU). This is the principal operational contribution of the LLM-as-
operator-agent pattern: every closed-loop proposal is paired with a one-sentence operator-voice explanation, producing
a complete audit log that the deterministic Architectures A and B cannot match without a separate explanation layer.
    Architecture C runs entirely offline. Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct weights are downloaded once from the Hugging Face
Hub (Apache-2.0 licence, ∼15 GB on disk in FP16) and the marginal cost per scenario run is the GPU energy budget
alone : approximately 1 h of GPU time at ∼80 W ≈ 0.08 kWh, under $0.02 at industrial electricity prices. No API calls,
no rate limits, no model-version drift.

2.6.4. Validation on the original Case IIB conditions, and the single-LLM ablation
    The scenario of Section 2.4 is our own mixed-season construction. To check the architectures against the source
benchmark, we additionally reproduce the exact conditions of Case IIB in [8]: the plant parameters of that paper’s
Table 2 (fan 0.1–15 m3 /s, heater 50 kW, 𝑈 𝐴 = 2000 W/K, nominal 𝑇out = 0 °C) and its disturbance test, in which 𝑇out
steps every 4000 s from 0 °C down to −40 °C and back up to +15 °C (total 74 000 s = 20.5 h). The −40 °C excursion
drives the plant into the hard freeze/CO2 infeasibility that motivates the override chain: with the 50 kW heater saturated,
holding 𝑇 ≥ 0 and 𝐶 ≤ 1000 ppm simultaneously is physically impossible, and a controller must choose which
constraint to relax. Architecture A runs at its native 2 s cadence; the LLM operators of Architectures B–D run at a
60 s operator cadence with a per-sample move-suppression limit on 𝑢1 and 𝑢2 , and the two safety-override operators
(sick-CO2 , freeze) are held to their proportional envelope by a deterministic-direction guard, conditioning elements
that are consistent with the structural-priority philosophy and do not give any operator authority the chain does not
already grant. All controllers see the same plant, noise seed, and disturbance sequence; their trajectories are shown in
Figure 6.




Page 28 of 37
                             Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control




Figure 6: The four architectures on the original Case IIB conditions of [8] (parameters of Table 2 and the 0 → −40 →
+15 → 0 °C ramp). (a) CO2 , (b) indoor temperature, (c) fan, (d) outdoor temperature. Under the deep-cold infeasibility
the decomposed architectures (A, B, C) relax the 1000 ppm comfort target and let CO2 rise toward the 3000 ppm sick limit
in order to keep the barn near the freeze line. The monolithic single-LLM controller (D, red) instead keeps CO2 pristine
(≤ 950 ppm throughout) by over-ventilating, and the barn temperature collapses to −32.6 °C.




Page 29 of 37
                             Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

    Two observations follow, and neither is a claim that one architecture is preferable; they describe what behaviour
each design produces under hard infeasibility. First, the three decomposed architectures (A, B, C) resolve the conflict
in the same direction and to a similar degree. All three hold the heater at saturation, reduce the fan to retain heat, and
accept CO2 drifting up toward (B, C) or just past (A) the 3000 ppm sick limit so that the indoor temperature stays near
the freeze line (𝑇min between −6 and −8 °C, 𝑡𝑇 <0 between 3.4 and 3.6 h). The Qwen-operator variants B and C are
indistinguishable from the PI baseline A at the level of constraint accounting, which is the feasibility statement this
paper makes: the LLM-operator reformulation reproduces the ARC behaviour on the source benchmark, including the
correct binding-direction resolution of the Case IIB trade-off.
    Second, the single-LLM ablation (D) fails on exactly the coordination the decomposition is designed to provide.
The monolith reliably emits valid commands (0 of 1233 calls failed schema validation) and controls CO2 better than any
other architecture: it never exceeds 1000 ppm and peaks at 950 ppm. But it achieves that clean air by over-ventilating
(fan-hours 11.5 versus ≈ 8.5 for A–C) and under-using the heater (212 kWh versus ≈ 430), and the barn freezes
to −32.6 °C, more than 24 °C colder than any decomposed architecture and below freezing for 7.75 h. Inspecting its
decisions at the coldest point (𝑡 = 7.0 h, 𝑇 = −32 °C, 𝐶 = 871 ppm) shows the failure mode directly: with no CO2
problem present, the model still commands 𝑢1 = 60 % fan and only 𝑢2 = 30 % heater, the opposite of the freeze-
protection action. It can defend a single constraint, but it cannot hold the priority order among five constraints while
choosing two actuators in one context. This is the empirical counterpart of the Introduction’s argument (Section 1): the
value of the ARC-derived decomposition is that the priority among constraints is enforced structurally by the selector
chain and each agent reasons about only its own constraint, so the catastrophic miscoordination of the monolith cannot
arise. The same Qwen 2.5 7B model that freezes the barn when asked to run the whole plant reproduces the ARC
behaviour when its role is narrowed to one constraint inside the chain (Architectures B and C).

2.7. Takeaways
    The architecture sweep on the cow-barn benchmark demonstrates five properties: (i) a validation swap in which the
operator agents’ decision logic is replaced by SIMC-tuned PI blocks reproduces the monolithic ARC selector network
bit-for-bit, confirming that the control-theory-derived recipe of Section 2.5.2 (each PI corresponds to one operator
agent that acts directly on its proposal target, the chain’s interaction logic encapsulated as the orchestrator agent) is
faithful and isolating the operator agents and the orchestrator’s added capabilities as the only sources of behavioural
difference between Architectures B and C; (ii) the smart orchestrator’s memory, dwell, and trend-anticipation produce
a distinct operating point on the comfort–energy trade-off, illustrating that an orchestrator with reasoning can shift the
closed-loop behaviour without changing the operator agents; (iii) the LLM-MAS Architecture C (Section 2.6.3) is the
headline feasibility demonstration of the paper: it delegates each PI’s role inside the regulatory-tier operator agents to
a Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct call. Two architectural levers carry over key properties of a PI controller without ceding direct
write authority over the manipulated variables. Lever A (deterministic-direction mapping, Eq. 8) makes direction-of-
binding errors structurally impossible by encoding the direction in the agent’s identity rather than in the LLM’s output.
Lever B (operator memory, Eqs. 9–10) gives each agent the integral state that closes the slow-frequency steady-state
offset on long disturbance episodes; Lever B is observable in the metrics as a reduction of cold-comfort time below
Rule-MAS, bringing Architecture C close to the near-ideal PI baseline once a back-off margin is applied. Each proposal
carries a one-sentence operator-voice rationale that the deterministic Architectures A and B cannot match without a
separate explanation layer. We report one honest limitation: under deep-cold disturbances where heater capacity is
the binding physical constraint, the discrete IDLE/ ACTIVE/SATURATED mode classification produces high-frequency
bang-bang at the mode boundary that Lever B does not suppress (the integrator hits its upper clip while the actuator is
already saturated), so Architecture C matches Rule-MAS rather than ARC on freeze-protection (𝑇 < 0 °C) hours. A
natural Lever C, such as boundary hysteresis on mode transitions or letting the LLM emit a continuous 𝑢target alongside
the mode, is the obvious next step; we leave it for future work.




Page 30 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

Table 8
Behaviour on the Case IIB ramp (20.5 h). 𝑇min is the deepest indoor temperature reached; 𝑡𝑇 <0 the time below the freeze
limit; 𝑡𝐶>1000 and 𝑡𝐶>3000 the times above the comfort and sick CO2 limits. The decomposed architectures A–C behave
comparably; the monolithic controller D is the ablation.

          Arch.                          𝑇min [°C]   𝑡𝑇 <0 [h]   𝑡𝐶>1000 [h]   𝑡𝐶>3000 [h]   Heater [kWh]   Fan [h]
          A. ARC (PI)                      −6.1       3.62          7.57          0.61           418         8.44
          B. LLM-MAS, rule orch.           −8.3       3.38          7.52          0.00           435         8.47
          C. LLM-MAS, LLM orch.            −7.3       3.40          7.62          0.00           437         8.51
          D. Single-LLM (monolith)        −𝟑𝟐.𝟔       𝟕.𝟕𝟓          0.00          0.00           212        11.50



3. Implementation notes
    The architecture is small enough to read end-to-end (approximately 2 500 lines of Python across both case studies),
but several non-obvious design decisions were necessary to make the multi-agent reformulation behave well as a
control-loop element rather than as a generic agent system. This section collects those decisions, the architectural
know-how required to reproduce them, and the agent-system limitations they expose.

3.1. Software stack and reproducibility
    The plant is integrated with a stiff ODE solver (LSODA, rtol = 10−7 , atol = 10−10 , with the maximum step bounded
to one control period), and the LLM advisor is built on a schema-validated structured-output interface. All controllers,
plants, and orchestrators expose substitutable interfaces; a single driver runs any controller through any disturbance
profile, so the three architectures can be compared on bit-identical inputs. Trajectory data is persisted in compressed
archives so post-hoc plotting and analysis do not require re-running an expensive simulation. Architectures A and B
are fully deterministic; Architecture C is deterministic only conditional on the sequence of LLM responses, which
themselves are not.

3.2. Agent communication: synchronous broadcast, not free-form messaging
    A central design decision is that the agent communication model is synchronous and in-process. At each sample step
of Δ𝑡ctrl , the orchestrator queries each operator agent sequentially for a proposal, collects all proposals, and applies the
MIN/MAX chain before emitting a single decision. There is no agent-to-agent messaging, no negotiation, no consensus
protocol, and no asynchronous reply: every agent participates in every decision, and a missing proposal is a hard failure
rather than a degraded operating mode.
    The reason for this discipline is that the architecture is a control loop, not a general-purpose agent system. A typical
Claude-Code agent team can afford an LLM call per turn, latency in the tens of seconds, and back-and-forth messages
between agents; a control loop running at Δ𝑡ctrl = 2 s (the original ARC chain) or Δ𝑡ctrl = 5 min (the LLM-operator
polling cadence used in Architecture C, Section 2.5.5) cannot. The synchronous broadcast pattern compresses the
agent-team idea into the deterministic per-sample schedule that classical control engineering expects, and lets each
operator agent be implemented as a small Python object with at most one LLM call per sample. Architecture C places
one LLM call per agent per sample on a single shared local backend (Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct), running offline on a single
consumer GPU. Architectures A and B use no LLM at all on the regulatory loop. The separation between regulatory
and supervisory tiers is a required property: an unconstrained LLM in the inner loop would defeat the safety-by-chain
guarantee that the rest of the architecture is designed to provide.
    In a distributed deployment over a network the synchronous assumption would need a coordination barrier and a
missing-proposal fallback. The natural fallback is to substitute the default operator setpoint 𝑢0 for any agent that does
not reply within the sample period; this preserves the chain structure but the absent agent’s constraint is then defended
only by the next-higher-priority agent on the same MV. We treat the in-process synchronous case as the reference
implementation precisely because it is the case where the behavioural neutrality of the multi-agent reformulation is
provable; a distributed deployment requires extra analysis that is left to future work.

3.3. Workspace discipline and append-only logs
    Each operator agent owns a private workspace and records every Proposal it issues, plus a snapshot of its internal
state, as append-only JSONL files. This pattern is borrowed from the Anthropic agent-team-builder guidelines [30]

Page 31 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

and is the source of the system’s auditability: every Proposal ever made and every Decision ever taken across an entire
4-day run can be replayed offline from these files alone, with neither the live plant nor the live LLM in the loop.
In our experience the workspace discipline matters most when debugging the LLM operator: Architecture C’s ∼288
LLM calls per simulated day per agent produce on the order of a few hundred KB of JSONL across the agents and
orchestrator, and the fact that those logs are append-only files in a stable directory layout makes it tractable to diff two
runs against each other and locate the moment when a mode classification changed.

3.4. Limitations exposed by the agent reformulation
    Four limitations of the multi-agent reformulation are worth naming explicitly, because those points became
apparent only after building the architecture. Each of them admits a concrete process-control or computer-systems
formalisation, and they are stated below in that form: a scaling bound, a structural-pairing argument, an information-
theoretic argument, and a control-theoretic grammar. The four points generalise beyond the cow-barn case study, and
a closing paragraph grounds each of them back to the numbers the deployment produced.
    The first limitation concerns per-sample wall-clock cost. The MIN/MAX chain itself is constant-time: the
orchestrator collects one Proposal per agent, evaluates a fixed series of MIN/MAX rules, and emits one decision per
MV, all within CPU microseconds. The cost that scales with the agent count 𝑁 is the per-sample loop that queries each
agent for a proposal. If 𝑓 denotes the serial fraction of one sample (the orchestrator broadcast, the message serialisation,
and the deterministic MIN/MAX evaluation) and the remaining (1 − 𝑓 ) is parallelisable across 𝑁 agents on separate
inference contexts, the achievable speed-up relative to a single-agent baseline is given by Amdahl’s law [31]:
                       1
      𝑆(𝑁) =                    .
                 𝑓 + (1 − 𝑓 )∕𝑁
For Architecture C on a single workstation the serial fraction is small: the orchestrator broadcast and JSON validation
cost tens of microseconds, while a single Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct call costs hundreds of milliseconds, so 𝑓 ≈ 0.05 as
an order-of-magnitude estimate. The implied speed-up relative to a sequential baseline is then 𝑆(6) ≈ 5 for the six
cow-barn agents, 𝑆(30) ≈ 10 for plant-wide deployments of order thirty agents, and 𝑆(100) ≈ 20 at the asymptotic
end; the same calculation at the more conservative 𝑓 = 0.10 gives 𝑆(100) ≈ 9. The point of those numbers is not the
exact value, which depends on batching efficiency: the point is that the speed-up saturates well below 𝑁 once 𝑓 stops
being negligible, and that the chain is therefore not capable of hiding the cost of an indiscriminate increase in agent
count.
     A second mechanism reduces the wall-clock cost further on modern inference engines. The operator agents share
the same model weights and differ only in the system prompt and the live snapshot they receive, so their forward passes
are capable of being batched. Inference engines that maintain a shared key-value cache across concurrent contexts fit the
six cow-barn agents in one batched forward pass on a 24 GB GPU, and the wall-clock cost per sample is approximately
the cost of one agent’s call, not six [32, 33]. Above roughly thirty agents on the same backbone the activations no longer
fit in a single device’s memory budget, and the deployment is forced to choose between model sharding across multiple
devices and a smaller backbone. The deterministic chain itself remains a CPU-side computation of microsecond cost
and is fully hidden under the GPU-side LLM latency; the asymmetry between chain cost and inference cost is the
structural reason why the chain is kept synchronous with the control loop even as the agent count grows. The agent
count is therefore bounded from above by the inference engine’s batching capacity, and not by the chain’s resolution
logic.
     The second limitation is that adding an agent is a structural change, not a configuration change. A new agent
introduces a new Proposal channel, a new priority level (or a new tie at an existing level), and a new MIN/MAX
rule in the orchestrator. The architecture is open to extension in the software sense: a new agent is capable of being
registered with the orchestrator without modifying the existing agents. Correctness of the extension, however, depends
on a decision the architect must take explicitly before the new agent is plugged in, which is the priority rank of the new
agent relative to the existing ones. Adding the new agent correctly is not easy to be done without that decision, because
an incorrect rank silently re-orders the active-set transition, with no error raised by the chain and no compensation
possible from the LLM tier.
     The classical control literature provides the formal language for that decision, and the present subsection is the
natural place to bring it back to the foreground. Bristol’s Relative Gain Array (RGA) is the canonical CV–MV pairing
rule [34]: with 𝐺(0) the steady-state gain matrix of the open-loop plant, the array
                         (       )⊤
        Λ = 𝐺(0) ⊙ 𝐺(0)−1 ,

Page 32 of 37
                             Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

(Hadamard product of 𝐺(0) with the transpose of its inverse) carries the pairing recommendation 𝜆𝑖𝑗 near unity with
no negative diagonal entries. The Niederlinski Index
           det 𝐺(0)
      NI = ∏
             𝑖 𝑔𝑖𝑖 (0)

provides a complementary structural-stability test: NI < 0 implies that the chosen pairing is structurally unstable under
integral action regardless of tuning [35]. For the cow-barn case study the gain matrix follows from the steady state of
(1)–(2) at the nominal operating point (𝑢1 = 50 %, 𝑢2 = 50 %, 𝑇out = 5 °C, 𝑛cows = 80): 𝑔11 = 𝜕𝐶∕𝜕𝑢1 ≈ −10 ppm/%,
𝑔12 = 𝜕𝐶∕𝜕𝑢2 = 0, 𝑔21 = 𝜕𝑇 ∕𝜕𝑢1 ≈ −0.19 °C/%, and 𝑔22 = 𝜕𝑇 ∕𝜕𝑢2 ≈ 0.092 °C/%. The off-diagonal 𝑔12 vanishes
because the heater does not appear in the CO2 mass balance. The gain matrix is therefore lower-triangular, the RGA
reduces to the identity exactly (𝜆11 = 𝜆22 = 1.00), and NI = 1.00 > 0. The pairing of CO2 with the fan and of
temperature with the heater is the canonical decomposition for this plant; the priority order among selector agents
inside the fan loop is then the discrete extension of the same idea, encoding which inequality is allowed to dominate
when several constraints are simultaneously active [9, 10, 12].
     The steady-state RGA is, however, only part of the pairing decision, and not the decisive part. The primary rule
for selecting pairings is the pair-close rule, which is governed by the initial (high-frequency) response rather than the
steady state: each controlled variable should be paired with the manipulated variable that affects it most directly and
most quickly, since it is the initial dynamics that decide how well a decentralised loop reacts before the interaction
propagates. The steady-state RGA enters as a secondary, structural check: pairing on a negative steady-state RGA
element should be avoided whenever possible, because such a pairing loses integrity and can become unstable if one of
the inputs saturates [34]. For the cow-barn plant both criteria agree, since the lower-triangular gain structure makes the
fast CO2 –fan and temperature–heater couplings also the dominant initial responses; but in a general plant the architect
should let the initial-response pairing lead and use the steady-state RGA and the Niederlinski index as admissibility
filters rather than as the primary selector.
     The same lower-triangular structure exposes an obvious refinement of the ARC design that the present work
does not implement but that a deployment should consider. Because the fan affects the indoor temperature (𝑔21 ≈
−0.19 °C/%) while the heater does not affect CO2 (𝑔12 = 0), the coupling is one-way, from the fan into the temperature
loop. A feedforward decoupler, feeding the fan command 𝑢1 forward into the output of the heater controller so that 𝑢2
pre-compensates the cooling the fan is about to cause, would cancel this one-way interaction and let the temperature
loop ignore the CO2 -driven fan activity altogether. This is the standard triangular-plant decoupling addition to ARC,
and it maps directly onto the agent reformulation as a feedforward message from the fan agent to the heater agent.
     That priority decision sits as the primal-side analogue of the dual variables that emerge inside a distributed-MPC
formulation. Distributed-MPC schemes tune Lagrange multipliers or penalty weights so that agent-local objectives
align with a global constraint set [36–38]; classical chain engineering tunes structural priorities at design time so
that the same constraint set is resolved by a fixed MIN/MAX network with no online optimisation. Distributed MPC
requires iteration to convergence over those multipliers, with a real-time-feasibility cost per sample, while the chain
resolves the same constraint conflict one-shot at design time. Both encode the same physics, namely which inequality
yields when two active constraints conflict, in dual representations. The chain case keeps the resolution rule visible and
traceable in the orchestrator’s source code; the distributed-MPC case absorbs the resolution rule into the multipliers
and exposes it only through the converged solution. Those two representations are dual. The implication for an architect
adding an agent is therefore well defined: the new priority slot is a discrete design choice, the RGA and Niederlinski
analyses inherited from the underlying plant tell the architect whether the candidate pairing is admissible at all, and
the literature on priority shifts under active-constraint changes [9, 10] provides the formal vocabulary for ranking the
new agent against the existing ones.
     The third limitation is that the LLM is not capable of rescuing a poorly designed chain. The operator agents in
Architecture C emit a 3-class label (IDLE, ACTIVE, SATURATED) together with a bounded rationale string, and a fixed
schema rejects any output that does not conform to that structure [30]. The information capacity of the discrete-mode
channel is therefore at most log2 3 ≈ 1.58 bit per call. A future continuous-intensity output (the Lever C extension
flagged in §3.6) would widen the channel by log2 𝐾intensity bits per call, where 𝐾intensity is the effectively-resolvable
number of intensity quantiles after the slew clamp, which puts 𝐾intensity in the 4–8 range and the total channel ceiling in
the 3.5–4.5 bit/call range. The architectural decision space (CV–MV pairing, RGA selection, priority order across the
selector agents) lives in a much higher-dimensional discrete space: a plant-wide problem with 𝑛 controlled variables
has 𝑛! candidate pairings, and the cardinality of the priority-rank set on 𝑚 agents grows as 𝑚! in turn. It is possible to

Page 33 of 37
                              Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

see that encoding a re-pairing decision in the operator agent’s output schema is structurally impossible at any of those
bit budgets: the channel does not have the bits, and widening the channel further would also widen the hand-validated
set of safe actions, defeating the safety argument that motivates the schema in the first place.
    The same argument has a token-budget restatement. The Qwen 2.5 7B backbone used by the operator agents has
a 32,768-token context window; the snapshot the orchestrator hands to each operator agent each sample includes the
recent measurement history, the active priority structure, and the rationale of the previous decision. Even if the schema
were widened to admit a structural recommendation, the context budget is too small to enumerate the 𝑛! candidate
pairings that a plant-wide RGA analysis would consider. The LLM is therefore an inherently local-decision agent, and
a global-architecture agent would have to be of a different kind: either a different model class trained on the architectural
search space or a deterministic combinatorial search wrapped around the chain. The information channel exposed by
the present design is sized for parameter scheduling at the regulatory tier, not for architecture selection.
    Two additional observations sharpen the same point. A plant whose chain is mis-paired produces snapshots the
LLM has not seen in any plausible training corpus, so its rationale-text in those regimes is unconstrained extrapolation,
not retrieval. Recent results on the theoretical limits of embedding-based retrieval show that an LLM is not capable
of retrieving facts that are absent from its training distribution [27], and the affordance argument from the SayCan
line of work makes the matching point on the action side: an LLM-driven controller is bounded by the environmental
affordances exposed to it, not by the claims its rationale-text is willing to make [39]. A consequence of that bound
is exploited by construction in Architecture C: the rationale string is logged to JSONL for the auditor and is read by
humans only, while the deterministic chain consumes only the schema-validated mode field and the deterministically-
computed 𝑢request scalar. A hallucinated rationale therefore never reaches the plant, and the 0-fallthrough record
observed over the 4-day scenario is the empirical expression of that property. The agentic-framework deployment
of an LLM at the supervisory tier of an industrial process [26] relies on the same combination of schema-bounded
outputs and human-validated affordances, and our Architecture C reproduces that pattern.
    The fourth limitation, taken together with the previous three, is that the design grammar of an LLM-supervised
selector chain is process-control-theoretic, and not agent-theoretic. The primitives that decide whether a given plant
admits an LLM-supervised chain solution are inherited from the classical literature on selector control and plant-wide
design, and they precede any choice of agent boundary, message contract, or orchestrator policy. They are the following.

   • CV–MV pairing. Which controlled variable is to be regulated by which manipulated variable, decided through
     the RGA 𝜆𝑖𝑗 of Bristol [34], with the recommendation 𝜆𝑖𝑗 near unity and no negative diagonal entries.

   • Interaction analysis. Whether the chosen pairing is structurally stable under integral action, tested through the
     Niederlinski Index [35]. A negative NI rules out the candidate pairing at design time, before any chain is built
     around it.
   • Constraint priority. Which inequality each agent defends and which is allowed to yield, decided from the active-
     set analysis of the plant under the disturbance scenarios of interest. The formal treatment of priority shifts as the
     active set changes is the subject of recent work on selector control and split-range generalisations [9, 10, 12].

   • Plant-wide procedure. A degrees-of-freedom analysis, followed by an economic-objective statement, CV
     selection, MV selection, throughput-manipulator selection, and a stepwise control-structure design, is the
     canonical sequence of decisions for a plant-wide problem [1, 8]. The selector chain in this paper is the regulatory
     layer of that sequence, applied to the cow-barn case study; the same sequence applies to any plant where an
     LLM-supervised chain is a candidate.

   • Selector primitives. The MIN, MAX, override, split-range, and mid-ranging primitives of the classical selector-
     control literature [4, 5, 9, 12] are the building blocks from which the orchestrator’s resolution logic is assembled.
     Once the pairing and priorities are fixed, the choice among those primitives is a transcription, and not a design
     step.

   • Selector synthesis. Whether each layer of the chain uses a MIN or a MAX is determined by Skogestad’s Selector
     Rules 1 and 2: a constraint satisfied with a large MV is defended by a max-selector, a constraint satisfied with
     a small MV by a min-selector, and conflicting cases require max and min selectors in series with 𝑢0 entering
     the first selector [7, 8]. Those two rules are the chain-synthesis step that turns the priority ranking into a wired
     network of MIN and MAX nodes.

Page 34 of 37
                             Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

     Those primitives are decided before the agent boundary is drawn and they are not capable of being rescued by any
subsequent choice of orchestrator policy or LLM advisor. The agent boundary, the message contract, and the workspace
discipline are implementation conveniences that follow from the priority structure; they carry the architecture but they
are not the engine of correctness. Two orthogonal routes are available to an architect who wishes to inject control-
theoretic knowledge into an LLM-supervised chain: the first is through the LLM’s input schema, where the state-
summary prompt encodes the active priority order, the recent measurement history, and the regime context; the second
is through the deterministic chain that wraps the LLM, where the priority structure, the selector primitives, and the
override network encode the same knowledge in a form the LLM never sees. The two routes carry complementary
slices of the same control-theoretic content, and a sound design uses both. The route through the chain carries the
architecture; the route through the schema carries the regime-aware parameter scheduling. Practitioners who treat the
agent system as primary and the chain as a wrapper recover, in our preliminary experience, agent boundaries that are
difficult to align with the underlying constraint geometry.
     Those four limitations are not unique to our implementation; they are structural features of any chain-based multi-
agent process-control design that places a language model at the supervisory tier. It is also useful to ground each of
them back to the cow-barn deployment, because the numbers the case study produced are the empirical anchor for the
arguments above. The Amdahl scaling at 𝑁 = 6 (𝑆(6) ≈ 5) is comfortably below the per-sample budget set by the
5-minute polling cadence: a single Qwen 2.5 7B call is in the 100–500 ms range on the test workstation, so the per-
sample wall-clock cost of the six operator agents sits inside the 5-minute budget with two orders of magnitude of margin
even before batching. The RGA computed above on the 2×2 plant supports the C-with-fan and T-with-heater pairing
the chain actually implements (𝜆11 = 𝜆22 = 1.00 at the nominal), so the structural-pairing primitive is exercised on
this plant rather than asserted. The information-theoretic ceiling shows up empirically: across the 4-day mixed-season
scenario the six operator agents made 6 912 schema-validated calls (six agents, 1 152 calls each), 0 of them produced
a fallthrough, and the priority order between tc_0 and cc_1000 was never altered by the LLM, as the information
channel does not have the bits to encode that re-pairing decision. The design-grammar primitives, finally, are the
language in which the cow-barn chain was assembled before any LLM was introduced; what the LLM contributed in
this paper was confined to the parameter-scheduling tier. The architectural know-how of selecting agents, ranking their
priorities, and partitioning the constraint set across manipulated variables remains a human task; the language model
contributes only at the parameter-scheduling tier, and the four limitations stated above are the structural reasons why
that remains the right division of labour.


4. Conclusions
     This work proposed a multi-agent reformulation of the regulatory control layer that is derived from Advanced
Regulatory Control theory. The starting point is the observation, supported by the recent literature, that large language
models are useful tools for general-purpose tasks yet present poor performance on specific domain tasks, partly because
supplying narrow context to a general-purpose model is difficult and the task being asked of the model is rarely bounded
by construction. Process control theory, and ARC in particular, offers a discipline for decomposing a regulatory problem
into elements of contained scope, each defending one inequality on one controlled variable, with conflicts resolved by
structural priority through MIN/MAX selector networks. The hypothesis explored here is that this same discipline
informs the construction of safe multi-agent LLM systems for process control.
     The hypothesis is supported by the case studies. ARC theory is capable of providing a principled recipe for the
construction of a multi-agent system at the regulatory tier: the agent roster is derived from the plant-wide procedure
under two structural equivalences, each PI in the chain becoming one operator agent and the chain’s interaction logic
becoming one orchestrator agent. Those points are what supports the structural soundness of the architecture, since
every constraint conflict is resolved deterministically by the orchestrator following the priority order prescribed by
control theory, regardless of what the LLM operator agents emit.
     A consequence of the agent reformulation is that the PI tuning step of classical ARC is replaced by a prompt
engineering and context curation step. The LLM operator agent does not require numerical gain tuning, since it
produces a regime classification that the agent code maps to a proposal through the agent’s own identity. What the
operator agent does require is a curated context, namely its role in the chain, the selector kind, the binding direction,
and the rolling history of its own past decisions. This trade-off is the design choice that the practitioner adopting the
present architecture inherits. The PI tuning literature is mature, while the prompt engineering for regulatory-tier agents
is at an earlier stage, and the storytelling of the prompt design in this work is intended to inform that practice.

Page 35 of 37
                                    Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

     The Claude-based LLM orchestrator was also tested. It is possible to wire a language model into the supervisory
tier of the chain with bounded outputs, schema validation, and a deterministic fallback, and the orchestrator-tier LLM
is capable of varying the chain’s tuning parameters within regime classifications, not between them. The implication is
that the language model’s contribution at the supervisory tier is in continuous-parameter retuning, while the discrete
priority order remains under the deterministic chain. The two roles, operator at the regulatory tier and orchestrator at
the supervisory tier, occupy different tiers of the plant-wide hierarchy and informs how an LLM may be deployed at
each.
     Several limitations remain. The operator agents in this work are local instruction-tuned models running offline,
motivated by data access restrictions, security considerations, and the absence of cloud connectivity at many process
sites. Local models inform a deployment style that is feasible in industrial settings but constrains model capacity, and
the prompt engineering effort observed here is one of the costs of that choice. A wider validation, including Monte
Carlo replication, regime sweeps beyond the cold regime and mixed-season conditions, and field deployment, is needed
before a preference among architectures can be asserted; those points are explicitly deferred to future work.

References
 [1] S. Skogestad, “Plantwide control: the search for the self-optimizing control structure,” Journal of Process Control, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 487–507,
     2000.
 [2] M. Baldea and P. Daoutidis, Dynamics and Nonlinear Control of Integrated Process Systems. Cambridge University Press, 2012.
 [3] W. L. Luyben, B. D. Tyreus, and M. L. Luyben, Plantwide Process Control. McGraw-Hill, 1998.
 [4] A. Maarleveld and J. Rijnsdorp, “Constrained control of distillation columns,” Automatica, vol. 6, pp. 51–58, 1970.
 [5] F. G. Shinskey, Controlling Multivariable Processes. Instrument Society of America, 1981.
 [6] S. Engell, “Feedback control for optimal process operation,” Journal of Process Control, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 203–219, 2007.
 [7] S. Skogestad, “Advanced control using decomposition and simple elements,” Annual Reviews in Control, vol. 56, pp. 100903, 2023.
 [8] S. Skogestad, “Advanced PID architectures for tracking changing active constraints,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.18463, 2026. Extended journal
     version of the paper presented at the IFAC World Congress 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.18463.
 [9] A. Reyes-Lúa and S. Skogestad, “Multi-input single-output control for extending operating range: use of split range and mid-ranging,” Journal
     of Process Control, vol. 91, pp. 1–11, 2020.
[10] A. Reyes-Lúa, C. Zotică, T. Das, D. Krishnamoorthy, and S. Skogestad, “Changing between active constraints in the presence of uncertainty,”
     IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 219–224, 2019.
[11] D. Krishnamoorthy and S. Skogestad, “Online process optimization with active constraint set changes using a support vector machine
     classifier,” Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, vol. 61, no. 28, pp. 9970–9979, 2022.
[12] K. Forsman, M. Adlouni, and S. Skogestad, “Split parallel control: a little known control structure,” IFAC-PapersOnLine (DYCOPS), vol. 59,
     no. 6, pp. 552–557, 2025.
[13] Y. Yu, Z. Yao, H. Li, Z. Deng et al., “FinCon: A synthesized LLM multi-agent system with conceptual verbal reinforcement for enhanced
     financial decision making,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.
[14] Y. Xiao, E. Sun, D. Luo, and W. Wang, “TradingAgents: Multi-agents LLM financial trading framework,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.20138,
     2024.
[15] D. J. Moore, “A taxonomy of hierarchical multi-agent systems: Design patterns, coordination mechanisms, and industrial applications,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2508.12683, 2025.
[16] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,” in Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
[17] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, et al., “ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629, 2022.
[18] W. Huang, P. Abbeel, D. Pathak, and I. Mordatch, “Language models as zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied
     agents,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
[19] J. S. Park, J. C. O’Brien, C. J. Cai, M. R. Morris, P. Liang, and M. S. Bernstein, “Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior,”
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03442, 2023.
[20] M. Wooldridge, An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems, 2nd ed. Wiley, 2009.
[21] S. Russell and P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 4th ed. Pearson, 2020.
[22] S. Natarajan and R. Srinivasan, “Implementation of multi-agents based system for process supervision in large-scale chemical plants,”
     Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 60, pp. 182–196, 2014, DOI: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2013.08.012.
[23] S. Rupprecht, Q. Gao, T. Karia, and A. M. Schweidtmann, “Multi-agent systems for chemical engineering: A review and perspective,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2508.07880, 2025.
[24] F. A. R. D. Lima et al., “Improving process systems engineering with specialized multi-agent large language models,” Chemical Engineering
     Journal Advances, 2026, DOI: 10.1016/j.ceja.2026.101141.
[25] E. A. Costa, S. Skogestad, and I. B. R. Nogueira, “MAASC: Multi-agentic architecture specialised for control,” Journal of Process Control,
     vol. 162, p. 103702, 2026, DOI: 10.1016/j.jprocont.2026.103702.
[26] J. Vyas and M. Mercangöz, “Autonomous industrial control using an agentic framework with large language models,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2411.05904, 2024, note: Published as IFAC-PapersOnLine, DOI: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2025.07.170.
[27] O. Weller, M. Boratko, I. Naim, J. Lee et al., “On the theoretical limitations of embedding-based retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.21038,
     2025.

Page 36 of 37
                                    Systematic Multi-Agent AI from Advanced Regulatory Control

[28] K. J. Åström and T. Hägglund, PID Controllers: Theory, Design, and Tuning, 2nd ed. Instrument Society of America, Research Triangle Park,
     NC, 1995.
[29] S. Skogestad, “Simple analytic rules for model reduction and PID controller tuning,” Journal of Process Control, vol. 13, pp. 291–309, 2003.
[30] Anthropic, “Claude API documentation: Messages, structured outputs, prompt caching,” https://platform.claude.com/docs, accessed
     2026.
[31] G. M. Amdahl, “Validity of the single processor approach to achieving large scale computing capabilities,” in Proceedings of the AFIPS Spring
     Joint Computer Conference, vol. 30, pp. 483–485, 1967.
[32] W. Kwon, Z. Li, S. Zhuang, Y. Sheng, L. Zheng, C. H. Yu, J. Gonzalez, H. Zhang, and I. Stoica, “Efficient memory management for large
     language model serving with PagedAttention,” in Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP), 2023. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2309.06180.
[33] R. Pope, S. Douglas, A. Chowdhery, J. Devlin, J. Bradbury, J. Heek, K. Xiao, S. Agrawal, and J. Dean, “Efficiently scaling transformer
     inference,” in Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys), 2023. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05102.
[34] S. Skogestad and I. Postlethwaite, Multivariable Feedback Control: Analysis and Design, 2nd ed. Wiley, 2005.
[35] A. Niederlinski, “A heuristic approach to the design of linear multivariable interacting control systems,” Automatica, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 691–701,
     1971.
[36] A. Nedić and A. Ozdaglar, “Distributed subgradient methods for multi-agent optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 54,
     no. 1, pp. 48–61, 2009.
[37] A. N. Venkat, I. A. Hiskens, J. B. Rawlings, and S. J. Wright, “Distributed MPC strategies with application to power system automatic
     generation control,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1192–1206, 2008.
[38] E. Camponogara, D. Jia, B. H. Krogh, and S. Talukdar, “Distributed model predictive control,” IEEE Control Systems Magazine, vol. 22, no. 1,
     pp. 44–52, 2002.
[39] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, et al., “Do as I can, not as I say: Grounding language in robotic affordances,” in Proceedings of CoRL 2022,
     2022.




Page 37 of 37
