                                             LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with
                                                     MCP and Proof Repair

                                                         Santhana Srinivasan R1 and Maithilee Patawar1

                                               Indian Institute of Information Technology, Design and Manufacturing,
                                                                            Kancheepuram




arXiv:2606.28841v1 [cs.LO] 27 Jun 2026
                                               Abstract. Large language models are increasingly capable of mathe-
                                               matical reasoning, but the proofs they generate are often unreliable and
                                               hard to verify. Interactive theorem provers such as Lean 4 address this
                                               by accepting only kernel-checked proofs; however, their reach is bounded
                                               by the formalized knowledge available. While Mathlib, a repository of
                                               formalized Lean 4 theorems that covers diverse mathematical areas, cer-
                                               tain specialized areas remain underrepresented; notably, the domain of
                                               Combinatorics on Words (CoW). CoW studies sequences, exploring their
                                               properties such as periodicity, borders, conjugacy, and morphisms. As a
                                               result, specialized provers, trained on Mathlib-centered data, lack the
                                               lemmas to operate in CoW. We present two contributions. First, we in-
                                               troduce a Lean 4 formalization of CoW containing eight modules and
                                               93 declarations of core definitions and foundational lemmas. Second, we
                                               present LAMP, a multi-agent framework that synthesizes kernel-verified
                                               Lean 4 proofs by providing explicit, structured domain knowledge at in-
                                               ference time through an ontology, rather than by fine-tuning a prover.
                                               LAMP coordinates a Planner, Builder, and Verifier with Model Context
                                               Protocol based access to a domain-specific CoW ontology. In a suite of
                                               90 CoW theorems that span all eight modules and three difficulty levels,
                                               LAMP synthesizes verified proofs for 96.7% of theorems, substantially
                                               exceeding both an unscaffolded baseline and existing specialized provers.
                                               An ablation shows that removing LAMP’s tool-grounded architecture or
                                               its Planner/Builder separation each cost roughly 12 percentage points,
                                               even with the backbone model held fixed.

                                               Keywords: Theorem Proving · Lean 4 · LLM Agents · Combinatorics
                                               on Words · Model Context Protocol · Proof Automation


                                         1   Introduction

                                         Large language models (LLMs) have made rapid progress in mathematical rea-
                                         soning, but the solutions they produce are often difficult to verify and unreliable
                                         [30,22,44]. Interactive theorem provers such as Lean 4 [25] offer a reliable so-
                                         lution to the problem. With Lean 4, every proof is checked by a small trusted
                                         kernel, and the kernel-verified proof is correct regardless of how it was gener-
                                         ated. This makes the pairing of LLM-based reasoning with formal verification
2      Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar

a promising route to scaling the formalization of mathematics, which is a task
that has traditionally demanded enormous expert effort [18].
    The usefulness of this approach depends on the availability of formalized do-
main knowledge. The Lean 4 ecosystem is built on Mathlib [39], a large library
of formalized mathematics. It covers domains like analysis, number theory, lin-
ear algebra, and formal verification. However, its coverage is far from complete,
and several domains are unrepresented. One such domain is Combinatorics on
Words (CoW) [23], the study of structural properties of finite and infinite se-
quences. These properties include periodicity, borders, conjugacy, morphisms,
and primitive roots, which have no formalization in Mathlib. This gap is impor-
tant because proofs in CoW are often long and involve many cases. Such proofs
benefit from machine checking, but without a formal library, both human for-
malizers and automated provers lack the basic definitions needed to build these
proofs.
    Existing automated provers do not close this gap. State-of-the-art (SOTA)
systems, whether fine-tuned for Lean (DeepSeek-Prover-V2 [30], Goedel-Prover
[22], Kimina-Prover [42]) are trained on a fixed, Mathlib-centered distribution.
Their performance is known to decline on tasks formalized in unfamiliar frame-
works [36]. For a domain absent from Mathlib, such as CoW, this degradation
is acute. These systems lack both the vocabulary and the supporting lemmas
needed to reason about CoW concepts. Therefore, the main limitation is not
the inherent difficulty of the reasoning task, but the ability of these systems to
generalize to new domains.
    Our main observation is that an unformalized domain needs explicit and
structured domain knowledge at inference time, rather than knowledge that is
only learned implicitly through training. This knowledge includes the defini-
tions of the domain and the relationships between them. It can be provided to
a general-purpose model through external tools. In this way, the model can be
adapted to a new domain by organizing and providing the required knowledge
instead of retraining the model. We apply this idea specifically to CoW. Fig-
ure 1 illustrates this concretely: a CoW theorem with a sorry placeholder is
transformed into a kernel-verified proof by a general-purpose model drawing on
a curated CoW knowledge source.
    We make this idea concrete through two artifacts: a Lean 4 formalization
of CoW and LAMP, a multi-agent framework for generating verified Lean 4
proofs. LAMP uses curated domain knowledge during the proving process via
Model Context Protocol (MCP) [1]. It combines three main agents: a Planner,
which creates a proof strategy; a Builder, which turns the strategy into Lean
tactics; and a Verifier, which checks the proof against the Lean kernel. Most im-
portantly, these agents can access a domain-specific CoW ontology that provides
the required definitions and their dependencies when needed. We summarize our
contributions as follows:

1. The first Lean 4 formalization of CoW. It contains eight modules (Word,
   Factor, ProperPrefix, ProperSuffix, Border, Conjugacy, Period, Morphism)
   with core definitions and foundational lemmas.
            LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair                3

            Input                                                          Output
 theorem border_period                                           theorem border_period
    (h : IsBorder b w) :                                           ...:= by
    HasPeriod w (..) := by
                                        LAMP                       intro i hi; simp ...
    sorry                                                          omega     verified




                               CoW ontology & MCP tools


    Fig. 1: LAMP transforms a theorem with sorry into a kernel-verified proof


 2. LAMP, a multi-agent framework that injects domain knowledge into LLM
    proof synthesis via MCP tools. It includes a structured CoW ontology that
    is used by a dedicated Planner agent. This allows the framework to adapt
    to the CoW domain without retraining the underlying model.
 3. A CoW Evaluation Suite of 90 theorems across the eight modules and three
    difficulty levels, including the classical border-period duality theorem, de-
    signed as a growing foundation: solved theorems can be folded back into the
    library to support harder results, rather than serving as a static benchmark.

    On this suite, LAMP synthesizes verified proofs for 96.7% of theorems, sub-
stantially exceeding both an unscaffolded LLM baseline (58.9%) and existing
specialized provers (1.1–8.9%), which fail almost entirely because CoW lies
outside their training distribution. The ablation above shows that this perfor-
mance depends on LAMP’s tool-grounded architecture and its Planner/Builder
separation, not on the backbone model alone. We also report performance on
an out-of-domain benchmark, where LAMP is deliberately less competitive: it
trades breadth across general mathematics for depth in an unformalized domain,
and we make this trade-off explicit rather than claiming general superiority.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work in
theorem proving and agentic systems. Section 3 introduces the Lean 4 formaliza-
tion of CoW (Section 3.1) and then describes the LAMP system, its components,
and control algorithm. Section 4 reports the evaluation, ablations, and compar-
isons. Section 5 opens with a failure analysis and then discusses implications,
limitations, and future work, and Section 6 concludes.


2     Background and Related Work

Three lines of work are directly related to our setting. We first review the proof
assistant our system targets and the library that anchors it (Section 2.1). We then
survey approaches that leverage large language models for Lean proof genera-
tion (Section 2.2), and finally agentic frameworks that augment general-purpose
4      Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar

models with external tools to the same end (Section 2.3). A comprehensive re-
cent survey by [19] provides broader context; here we focus on the aspects most
salient to the design and evaluation of LAMP.


2.1   Lean 4, Mathlib, and Combinatorics on Words

Lean 4 is an interactive theorem prover (ITP) and dependently typed func-
tional programming language in which mathematical statements are encoded as
types and proofs as terms whose well-typedness is checked by a small trusted
kernel [25]. Proofs are usually developed interactively through tactics, which
transform a proof state consisting of hypotheses and goals until the goal is dis-
charged. This design makes Lean 4 an attractive target for machine-generated
proofs: any candidate proof, however it is produced, is accepted only if it passes
kernel checking, so correctness does not depend on trusting the generator. Other
widely used proof assistants include Coq [38] and Isabelle/HOL [26], though the
overwhelming majority of recent LLM-based prover research targets Lean 4.
    Lean’s utility relies heavily on Mathlib [39], a community-driven library pro-
viding an extensive network of definitions, lemmas, and automation across di-
verse mathematical fields, including algebra, analysis, topology, number theory,
and combinatorics. Mathlib is also a fast-moving target: definitions are rou-
tinely added, renamed, or deprecated, and proof developments must track these
changes. Despite its breadth, Mathlib’s coverage is uneven, and several mathe-
matical domains remain entirely unformalized.
    Combinatorics on Words (CoW) [23,24] is one such domain. CoW studies the
structural and combinatorial properties of finite and infinite sequences, encom-
passing periodicity, borders, conjugacy, primitive roots, and morphisms. CoW
hosts several long-standing open problems that have driven sustained research
activity. A central question, posed by Fraenkel and Simpson [10], asks how many
distinct squares a word of length n can contain; the conjectured upper bound of n
remains open, with the best known bound of fewer than 1.5n distinct squares
established by Thierry [40]. The closely related runs conjecture, which posits
that the number of maximal repetitions in a word of length n is at most n,
was formulated by Crochemore et al. [6] and subsequently resolved. Recent ad-
vances continue to sharpen density bounds for specific repetition patterns [27].
A recurring feature of proofs in this area is that they involve elaborate case
analyses over word combinatorics, making them both lengthy and error-prone to
verify by hand; this characteristic creates a natural demand for machine-checked
formalization.
    The most substantial formalization of CoW to date is the project of Holub
and Starosta in Isabelle/HOL, which formalizes the Periodicity Lemma, the
Lyndon–Schützenberger equation, the Graph Lemma, and additional results on
Lyndon words and morphic languages [12,13,35]. No comparable Lean 4 for-
malization exists, which means that both researchers and automated provers
must build the necessary definitions and supporting lemmas from scratch. The
proposed work addresses this gap by establishing a CoW library in Lean 4.
        LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair             5

2.2   LLM-based Theorem Provers

The application of neural language models to theorem proving originates with
GPT-f [29], which demonstrated that a transformer fine-tuned on proof data
can generate single proof steps in Metamath, guided by best-first search. Sub-
sequent work scaled this paradigm: PACT [11] introduced proof artifact co-
training, while curriculum learning over statement difficulty further improved
success rates on formal mathematics [28]. HyperTree Proof Search (HTPS) [17]
brought AlphaZero-style online training to theorem proving, achieving strong
results on both Metamath and the Lean-based miniF2F benchmark.
    More recently, several systems have fine-tuned large language models specifi-
cally for whole-proof or stepwise proof generation in Lean. The DeepSeek-Prover
series [47,48,30] couples whole-proof generation with subgoal decomposition and
reinforcement learning, with its largest model reaching SOTA results on compe-
tition benchmarks. Kimina-Prover [42] adopts a reasoning-driven reinforcement-
learning framework. In contrast, the Goedel-Prover line [21,22] achieves compa-
rable performance with substantially smaller models by pairing scaffolded data
synthesis with verifier-guided self-correction. InternLM2.5-StepProver [46] scales
expert iteration on the Lean Workbook dataset [51] using a learned critic model
to guide search toward tractable subproblems. LEGO-Prover [43] constructs
reusable lemma libraries during proof search, and Baldur [9] demonstrates whole-
proof generation with repair in Isabelle. Draft, Sketch, and Prove [16] bridges in-
formal and formal reasoning by using an LLM to produce natural-language proof
sketches that are then translated into formal tactic sequences. AlphaProof [15],
combining reinforcement learning with autoformalization and Lean 4 verifica-
tion, achieved silver-medal performance at the 2024 International Mathematical
Olympiad, marking a landmark for AI-driven formal mathematics.
    These systems are typically evaluated on miniF2F [53] and PutnamBench [41],
both of which are derived from mathematics competitions. ProofNet [3] extends
evaluation to undergraduate-level mathematics, and FormalMATH [52] provides
a broader benchmark across multiple mathematical domains.
    A complementary family augments LLMs with retrieval. LeanDojo and its
ReProver model [49] extract training data from Lean repositories and perform
premise selection over Mathlib, retrieving relevant lemmas to condition proof
generation. Lean Copilot [34] integrates LLM-based tactic suggestion directly
into the interactive Lean workflow. Autoformalization, the automatic translation
from natural language mathematics to formal specifications, has also emerged
as a closely related direction, with large language models showing promising
capabilities for this task [45].
    Despite strong benchmark numbers, these approaches share limitations that
are salient for our setting. Because they are trained predominantly on competi-
tion mathematics and on fixed snapshots of Mathlib, their ability to generalize
to domains outside their training distribution is unclear, and they can be brittle
to Mathlib version changes such as renamed or deprecated lemmas [5]. Recent
benchmarks specifically probe this concern: TaoBench [36] asks whether auto-
mated prover LLMs generalize beyond Mathlib, miniCTX [14] evaluates provers
6      Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar

on novel projects with long contexts, and related work observes that the effec-
tiveness of specialized provers diminishes on tasks involving unfamiliar problem
domains [33]. Finally, the largest specialized provers require substantial com-
putational resources to deploy. These observations motivate approaches that
introduce domain knowledge without retraining a monolithic model, which is
the direction our work pursues.




2.3   Agentic Frameworks for Theorem Proving



An alternative paradigm equips general-purpose LLMs with external tools and
coordinates them through agentic orchestration, rather than fine-tuning a ded-
icated prover. This builds on broader work in tool-augmented language mod-
els [50,31]. In the theorem-proving setting, the LLM supplies reasoning and Lean
expertise, while tools provide access to the proof state, lemma search, error di-
agnostics, and verification. Several systems explore agent decompositions of the
proving task, including multi-agent long-chain-of-thought reasoning [44], agent-
based proof refinement [4], interleaving of informal reasoning steps with tactic
generation [20], and language-agent approaches that couple reasoning with envi-
ronment interaction [37]. MCP [1] has recently emerged as a standard interface
for connecting LLMs to such tools, including Lean language-server tooling [7].
    LAMP shares its agentic, MCP-based philosophy with Ax-Prover [5], which
also pairs a frontier LLM with Lean tooling and argues that tool-augmented
agents generalize where specialized provers do not; we view our work as com-
plementary rather than competing, and differ in three respects we make explicit
and evaluate. First, Ax-Prover demonstrates breadth across mathematics and
quantum physics using generic Lean tooling. In contrast, LAMP targets CoW,
a domain absent from both Mathlib and prior agentic benchmarks. To address
this, LAMP contributes a dedicated CoW Lean 4 library as a reusable dataset.
No generic Lean tool can supply this knowledge, as it does not yet exist outside
our work. Second, whereas existing agentic provers rely on generic Lean tooling,
LAMP introduces a structured, domain-specific CoW ontology that is exposed
as an MCP tool to Builder agent and also consumed by a dedicated Planner
agent during proof-strategy formation, injecting curated domain knowledge into
planning rather than leaving it implicit in the model’s weights. Third, LAMP
separates the planning of a proof strategy from the construction of Lean tactics
into distinct Planner and Builder agents, coordinated by a dual-loop orchestra-
tor. In Section 4, we show that both LAMP’s tool-grounded architecture and its
Planner/Builder separation are necessary for its performance on this unformal-
ized domain. Removing either component produces a marked drop in the proof-
synthesis rate. This isolates a unique contribution that generic tool-augmented
agents do not provide.
          LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair            7


      Table 1: Declaration breakdown of the CoW Lean 4 library by module.
                      Module         Definitions Lemmas Total
                      Word               4        18     22
                      Factor             4        18     22
                      ProperPrefix       1        4       5
                      ProperSuffix       1         4      5
                      Border             3        4       7
                      Conjugacy          1        3       4
                      Period             3        6       9
                      Morphism           5        14     19
                      Total             22        71     93



3     The LAMP System
3.1    The CoW Library
The library models words as lists over an arbitrary type (abbrev Word (α :
Type*) := List α) and is organized into eight modules with a strict depen-
dency hierarchy: Word → Factor → {ProperPrefix, ProperSuffix } → Border,
with Conjugacy, Period, and Morphism each built directly atop Word and Fac-
tor ; later modules import only earlier ones. Word establishes the monoid struc-
ture under concatenation. Factor formalizes prefix, suffix, and factor relations
with full transitivity chains; ProperPrefix and ProperSuffix capture strict sub-
word relations and length inequalities. Border encodes words that simultane-
ously appear as a proper prefix and suffix, illustrated below: a border is defined
directly in terms of the two prior modules, and its core closure lemma follows
by chaining a single prefix-to-factor lemma from Factor. The following Lean 4
snippet illustrates the Border definition and its entailment of the factor relation:
1   def IsBorder ( b w : Word α) : Prop :=
2     IsProperPrefix b w ∧ IsProperSuffix b w
3

4 theorem IsBorder . isFactor ( h : IsBorder b w ) : IsFactor b w
       :=
5   IsFactor . of_prefix h .1. isPrefix

   Conjugacy characterizes cyclic rotations. Period defines periodicity, mini-
mal periods, and primitivity. Morphism covers word morphisms together with
non-erasing, coding, and uniform classifications. Table 1 gives the declaration
breakdown per module; additional implementation details and design rationale
are given in Appendix A.

3.2    System Overview
LAMP is a multi-agent framework that synthesizes a complete, kernel-verified
Lean 4 proof from a theorem statement whose proof body is left as a sorry
8       Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar




                    Fig. 2: LAMP architecture and data flow


placeholder. Its design follows a single principle: rather than asking one language
model to perform mathematical reasoning, Lean coding, and error recovery si-
multaneously, LAMP decomposes the task across specialized agents and grounds
each of them in external tools so that decisions are based on verified facts rather
than the model’s recollection. Three core agents cooperate in this architecture. A
Planner devises a mathematical proof strategy, a Builder realizes that strategy
as Lean 4 tactics, and a Verifier checks candidate proofs against the Lean ker-
nel. Managing this workflow is a central Orchestrator, while a Semantic Toolbox
exposes a set of MCP [1] tools that the agents may query on demand. These
tools include a domain-specific CoW ontology. The system operates as a closed
feedback loop: a strategy is planned, built into code, and verified; if verification
fails, the structured error is returned to the agents, which revise and retry. This
loop runs under a bounded attempt budget until a proof is verified or the budget
is exhausted. Figure 2 shows the overall data flow. The remainder of this section
describes each component (Section 3.3) and then specifies the control algorithm
that ties them together (see Section 3.4).


3.3   Components

We describe the five components in data-flow order: the Orchestrator that con-
trols the loop, the Planner and Builder agents that produce strategy and code,
the Semantic Toolbox that grounds the Builder, and the Verifier that adjudi-
cates correctness. All agent reasoning is performed by a single general-purpose
        LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair              9

large language model accessed through an API; LAMP is model-agnostic, and
we report results across several backbones in Section 4.

Orchestrator: The Orchestrator is the central controller that drives the “Planner
→Builder→Verifier" cycle and owns all loop state. Before any reasoning be-
gins, it performs contextual grounding: it extracts the import statements from
the target theorem, resolves each to the corresponding CoW source file, and
injects the verbatim library source into both agents’ prompts. This ensures the
agents reason about the library’s actual definitions and lemma names rather than
plausible-looking inventions, which is the principal defense against hallucinated
identifiers. The Orchestrator also localizes edits: a theorem locator identifies the
exact source region occupied by the target proof so that generated tactics replace
only the sorry body and never overwrite imports or neighbouring declarations,
with a conservative fallback that patches only the lines containing sorry when
boundaries cannot be determined. Finally, the Orchestrator enforces the bounded
attempt budget and the branching recovery policy formalized in Section 3.4, and
persists every verified proof to disk.

Planner Agent: The Planner is the mathematical strategist and does not emit
Lean code. Given the goal and the injected library context, it produces an explicit
chain-of-thought analysis followed by a structured plan that names the specific
library lemmas and the proof technique to apply (for example, chaining prefix
relations through a transitivity lemma before applying a factor lemma). The
Planner retains a persistent conversation history across re-planning iterations, so
that when a strategy fails it revises in light of the Builder’s accumulated feedback
rather than planning from scratch. Separating strategy from implementation in
this way lets the system distinguish a flawed mathematical approach (which
warrants re-planning) from a correct approach that was implemented incorrectly
(which warrants only a rebuild).

Builder Agent: The Builder is the tactical executor that translates the Planner’s
strategy into syntactically valid Lean 4 tactics. During generation, it queries
the Semantic Toolbox (up to a fixed limit per attempt) to retrieve definitions,
search for lemmas, or inspect the live goal state before synthesizing the final
proof. Within a single planning iteration the Builder maintains its own history:
if an attempt fails verification, the next attempt receives the structured error
and the prior code, enabling targeted self-correction without re-prompting from
scratch. A post-processing step strips any accidental re-emission of the theorem
signature so that only the proof body is patched into the source.

Semantic Toolbox: The Semantic Toolbox is the tool registry that exposes the
MCP ecosystem [1] to the Builder and routes each call to the appropriate back-
end. It provides three classes of tool. A Lean LSP tool wraps the Lean language
server [7] to extract the precise goal state at the location of a sorry. This state
consists of the hypotheses and target exactly as the kernel sees them. Conse-
quently, it provides the Builder with ground truth rather than an inferred proof
10      Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar

state.A Mathlib search tool, built on LeanExplore [2], queries the surrounding
Lean ecosystem for general-purpose lemmas. Most importantly, an ontology tool
answers queries against a curated CoW knowledge corpus, returning the exact
Lean statement, description, source location, dependencies, and related concepts
for a named CoW entity, together with operations that list all lemmas in a con-
ceptual family or return a theorem’s prerequisite chain. The tools are governed by
an explicit priority hierarchy enforced through prompting: the Builder consults
the injected source first, then the CoW ontology for domain-specific lookups,
and only as a last resort the broader Mathlib search. This ordering highlights
a core design priority in LAMP. Specifically, the architecture privileges curated
domain knowledge over open-ended retrieval. The ontology tool then serves as
the vehicle for bringing this knowledge into the proof construction process.

Verifier: The Verifier is the final arbiter of correctness and the only component
that LAMP trusts to declare success. It submits a candidate proof to a Lean 4
REPL and parses the result into structured categories: errors, warnings, open
goals, and sorry occurrences. This distinction separates a proof that merely com-
piles (pass: no errors) from one that is genuinely finished (complete: no errors, no
sorries, no sorry-warnings). Parsed errors are returned to the agents as structured
feedback, including the offending goal state, so that recovery is informed rather
than blind. The verification backend, adapted from DeepSeek-Prover-V1.5 [48],
runs REPL instances as isolated worker processes with per-process resource lim-
its and timeouts, and a scheduler reaps stale processes, allowing many candidate
proofs to be checked concurrently and safely.

3.4   Algorithm
Algorithm 1 specifies LAMP’s control flow as a dual-loop procedure. The outer
loop (the planning loop) requests a proof strategy from the Planner and may
re-plan up to Rmax times; the inner loop (the build loop) asks the Builder to
realize the current strategy as Lean tactics and may retry up to Bmax times
per strategy. This yields up to Rmax ×Bmax verification attempts in total. Two
design decisions in the loop are not evident from the architecture alone and are
described after the listing.

Dual-stage verification: A candidate proof is accepted only if it passes two inde-
pendent checks (lines 9 and 14). The first is a purely textual test that the proof
contains no sorry token. The second compiles the proof in the Lean REPL and
requires that the result be complete: free of errors, sorries, and sorry-warnings.
The textual stage is necessary because Lean accepts sorry as a well-typed place-
holder: a proof consisting of sorry alone compiles without error, so a compila-
tion pass alone would register a false success. Requiring both stages eliminates
this failure mode.

Missing-definition fast path: When Builder fails, LAMP distinguishes why it
failed (line 16). If the error indicates that a referenced definition or lemma could
         LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair                 11

Algorithm 1 LAMP proof synthesis
Require: theorem T with a sorry placeholder; library L
Require: re-plan budget Rmax , build budget Bmax
Ensure: a verified Lean 4 proof of T , or failure
 1: C ← LoadContext(T, L)                   ▷ inject source of imported CoW modules
 2: HP ← ∅                                                 ▷ persistent Planner history
 3: for r ← 1 to Rmax do
 4:     plan ← Planner(T, C, HP )              ▷ mathematical strategy; no Lean code
 5:     HB ← ∅                                     ▷ Builder history, reset per strategy
 6:     for b ← 1 to Bmax do
 7:        proof ← Builder(plan, C, HB , Toolbox)          ▷ may issue MCP tool calls
 8:        if ContainsSorry(proof ) then                        ▷ stage 1: textual check
 9:             HB ← HB ∪ {“proof still contains sorry”}
10:             continue
11:         end if
12:         res ← Verify(proof )                    ▷ stage 2: Lean REPL compilation
13:         if res.complete then                                  ▷ no errors, no sorries
14:             return proof
15:         else if IsMissingDefinition(res) then
16:             C ← ReloadContext(T, L) ▷ cheap retry: re-ground, do not re-plan
17:             HB ← HB ∪ {res.errors}
18:         else
19:             HB ← HB ∪ {res.errors}         ▷ feed structured error back to Builder
20:         end if
21:     end for
22:     HP ← HP ∪ {summary of failed attempts for plan r} ▷ Planner learns before
    re-planning
23: end for
24: return failure



not be found, this represents an addressing failure rather than a flaw in the strat-
egy. In this case, the Orchestrator re-injects the library context and retries the
build immediately (lines 17–18). It does this rather than discarding the strategy
and consuming an outer-loop re-plan. A genuine proof failure instead appends
the structured error to the Builder’s history (line 20) so that the next build at-
tempt can self-correct, and only when the inner budget is exhausted does control
return to the Planner (line 22), which revises the strategy using a summary of
what failed. This separation keeps inexpensive recovery (re-grounding) distinct
from expensive recovery (re-planning).


4    Experimental Results

We evaluate LAMP to answer five questions. (Q1) How well does LAMP syn-
thesize proofs in an unformalized domain? (Q2) Does LAMP’s performance
come from its tools and architecture, or from the underlying language model?
(Q3) Does the result depend on a particular model backbone? (Q4) How does
12     Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar


                Table 2: Composition of the CoW Evaluation Suite.
        Difficulty # Theorems Modules covered           Example
        Easy           15            8          word_length_pos_of_ne_nil
        Medium         58            8               prefix_antisymm
        Hard           17            5            border_period_duality
        Total          90            8                     —



LAMP compare with existing specialized provers on the same domain? (Q5) How
does it behave outside its target domain? We address these in Sections 4.2–4.5,
with a failure analysis following in Section 5.


4.1   Experimental Setup

Evaluation suite: We evaluate on the CoW Evaluation Suite, a curated collec-
tion of 90 theorems spanning all eight modules of the CoW library (Section 3.1)
and stratified into three difficulty levels: easy, medium, and hard. Difficulty was
assigned according to the expected proof length and reasoning depth: easy the-
orems are dischargeable in a few tactic steps using one or two library lemmas;
medium theorems require case analysis or induction over several steps; and hard
theorems require cross-module reasoning or the discovery of non-obvious inter-
mediate lemmas. Note that these labels reflect the complexity of the formal
proof task, not the mathematical difficulty a human prover or a mathematician
would perceive.The distribution of theorems across difficulty levels and modules
is given in Table 2; the complete list of all 90 theorems with per-backbone pass/-
fail results is given in Appendix B. We view this suite as a foundation rather
than an endpoint: its 90 theorems validate LAMP on a CoW library that did
not previously exist, and verified proofs can, after human review, be folded back
in to support harder results. LAMP’s role is thus not only to solve theorems but
to grow the foundation it solves them over.
Success criterion: A theorem is counted as solved only if the synthesized proof
passes LAMP’s dual-stage check (Section 3.4): it must contain no sorry token,
and it must compile to a complete state under the Lean 4 REPL—no errors, no
sorries, and no sorry-warnings. This criterion admits no partial credit.

Metric: We report pass@1: a single synthesis attempt per theorem under the
standard attempt budget. We adopt pass@1 because it reflects realistic usage, in
which a practitioner runs the system once under fixed time and cost constraints
rather than sampling a proof many times in the hope that one attempt succeeds.
Note that LAMP’s internal repair loop (up to Rmax = 3 re-plans and Bmax = 3
build attempts per plan) operates within a single pass@1 attempt and is distinct
from independent pass@k sampling.
        LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair            13


      Table 3: LAMP pass@1 on the CoW Evaluation Suite, by difficulty.
                     Difficulty # Theorems Solved Pass@1 (%)
                     Easy          15        15     100.0%
                     Medium        58        57     98.3%
                     Hard          17        15     88.2%
                     Overall       90        87     96.7%



Configurations: Unless otherwise stated, LAMP uses Kimi K2.6 (Moonshot AI)
as its backbone model (API version kimi-k2.6, endpoint api.moonshot.ai/v1)
at temperature 1 (the only value accepted by the Kimi K2.6 API). All exper-
iments use the same Mathlib snapshot (v4.17.0, pinned to commit 5269898).
The Lean toolchain is fixed at leanprover/lean4:v4.17.0. Each verification
attempt is given a timeout of 30 seconds. Experiments were run on a single
machine equipped with a 13th Gen Intel Core i7-13650HX (14 cores, 28
threads) CPU, 24 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4060 Laptop
GPU (8 GB VRAM), running Ubuntu 24.04.3 LTS. The builder executes
up to 9 repair attempts (3 cycles × 3 attempts per cycle) before declaring failure.

4.2   Main Result: CoW Proof Synthesis
Table 3 reports LAMP’s pass@1 rate on the CoW Evaluation Suite, stratified by
difficulty. LAMP solves 87 of 90 theorems, an overall pass rate of 96.7%. Perfor-
mance by difficulty is 100.0% (easy), 98.3% (medium), and 88.2% (hard); the
per-module breakdown appears in Table 10 (see Appendix B). Notably, LAMP
synthesizes a verified proof of border–period duality, a named CoW result requir-
ing a prefix and suffix decomposition chained through the Border, Factor, and
Period modules (full proof in Appendix C). These results indicate that LAMP
is effective not only on structural lemmas but also on theorems requiring multi-
step, cross-module reasoning.

4.3   Ablation: The Role of Architecture
The central claim of LAMP is that its performance is driven by its architectural
design. It integrates tool-grounded access to the domain ontology via MCP and
separates strategy from implementation, rather than by the backbone model
alone. We test this with two ablations, holding the 3 × 3 attempt budget and
injected library source fixed in both. No MCP removes all tool access. Single
agent removes the Planner: the Builder alone makes all nine calls, retaining full
MCP access, but must plan and prove.
    Both ablations cost a comparable 11–12 points overall, with the loss concen-
trated almost entirely in Hard theorems (88.2% down to 47.1% and 58.8%); Easy
theorems are unaffected. This indicates that tool-grounded access to the domain
ontology and the Planner/Builder separation each contribute substantially, and
neither alone explains LAMP’s performance.
14     Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar


Table 4: Ablation study. All configurations use the same backbone model and
the same 9-call attempt budget; only the indicated component is removed.
        Configuration                 Easy Medium Hard Overall ∆
        LAMP (full)                      100.0% 98.3% 88.2% 96.7% -
        – no MCP                         100.0% 91.4% 47.1% 84.4% 12.3
        – single agent (9 Builder calls) 100.0% 89.7% 58.8% 85.6% 11.1



Table 5: Effect of the backbone model on LAMP, CoW suite (architecture fixed).
                         Model               Pass@1 (%)
                         Backbone model        96.7%
                         Claude Sonnet 4.5     88.9%
                         DeepSeek V4 Pro       68.9%



4.4   Backbone Comparison and Comparison with Existing Provers

LAMP is model-agnostic: any instruction-following LLM with tool-use support
can serve as the backbone for its agents. Table 5 reports LAMP’s pass@1 on the
CoW suite with the backbone varied, architecture and tools held fixed. LAMP
attains 96.7% with its backbone model, 88.9% with Claude Sonnet 4.5, and
68.9% with DeepSeek V4 Pro. We emphasize that this experiment varies only
the engine inside LAMP; it is distinct from the system-level comparison, where
complete proving systems compete against one another.
    We now compare LAMP against specialized theorem-proving systems and an
unscaffolded baseline on the same CoW suite, with the same ontology context
given to every system, including the provers.



Table 6: System-level comparison on the CoW suite. All systems are given the
same ontology context.
                    System                       Pass@1 (%)
                    DeepSeek-Prover-V2 7B [30]      8.9%
                    Kimina-Prover 7B [42]           3.3%
                    Goedel-Prover-V2 32B [22]       1.1%
                    Backbone LLM, no agents        58.9%
                    LAMP                           96.7%



    Table 6 reports the result. Despite identical ontology access, the special-
ized provers solve almost nothing—8/90, 3/90, and 1/90 respectively—while the
backbone LLM alone solves 58.9% and LAMP reaches 96.7%. A miniF2F san-
ity check on Goedel-Prover-V2 confirms it is a functioning prover, producing
         LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair          15


Table 7: Out-of-domain evaluation on a balanced 32-problem subset of miniF2F
(8 problems per domain). All results are Pass@1.
 Model               Algebra    Comp. Math     Induction   Num. Theory    Overall
 Backbone model        100          100          100           87.5         96.9
 DeepSeek V4 Pro       75.0         37.5         62.5          50.0         56.2
 Claude Sonnet 4.5     87.5         12.5         25.0          12.5         34.4


valid in-distribution proofs (8B: 6/10, 32B: 2/10), so its near-total failure on
CoW is not a broken pipeline. The gap instead reflects architecture: specialized
provers are trained to emit tactics directly from a fixed Mathlib-centered distri-
bution and have no mechanism to consume retrieved ontology context, whereas
a general-purpose LLM can read and apply it directly, and LAMP’s agentic
structure exploits it further still.

4.5   Out-of-Domain Generalization
To evaluate LAMP’s generalization beyond its target domain, we assess all three
models on a balanced 32-problem subset of miniF2F [53], drawn equally from
four domains: algebra, competition mathematics, induction, and number theory
(8 problems each). This balanced sampling ensures representative coverage across
problem types rather than favoring any single category. A full evaluation across
all 244 miniF2F problems was not feasible within our computational budget,
as each theorem requires multiple Planner, Builder cycles with repeated MCP
tool invocations and Lean REPL verification. This makes large-scale evaluation
significantly expensive. The 32-problem balanced subset was designed to provide
a principled and reproducible cross-section of LAMP’s out-of-domain behaviour
under these constraints.
    Table 7 reports the Pass@1 results across all three models. Backbone model
(Kimi K2.6) achieves 96.9%, while DeepSeek V4 Pro achieves 56.2% and Claude
Sonnet 4.5 achieves 34.4%. The significant variance across models suggests that
out-of-domain generalization in LAMP is strongly governed by the model’s agen-
tic tool-use capabilities rather than the framework itself. Claude’s drop from
88.9% on CoW to 34.4% on miniF2F further indicates that its strong CoW per-
formance is partly attributable to LAMP’s domain-specific ontology and seman-
tic retrieval tools, which provide little leverage on Mathlib-centered competition
problems. We note that these Pass@1 results do not constitute a direct com-
parison with dedicated prover models evaluated on the full miniF2F benchmark
under pass@k protocols; a comprehensive comparison under unified evaluation
conditions remains future work.

5     Discussion and Limitations
The above evaluation provides a quantitative overview of model performance;
however, a deeper understanding requires examining where and why the models
16     Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar


Table 8: Classification of LAMP’s 38 failure instances on the CoW suite (Claude
Sonnet 4.5 + DeepSeek v4 Pro combined).
                      Failure Category            Count   %
                      Incorrect proof strategy       29 76.3
                      Invalid Lean syntax             7 18.4
                      Ill-posed (false) theorem       2 5.3



fail. Accordingly, we proceed with a detailed failure analysis of the backbone
model to characterize its limitations and discuss future improvements.

Failure Analysis: An analysis of the failed proofs for Backbone model (Kimi
K2.6) reveals distinct failure modes. The two failures in suffix_of_pow_le and
hasPeriod_pow_length stemmed from complex modular indexing lookups. Mean-
while, the failure in primitive_minimal _period_is_length occurred because the
theorem statement within the dataset is mathematically false; the multi-agent
Planner correctly identified this flaw and refused to generate a proof.
    We examined the 38 proof attempts that LAMP failed to complete using the
Claude Sonnet 4.5 and DeepSeek v4 Pro backbones and classified the failures
into the categories shown in Table 8. The dominant category was incorrect proof
strategy (76.3%), where the agent produced a plausible plan but could not close
all proof obligations, typically leaving sorry placeholders after exhausting all
re-planning attempts. Seven theorems, related to the Factor, Period, and Bor-
der modules, failed under both backbones, indicating that these proofs require
multi-step modular-arithmetic reasoning over List.get? indices that exceeds
current LLM capabilities regardless of backbone choice. The second category,
invalid Lean syntax (18.4%), consisted entirely of DeepSeek failures on Easy
and Medium theorems that both Kimi K2.6 and Claude Sonnet solved; the
proof ideas were correct, but the generated code referenced non-existent identi-
fiers or applied wrong projection syntax, suggesting lower Lean 4 surface-syntax
fidelity for DeepSeek. Two failures (5.3%) stemmed from the same ill-posed the-
orem discussed above; neither Claude nor DeepSeek identified its falsity, unlike
Kimi K2.6. Notably, no failures were attributable to verification timeouts or tool
retrieval errors, confirming that LAMP’s MCP-based infrastructure operates re-
liably and that the performance ceiling is determined by backbone reasoning
quality rather than system-level bottlenecks. We now discuss the broader impli-
cations of these results, along with key limitations and future directions.
    The central finding of our evaluation is that a general-purpose language model
equipped with curated domain tooling outperforms specialized provers in a do-
main for which no training corpus exists, and that this advantage depends on
LAMP’s tool-grounded architecture and its Planner/Builder separation, not on
the backbone model alone (Section 4.3). We read this as evidence that, for un-
formalized domains, the binding constraint is not the model’s reasoning capacity
but its access to the domain’s vocabulary and the relationships among its defi-
        LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair             17

nitions. Specialized provers encode such knowledge implicitly, through training
on a fixed Mathlib-centered corpus, and consequently degrade when that corpus
does not cover the target domain [36]. LAMP instead supplies the knowledge
explicitly and at inference time,making it retargetable to new domains through
library curation rather than model retraining. This gives a solution for formal-
izing further unformalized domains.

Limitations and Future Work: The CoW Evaluation Suite is self-constructed,
and its difficulty labels reflect our own judgement rather than an external stan-
dard; pass rates on it are not directly comparable to established benchmarks. As
noted in Section 4.1, the suite is a foundation rather than an endpoint, and the
same library-growth loop can extend it toward the field’s hardest classical results,
such as the Fine-Wilf theorem [8]. More broadly, results routinely dismissed as
“obvious” in informal mathematics (e.g., the border-period duality, recorded only
as a remark in [32]) require explicit machine-checked proofs on which stronger
statements depend. This gap between “easy to see” and “accepted by the kernel”
is where much formalisation effort concentrates and where the domain ontology
contributes most. LAMP’s performance is also sensitive to the backbone model
(Section 4.4); the gap to open-source backbones is substantial, so LAMP is best
understood as a method for extracting domain-specific proving capability from a
capable general-purpose model, not a model-agnostic guarantee. This motivates
a future hybrid design in which the Planner remains general-purpose while the
Builder is a prover-specialized model adapted to MCP tool calling, a split the
Planner/Builder separation was designed to accommodate, since current spe-
cialized provers (e.g. Kimina-Prover [42], DeepSeek-Prover-V2 [30]) do not yet
expose native tool-calling interfaces. Finally, our comparison with specialized
provers spans a single unformalized domain; whether explicit domain tooling
and the library-growth loop transfer to other such domains remains open, and
is the natural next test of this methodology.

6   Conclusion
We presented LAMP, a multi-agent framework that synthesizes kernel-verified
Lean 4 proofs by supplying curated domain knowledge to a general-purpose lan-
guage model at inference time, together with a Lean 4 formalization of CoW, a
domain previously absent from Mathlib, on which we evaluated it. Across a suite
of 90 CoW theorems spanning eight modules and three difficulty levels, LAMP
synthesized verified proofs for 96.7% of theorems, and an ablation showed that
this performance depends on LAMP’s tool-grounded architecture rather than
the backbone model alone. These results indicate that for domains lacking a
formalized corpus, the decisive factor is explicit, structured access to domain
knowledge, which a tool-augmented agent can exploit without retraining. The
suite’s 87 verified proofs are themselves candidates for the library. Folding them
back would grow it from 93 to as many as 180 declarations, the kind of com-
pounding foundation LAMP is designed to build as it solves. We release the
CoW library and evaluation suite to support this and the further work.
18      Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar

References
 1. Anthropic: Model context protocol. https://modelcontextprotocol.io (2024),
    accessed 2026
 2. Asher, J.: Leanexplore: A search engine for lean 4 declarations (2025), https:
    //arxiv.org/abs/2506.11085
 3. Azerbayev, Z., Piotrowski, B., Schoelkopf, H., Ayers, E.W., Radev, D., Avigad, J.:
    Proofnet: Autoformalizing and formally proving undergraduate-level mathematics.
    arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12433 (2023)
 4. Baba, K., Liu, C., Kurita, S., Sannai, A.: Prover agent: An agent-based framework
    for formal mathematical proofs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.19923 (2025)
 5. Breen, B., Del Tredici, M., McCarran, J., Mijares, J.A., Yin, W.W., Sulimany,
    K., Taylor, J.M., Koppens, F.H., Englund, D.: Ax-prover: A deep reasoning agen-
    tic framework for theorem proving in mathematics and quantum physics. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2510.12787 (2025)
 6. Crochemore, M., Ilie, L., Tinta, L.: The “runs” conjecture. Theoretical Computer
    Science 412(27), 2931–2941 (2011)
 7. Dressler, O.: Lean LSP MCP: Tools for agentic interaction with the Lean theorem
    prover (3 2025), https://github.com/oOo0oOo/lean-lsp-mcp
 8. Fine, N.J., Wilf, H.S.: Uniqueness theorems for periodic functions. Proceedings of
    the American Mathematical Society 16(1), 109–114 (1965)
 9. First, E., Rabe, M.N., Ringer, T., Brun, Y.: Baldur: Whole-proof generation and
    repair with large language models. In: Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European
    Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
    Engineering. pp. 1229–1241 (2023)
10. Fraenkel, A.S., Simpson, J.: How many squares can a string contain? J. Comb.
    Theory A 82(1), 112–120 (1998)
11. Han, J.M., Rute, J., Wu, Y., Ayers, E.W., Polu, S.: Proof artifact co-training
    for theorem proving with language models (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.
    06203
12. Holub, Š., Starosta, Š.: Formalization of basic combinatorics on words. In: 12th
    International Conference on Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP 2021). Leibniz In-
    ternational Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), vol. 193, pp. 22:1–22:17. Schloss
    Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik (2021). https://doi.org/10.4230/
    LIPIcs.ITP.2021.22
13. Holub, Š., Starosta, Š.: Lyndon words formalized in Isabelle/HOL. In: Develop-
    ments in Language Theory (DLT 2021). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
    12811, pp. 217–228. Springer (2021)
14. Hu, J., Zhu, T., Welleck, S.: minictx: Neural theorem proving with (long-) contexts.
    In: International Conference on Learning Representations. vol. 2025, pp. 10106–
    10130 (2025)
15. Hubert, T., Mehta, R., Sartran, L., Horváth, M.Z., Žužić, G., Wieser, E., Huang,
    A., Schrittwieser, J., Schroecker, Y., Masoom, H., et al.: Olympiad-level formal
    mathematical reasoning with reinforcement learning. Nature pp. 1–3 (2025)
16. Jiang, A.Q., Welleck, S., Zhou, J.P., Li, W., Liu, J., Jamnik, M., Lacroix, T., Wu,
    Y., Lample, G.: Draft, sketch, and prove: Guiding formal theorem provers with
    informal proofs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.12283 (2022)
17. Lample, G., Lacroix, T., Lachaux, M.A., Rodriguez, A., Hayat, A., Lavril, T.,
    Ebner, G., Martinet, X.: Hypertree proof search for neural theorem proving. Ad-
    vances in neural information processing systems 35, 26337–26349 (2022)
         LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair                 19

18. Leroy, X., Blazy, S., Kästner, D., Schommer, B., Pister, M., Ferdinand, C.:
    Compcert-a formally verified optimizing compiler. In: ERTS 2016: Embedded Real
    Time Software and Systems, 8th European Congress (2016)
19. Li, Z., Sun, J., Murphy, L., Su, Q., Li, Z., Zhang, X., Yang, K., Si, X.: A survey
    on deep learning for theorem proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09939 (2024)
20. Lin, H., Sun, Z., Welleck, S., Yang, Y.: Lean-star: Learning to interleave thinking
    and proving. In: International Conference on Learning Representations. vol. 2025,
    pp. 66041–66062 (2025)
21. Lin, Y., Tang, S., Lyu, B., Wu, J., Lin, H., Yang, K., Li, J., Xia, M., Chen, D.,
    Arora, S., Jin, C.: Goedel-prover: A frontier model for open-source automated
    theorem proving (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07640
22. Lin, Y., Tang, S., Lyu, B., Yang, Z., Chung, J.H., Zhao, H., Jiang, L., Geng, Y., Ge,
    J., Sun, J., et al.: Goedel-prover-v2: Scaling formal theorem proving with scaffolded
    data synthesis and self-correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03613 (2025)
23. Lothaire, M.: Combinatorics on Words. Cambridge Mathematical Library,
    Cambridge University Press, 2nd edn. (1997). https://doi.org/10.1017/
    CBO9780511566097
24. Lothaire, M.: Algebraic Combinatorics on Words. Cambridge University Press
    (2002)
25. de Moura, L., Ullrich, S.: The Lean 4 theorem prover and programming language.
    In: Automated Deduction – CADE 28. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
    12699, pp. 625–635. Springer (2021)
26. Nipkow, T., Paulson, L.C., Wenzel, M.: Isabelle/HOL: A Proof Assistant for
    Higher-Order Logic. Springer (2002)
27. Patawar, M., Kapoor, K.: The square density of words having a sequence of fs-
    double squares. Discrete Applied Mathematics 341, 349–358 (2023)
28. Polu, S., Han, J.M., Zheng, K., Baksys, M., Babuschkin, I., Sutskever, I.: For-
    mal mathematics statement curriculum learning. In: International Conference on
    Learning Representations (ICLR) (2023), arXiv:2202.01344
29. Polu, S., Sutskever, I.: Generative language modeling for automated theorem prov-
    ing (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.03393
30. Ren, Z., Shao, Z., Song, J., Xin, H., Wang, H., Zhao, W., Zhang, L., Fu, Z., Zhu, Q.,
    Yang, D., et al.: Deepseek-prover-v2: Advancing formal mathematical reasoning via
    reinforcement learning for subgoal decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21801
    (2025)
31. Schick, T., Dwivedi-Yu, J., Dessì, R., Raileanu, R., Lomeli, M., Hambro, E., Zettle-
    moyer, L., Cancedda, N., Scialom, T.: Toolformer: Language models can teach
    themselves to use tools. Advances in neural information processing systems 36,
    68539–68551 (2023)
32. Simpson, J.: Palindromic periodicities. Australasian Journal of Combinatorics
    92(3), 450–462 (2025), https://ajc.maths.uq.edu.au/pdf/92/ajc_v92_p450.
    pdf
33. Song, C., Wang, Z., Pu, F., Wang, H., Lin, X., Liu, J., Li, J., Liu, Z.:
    Leangeo: Formalizing competitional geometry problems in lean. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2508.14644 (2025)
34. Song, P., Yang, K., Anandkumar, A.: Lean copilot: Large language models as
    copilots for theorem proving in lean. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12534 (2024)
35. Štěpán Starosta: Infinite words and morphic languages formalized in isabelle/hol
    (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11445
20      Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar

36. Taylor, A.K., Zhang, J., Ji, E., Sahai, V., Deng, H., Chen, Y., Yuan, Y., Wu,
    D., Gu, J.C., Chang, K.W., et al.: Taobench: Do automated theorem prover llms
    generalize beyond mathlib? arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.12744 (2026)
37. Thakur, A., Wen, Y., Chaudhuri, S.: A language-agent approach to formal theorem-
    proving (2024), https://openreview.net/forum?id=XCMbagV0No
38. The Coq Development Team: The Coq proof assistant. https://coq.inria.fr
    (2024), accessed: 2026-06-13
39. The mathlib Community: The Lean mathematical library. In: Proceedings of the
    9th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs
    (CPP). pp. 367–381. ACM (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3372885.3373824
40. Thierry, A.: A proof that a word of length n has less than 1.5n distinct squares
    (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.02996
41. Tsoukalas, G., Lee, J., Jennings, J., Xin, J., Ding, M., Jennings, M., Thakur, A.,
    Chaudhuri, S.: Putnambench: Evaluating neural theorem-provers on the putnam
    mathematical competition. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
    37, 11545–11569 (2024)
42. Wang, H., Unsal, M., Lin, X., Baksys, M., Liu, J., Santos, M.D., Sung, F., et al.:
    Kimina-prover preview: Towards large formal reasoning models with reinforcement
    learning (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.11354
43. Wang, H., Xin, H., Zheng, C., Liu, Z., Cao, Q., Huang, Y., Xiong, J., Shi, H., Xie,
    E., Yin, J., et al.: Lego-prover: Neural theorem proving with growing libraries. In:
    International Conference on Learning Representations. vol. 2024, pp. 31566–31597
    (2024)
44. Wang, R., Pan, R., Li, Y., Zhang, J., Jia, Y., Diao, S., Pi, R., Hu, J., Zhang, T.:
    Ma-lot: Multi-agent lean-based long chain-of-thought reasoning enhances formal
    theorem proving. arXiv e-prints pp. arXiv–2503 (2025)
45. Wu, Y., Jiang, A.Q., Li, W., Rabe, M., Staats, C., Jamnik, M., Szegedy, C.: Aut-
    oformalization with large language models. In: Advances in Neural Information
    Processing Systems (NeurIPS). vol. 35, pp. 32353–32368 (2022)
46. Wu, Z., Huang, S., Zhou, Z., Ying, H., Yuan, Z., Zhang, W., Lin, D., Chen, K.:
    Internlm2.5-stepprover: Advancing automated theorem proving via critic-guided
    search (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.15700
47. Xin, H., Guo, D., Shao, Z., Ren, Z., Zhu, Q., Liu, B., Ruan, C., Li, W., Liang, X.:
    Deepseek-prover: Advancing theorem proving in llms through large-scale synthetic
    data (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14333
48. Xin, H., Ren, Z.Z., Song, J., Shao, Z., Zhao, W., Wang, H., Liu, B., Zhang, L., Lu,
    X., Du, Q., et al.: Deepseek-prover-v1.5: Harnessing proof assistant feedback for
    reinforcement learning and monte-carlo tree search (2024), https://arxiv.org/
    abs/2408.08152
49. Yang, K., Swope, A., Gu, A., Chalamala, R., Song, P., Yu, S., Godil, S., Prenger,
    R.J., Anandkumar, A.: Leandojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented lan-
    guage models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, 21573–
    21612 (2023)
50. Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K., Cao, Y.: ReAct:
    Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In: International Conference
    on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2023)
51. Ying, H., Wu, Z., Geng, Y., Wang, J., Lin, D., Chen, K.: Lean workbook: A large-
    scale lean problem set formalized from natural language math problems. Advances
    in Neural Information Processing Systems 37, 105848–105863 (2024)
         LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair                21

52. Yu, Z., Peng, R., Ding, K., Li, Y., Peng, Z., Liu, M., Zhang, Y., Yuan, Z., Xin, H.,
    Huang, W., et al.: Formalmath: Benchmarking formal mathematical reasoning of
    large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02735 (2025)
53. Zheng, K., Han, J.M., Polu, S.: Minif2f: a cross-system benchmark for formal
    olympiad-level mathematics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00110 (2021)


Appendix

A     The CoW Library: Additional Details
Design rationale
Words are represented as List α rather than a custom inductive type, so that all
of Lean’s existing list lemmas and automation are available for free. Factor is de-
fined contiguously (IsFactor u w := ∃ x y, w = x ++ u ++ y) rather than
via an indexed substring predicate, which keeps proofs by case analysis on x
and y direct rather than requiring index arithmetic. All declarations reported in
Table 1 are sorry-free.

Notation
                Notation Meaning           Definition
                u·v       Concatenation u ++ v
                u ≤p w    Prefix        ∃s, w = u + +s
                u ≤s w    Suffix        ∃p, w = p + +u
                u ≤f w    Factor        ∃x y, w = x + +u + +y
                u <p w    Proper Prefix u ≤p w ∧ u ̸= w
                u <s w    Proper Suffix u ≤s w ∧ u ̸= w
                u∼v       Conjugacy     ∃x y, u = x · y ∧ v = y · x


Module summaries
Word contributes length properties (e.g. Word.length_concat), concatenation
algebra (e.g. Word.concat_assoc), and power laws (e.g. Word.pow_add). Fac-
tor establishes reflexivity, transitivity, and length monotonicity for the prefix,
suffix, and factor relations, together with closure lemmas relating the three
(e.g. IsFactor.of_prefix). ProperPrefix and ProperSuffix each add the cor-
responding strict-inequality lemmas and the empty-word boundary case. Border
adds IsUnbordered and IsLongestBorder alongside IsBorder.isFactor (Sec-
tion 3.1) and not_isBorder_self. Conjugacy establishes reflexivity, symmetry,
and length preservation under cyclic rotation. Period includes the trivial full-
length period (hasPeriod_length) and an equivalence characterization of primi-
tivity (isPrimitive_iff). Morphism covers application over concatenation and
powers, composition, classification relationships between coding, uniform, and
non-erasing morphisms, and preservation of factor, prefix, and suffix relations
under morphism application.
22      Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar

B    Evaluation suite: Additional details

Table 9 lists every theorem in the suite together with its module, difficulty label,
and per-backbone pass/fail outcomes.

                      Table 9: Evaluation results on the CoW suite, per theorem.

# Theorem                                               Module        Type      Kimi Claude DeepSeek
 1 word_length_eq_zero_iff                              Word         Easy         ✓        ✓          ✓
 2 word_length_pos_of_ne_nil                            Word         Easy         ✓        ✓          ✓
 3 word_concat_right_cancel                             Word         Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
 4 word_concat_left_cancel                              Word         Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
 5 word_pow_two_length                                  Word         Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
 6 word_pow_succ_left                                   Word         Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
 7 pow_ne_empty_of_ne_empty                             Word         Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
 8 concat_eq_nil_iff                                    Word         Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
 9 pow_eq_nil_iff                                       Word         Medium       ✓        ×          ✓
10 pow_comm_concat                                      Word         Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
11 pow_injective_of_ne_empty                            Word         Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
12 pow_add_length_eq                                    Word         Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
13 prefix_of_concat                                     Factor       Easy         ✓        ✓          ✓
14 suffix_of_concat                                     Factor       Easy         ✓        ✓          ✓
15 prefix_of_factor_is_factor                           Factor       Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
16 prefix_antisymm                                      Factor       Medium       ✓        ✓          ×
17 suffix_antisymm                                      Factor       Medium       ✓        ×          ×
18 suffix_of_factor_is_factor                           Factor       Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
19 prefix_concat_right                                  Factor       Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
20 suffix_concat_left                                   Factor       Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
21 factor_of_concat_left                                Factor       Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
22 factor_of_concat_right                               Factor       Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
23 prefix_of_pow_succ                                   Factor       Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
24 prefix_of_pow_le                                     Factor       Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
25 suffix_of_pow_le                                     Factor       Medium       ×        ×          ✓
26 prefix_eq_of_length_eq                               Factor       Hard         ✓        ✓          ✓
27 prefix_suffix_concat_partition                       Factor       Hard         ✓        ×          ×
28 proper_prefix_irrefl                                 ProperPrefix Easy         ✓        ✓          ✓
29 proper_prefix_ne                                     ProperPrefix Easy         ✓        ✓          ✓
30 prefix_lt_of_length_lt                               ProperPrefix Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
31 proper_prefix_trans                                  ProperPrefix Medium       ✓        ✓          ×
32 proper_prefix_concat_ne_nil                          ProperPrefix Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
33 proper_prefix_of_prefix_of_proper_prefix             ProperPrefix Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
34 proper_prefix_of_proper_prefix_of_prefix             ProperPrefix Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
35 proper_prefix_witness                                ProperPrefix Medium       ✓        ✓          ×
36 proper_prefix_witness_is_suffix                      ProperPrefix Medium       ✓        ✓          ✓
                                                                                       continued on next page
        LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair   23

Table 9 continued
# Theorem                                         Module       Type    Kimi Claude DeepSeek
37 proper_prefix_double_lt                   ProperPrefix Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
38 proper_suffix_irrefl                      ProperSuffix Easy          ✓       ✓          ✓
39 proper_suffix_ne                          ProperSuffix Easy          ✓       ✓          ✓
40 suffix_lt_of_length_lt                    ProperSuffix Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
41 proper_suffix_trans                       ProperSuffix Medium        ✓       ✓          ×
42 proper_suffix_concat_ne_nil               ProperSuffix Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
43 proper_suffix_of_suffix_of_proper_suffix ProperSuffix Medium         ✓       ✓          ✓
44 proper_suffix_of_proper_suffix_of_suffix ProperSuffix Medium         ✓       ✓          ×
45 proper_suffix_witness                     ProperSuffix Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
46 proper_suffix_witness_is_prefix           ProperSuffix Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
47 proper_suffix_double_lt                   ProperSuffix Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
48 border_is_proper_prefix                   Border       Easy          ✓       ✓          ✓
49 border_is_proper_suffix                   Border       Easy          ✓       ✓          ✓
50 border_ne_word                            Border       Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
51 border_empty_iff                          Border       Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
52 longest_border_length_unique              Border       Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
53 not_unbordered_iff_exists_nonempty_border Border       Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
54 not_border_of_length_ge                   Border       Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
55 border_of_prefix_suffix                   Border       Medium        ✓       ✓          ×
56 border_nonempty_implies_length_ge_two     Border       Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
57 border_imp_not_unbordered                 Border       Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
58 border_of_border_is_border                Border       Hard          ✓       ✓          ✓
59 border_period_duality                     Border       Hard          ✓       ×          ×
60 conjugate_concat                          Conjugacy Easy             ✓       ✓          ✓
61 conjugate_of_eq                           Conjugacy Easy             ✓       ✓          ✓
62 conjugate_symm_iff                        Conjugacy Medium           ✓       ✓          ✓
63 conjugate_empty_iff                       Conjugacy Medium           ✓       ✓          ✓
64 conjugate_concat_rotate                   Conjugacy Medium           ✓       ✓          ✓
65 conjugate_preserves_ne_empty              Conjugacy Medium           ✓       ✓          ✓
66 conjugate_pow_rotate                      Conjugacy Medium           ✓       ✓          ✓
67 conjugate_trans                           Conjugacy Hard             ✓       ✓          ×
68 conjugate_pow_of_conjugate                Conjugacy Hard             ✓       ×          ✓
69 primitive_length_pos                      Period       Easy          ✓       ✓          ×
70 hasPeriod_of_short                        Period       Easy          ✓       ✓          ×
71 isPrimitive_of_length_one                 Period       Medium        ✓       ✓          ×
72 minimalPeriod_unique                      Period       Medium        ✓       ✓          ×
73 pow_two_not_primitive                     Period       Medium        ✓       ✓          ✓
74 primitive_minimal_period_is_length        Period       Hard          ×       ×          ×
75 hasPeriod_concat_self                     Period       Hard          ✓       ×          ×
76 hasPeriod_mul_of_hasPeriod                Period       Hard          ✓       ✓          ×
77 period_of_prefix                          Period       Hard          ✓       ×          ×
78 hasPeriod_pow_length                      Period       Hard          ×       ×          ×
                                                                            continued on next page
24       Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar

Table 9 continued
# Theorem                                              Module        Type      Kimi Claude DeepSeek
79 morphism_cons                                       Morphism      Easy        ✓    ✓       ×
80 coding_preserves_length                             Morphism      Medium      ✓    ✓       ×
81 identity_morphism                                   Morphism      Medium      ✓    ✓       ×
82 nonErasing_preserves_ne_empty                       Morphism      Medium      ✓    ✓       ×
83 uniform_pow_length                                  Morphism      Medium      ✓    ✓       ×
84 morphism_length_cons                                Morphism      Medium      ✓    ✓       ✓
85 comp_nonErasing                                     Morphism      Hard        ✓    ✓       ×
86 coding_comp_coding                                  Morphism      Hard        ✓    ✓       ✓
87 uniform_comp                                        Morphism      Hard        ✓    ✓       ×
88 morphism_preserves_proper_prefix_ne                 Morphism      Hard        ✓    ✓       ×
89 morphism_preserves_proper_suffix_ne                 Morphism      Hard        ✓    ✓       ✓
90 border_preserved_by_coding                          Morphism      Hard        ✓    ✓       ×
Pass@1 (Total: 90)                                                            96.7% 88.9%   68.9%




Table 10: LAMP pass@1 on the CoW Evaluation Suite, by module and backbone.
                 Module         # Theorems Kimi Claude DeepSeek
                 Word               12    100.0% 91.7% 100.0%
                 Factor             15    93.3% 80.0% 80.0%
                 ProperPrefix       10    100.0% 100.0% 80.0%
                 ProperSuffix       10    100.0% 100.0% 80.0%
                 Border             12    100.0% 91.7% 83.3%
                 Conjugacy           9    100.0% 88.9% 88.9%
                 Period             10     80.0% 60.0% 10.0%
                 Morphism           12    100.0% 100.0% 25.0%
                 Overall           90     96.7% 88.9% 68.9%




C      Representative result: border–period duality

To illustrate LAMP’s input/output behavior concretely, we show the unsolved
input and verified output for border_period_duality (Table 9, #59), the clas-
sical result that a border of length |b| induces a period of length |w| − |b| [24].
The Orchestrator’s edit localization (Section 3.3) means only the proof body
changes between input and output; the theorem signature is never touched.
    The unsolved input provided to the proposed system is as follows:
1    theorem b order_ period _dual ity { b w : Word α} ( h : IsBorder
         b w) :
        LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair           25

2      HasPeriod w ( w . length - b . length ) := by
3    sorry

    LAMP patches only the region after := by, producing the following kernel-
verified proof, which chains a prefix decomposition and a suffix decomposition
of w through the Border, Factor, and Period modules:
1  theorem b order_ period _dual ity { b w : Word α} ( h : IsBorder
       b w) :
 2      HasPeriod w ( w . length - b . length ) := by
 3   have h1 : b < p w := h .1
 4   have h2 : b < s w := h .2
 5   obtain ⟨ x , hw1 , hxne ⟩ := ( IsProperPrefix . def b w ) . mp h1
 6   obtain ⟨ y , hw2 , hyne ⟩ := ( IsProperSuffix . iff b w ) . mp h2
 7   have hlen1 : w . length = b . length + x . length := by
 8      rw [ hw1 ]; simp [ List . length_append ]
 9   have hlen2 : w . length = y . length + b . length := by
10      rw [ hw2 ]; simp [ List . length_append ]
11   have hp_eq_xlen : w . length - b . length = x . length := by
12      rw [ hlen1 ]; omega
13   have hp_eq_ylen : w . length - b . length = y . length := by
14      rw [ hlen2 ]; omega
15   constructor
16   · rw [ hp_eq_xlen ]
17      apply List . length _pos_ iff_ne _nil . mpr
18      exact hxne
19   · intro i hi
20      have hib : i < b . length := by omega
21      have hw_i : w . get ? i = b . get ? i := by
22        rw [ hw1 ]; simp [ List . getElem ? _append , hib ]
23      have hw_ip : w . get ? ( i + ( w . length - b . length ) ) = b . get
            ? i := by
24        rw [ hp_eq_ylen , hw2 ]
25        have hiy : i + y . length ≥ y . length := by omega
26        have hget : ( y ++ b ) . get ? ( i + y . length )
27             = b . get ? ( i + y . length - y . length ) := by
28           simp [ List . getElem ? _append , hiy ]
29        rw [ hget ]
30        have hid : i + y . length - y . length = i := by omega
31        rw [ hid ]
32      exact hw_i . trans hw_ip . symm

    Note that the border-period duality is universally treated as a trivial remark
in the literature (e.g., Remark 1.1 in [32]; “well known” in [24]), yet a machine-
checked proof requires an explicit witness linking the prefix and suffix overlap
to the period offset. The proposed formalisation above makes this step precise.
