                                                        Learning What to Remember:
                                              A Cognitively Grounded Multi-Factor Value Model
                                                             for Agentic Memory
                                                                                  Zhibao Chen∗1 and Qian Cheng2
                                                                              1
                                                                                  Huatai Securities, Nanjing, China
                                                                                          2




arXiv:2606.12945v2 [cs.AI] 20 Jun 2026
                                                                                            OneBeget.com



                                                                                               Abstract
                                               Long-running LLM agents accumulate interaction histories far larger than any context window, forcing a
                                               standing decision: what to encode deeply, what to forget, and what to retrieve under a fixed memory
                                               budget. Production memory systems answer with semantic similarity to the current query or recency.
                                               We argue both are mis-specified for the governing decision, because the forgetting decision is made at
                                               consolidation time,P  before the future query is known. We propose a multi-factor memory value
                                               function V (m) =         w f (m) over seven interpretable factors — emotional intensity, goal relevance,
                                                                       i i i
                                               value alignment, self/user relevance, task utility, reliability, and usage history — each a determinant
                                               of human retention drawn from cognitive psychology (value-directed remembering, levels of processing,
                                               adaptive memory, emotional consolidation), whose weights are learned from a downstream objective
                                               (gold-evidence retention here; task-QA return in general) by a gradient-free optimiser, and whose single
                                               scalar uniformly controls encoding depth, forget risk, and retrieval rank. We make a methodological
                                               point that reframes how memory retention is measured: on the LongMemEval benchmark, scoring goal
                                               relevance against the held-out evaluation question (an oracle that peeks at the future query) saturates
                                               gold-evidence retention at ≈ 0.98 for similarity alone — this measures retrieval, not forgetting. In
                                               the realistic blind regime, where the consolidation policy never sees the evaluation question, a learned
                                               multi-factor value retains 0.770 ± 0.011 of gold evidence across all 479 usable cases, versus 0.657 for
                                               uniform weights, 0.518 for the best single factor, and 0.368 for recency — a per-case bootstrap places
                                               every paired gap’s 95% confidence interval above zero, and a neural network over the same factors ties the
                                               linear model, so the interpretable value is not a compromise. The learned blind weights are interpretable
                                               — reliability, emotional intensity, and self/user relevance dominate, while query-time goal similarity is
                                               correctly down-weighted for the forgetting decision. A controlled synthetic task with planted confounds
                                               confirms the learner recovers a separating weighting (1.00 retention) where uniform weighting trusts the
                                               confounds and fails (0.62). The substrate is open-source; all reported experiments run on a single CPU
                                               with no API calls.


                                         1     Introduction
                                         An LLM agent deployed over days or weeks accumulates an interaction history far larger than any context
                                         window. It cannot attend to everything, so on every consolidation step it makes a triage decision: which
                                         observations to encode (and how deeply), which to forget, and which to retrieve when a new task arrives.
                                         This decision is not cosmetic — it determines whether the agent remembers a user’s stated preference three
                                         weeks later, whether it recalls the one reliable fact among a hundred distractors, and whether its working
                                         memory is dominated by recent chatter or by durable, high-value knowledge.
                                             Production memory stacks answer this triage with one of two single-factor policies. Retrieval-augmented
                                         systems rank stored items by semantic similarity to the current query [8, 11]; time-to-live and sliding-window
                                             ∗ Corresponding author: maxzhibao@gmail.com




                                                                                                   1
schemes rank by recency. Both are intuitive and both are mis-specified for the governing decision. Similarity-
to-query is only defined at retrieval time, once the query exists — but the forgetting decision is made earlier,
at consolidation, when the future query is unknown. Recency is query-agnostic but discards the common
case of an old-but-important fact (a user’s allergy, a project constraint) in favour of recent low-value chatter.
Neither policy has a notion of how useful a memory is to future behaviour.
    Human memory is not single-factor. Decades of work show that what survives forgetting is governed by
the value of an item: people preferentially retain information tagged as high-value even at the expense of
low-value detail [3]; depth of processing — semantic, self-referential, and goal-relevant encoding — predicts
durability over shallow perceptual encoding [5, 14]; emotional arousal modulates consolidation [10]; and the
very shape of forgetting tracks the need-probability of information in the environment, an adaptive rather
than passive decay [1, 6]. The common thread is that retention is driven by a multi-factor estimate of an
item’s expected future usefulness, not by any single cue.
    We bring this principle to agentic memory. We define a multi-factor memory value function
                                                       X
                                             V (m) =      wi fi (m),                                         (1)
                                                        i

a weighted combination of seven interpretable factors — emotional intensity, goal relevance, value alignment,
self/user relevance, task utility, reliability, and usage history. A single scalar V (m) then uniformly controls
all three triage operations: encoding depth, forget risk, and retrieval rank. Crucially, the weights wi are not
hand-set: they are learned from a downstream objective by a gradient-free optimiser, because the encode →
forget → retrieve → answer pipeline is non-differentiable. That objective is a stand-in for task return; here we
use gold-evidence retention under a fixed memory budget (an API-free proxy), while a fully instrumented
setting would use downstream QA accuracy. The value function is thus fit to maximise the chosen objective,
in the spirit of expected-utility credit assignment [16].
    Along the way we surface a methodological pitfall in how memory retention is commonly measured, and
turn it into a clean experimental contrast. On the LongMemEval benchmark [17], the “gold” evidence for a
question is, by construction, defined relative to that question. If a memory policy is allowed to score goal
relevance as the cosine similarity between a stored turn and the held-out evaluation question — an oracle
that peeks at the future query — then similarity alone retains essentially all gold evidence (≈ 0.98), and no
multi-factor advantage is possible. But this measures retrieval, not forgetting: a real agent has not seen the
evaluation question at consolidation time. In the realistic blind regime, where goal relevance is computed only
against information available at consolidation (the topic of the ongoing session), the picture inverts: similarity
collapses to near-chance and a learned multi-factor value retains gold far better than any single-factor baseline.
Separating these two regimes is, we argue, necessary for any honest evaluation of a forgetting policy.

Contributions.
1. A multi-factor memory value function (eq. (1)) for the expected usefulness of a memory to future
   agent behaviour, with seven interpretable factors, and a single scalar that uniformly drives encoding depth,
   forgetting, and retrieval (section 3).
2. A learned-weight formulation (A2): a gradient-free optimiser fits w to a downstream objective (gold-
   evidence retention here; task-QA return in general), replacing hand-tuned resistances with credit-assigned
   weights (section 3.3).
3. A methodological contrast — oracle vs. blind forgetting — that separates retrieval from retention and
   shows why query-defined retention benchmarks cannot, on their own, demonstrate a forgetting advantage
   (section 4.2).
4. Empirical results on all 479 usable LongMemEval-S cases: in the blind regime, learned multi-factor
   value retains 0.770 ± 0.011 of gold evidence versus 0.657 (uniform), 0.518 (best single factor), and 0.368
   (recency), with every per-case bootstrap gap above zero; a neural MLP over the same factors ties the
   linear model (+0.003), so the interpretable linear value suffices (section 4.2). A synthetic confound study
   validates the learner (section 4.1).
5. An open-source, CPU-only substrate and evaluation harness; every reported number reproduces with
   no API calls.


                                                        2
2     Related Work
Memory systems for LLM agents. Retrieval-augmented generation retrieves passages by embedding
similarity to the query [8], and most agent memory frameworks inherit this ranking. MemGPT [11] treats
context as a paged virtual memory with explicit eviction, but eviction is driven by recency and capacity
pressure rather than a learned value. Generative Agents [12] introduce a retrieval score that blends recency,
importance, and relevance — importantly, a multi-factor score — but the importance term is produced ad
hoc by an LLM rating 1–10, the weights are fixed and hand-set, and the score governs only retrieval, not
encoding depth or forgetting. MemoryBank [18] adds an Ebbinghaus-inspired decay so older memories fade
unless reinforced, again with hand-set dynamics. MemOS [9] frames memory as an operating-system resource
with scheduling and lifecycle management, motivating a principled value signal but not learning one; the
broader cognitive-architecture view of language agents [15] similarly treats memory as a managed module
without prescribing how its contents are valued. Across this line of work, the triage signal is typically (i)
single-factor (similarity or recency), or (ii) multi-factor but hand-weighted and confined to retrieval. We
differ on both counts: our value is multi-factor, its weights are learned from a downstream objective, and the
same scalar drives encoding, forgetting, and retrieval.

Value- and need-based retention in cognition. The factors we combine are not arbitrary; each corre-
sponds to a robust determinant of human retention. Value-directed remembering shows people strategically
retain high-value items and shed low-value detail [3]. Levels-of-processing [5] and the self-reference effect
[14] establish that semantically, goal-, and self-relevant encoding is more durable than shallow encoding.
Emotional arousal modulates consolidation [10]. The rational analysis of memory [1] reframes forgetting itself
as adaptive: the retention function mirrors the environmental need-probability of information. Relatedly, the
metamemory and desirable-difficulties tradition argues that forgetting and selective retention serve memory
rather than merely degrade it [2]. Our contribution is to operationalise this multi-determinant view as a
single learned scalar for an artificial agent, rather than to model human data — a companion paper treats
the cognitive-modeling angle; here the target is engineering utility.

Learning what to remember. Reinforcement learning provides the natural framing for fitting a memory
policy to downstream outcome: the value of retaining an item is its marginal contribution to future return
[16]. Because the encode–forget–retrieve–answer pipeline is non-differentiable (discrete keep/drop decisions,
an external answerer), we fit weights with a gradient-free black-box optimiser [7] rather than backpropagation.
This keeps the value function low-dimensional (seven weights) and interpretable, in contrast to end-to-end
learned memory controllers whose policies are opaque.

Evaluating memory. LongMemEval [17] is the most directly relevant benchmark: 500 questions over long
multi-session chat histories, with gold-evidence turns flagged inside a haystack of distractor sessions. We use
it as our real-data testbed. Our methodological observation — that scoring relevance against the held-out
question conflates retrieval with retention, and that a forgetting policy must be evaluated blind to the future
query — applies to any retention metric built on query-defined gold, and to our knowledge has not been
made explicit in this setting.

3     Method
3.1   A multi-factor memory value
Each memory m (a stored turn or consolidated item) is summarised by a factor vector f (m) ∈ [0, 1]7 and
scored by a learned linear value
                                              7
                                              X
                                    V (m) =         wi fi (m),   w ∈ R7≥0 .                                 (2)
                                              i=1

The seven factors are chosen so that each is an interpretable, independently computable determinant of
expected future usefulness (table 1). We regard eq. (2) as a learned reward model for memory: V (m) estimates


                                                        3
a memory’s contribution to future task return, and its weights are fit by policy optimisation (section 3.3)
rather than set by hand.
    Linearity here is a deliberate design choice, not a limitation we tolerate, for three reasons. (i) Capacity
match: with seven interpretable factors and limited, indirect supervision, a seven-parameter value is the
appropriate capacity; richer function classes overfit this regime (section 6). (ii) Auditability: the learned
weights wi are the explanation — a deployment can read off which factors a given workload rewards
(section 4.2), which a black-box scorer cannot provide and which is a practical requirement for a memory
controller. (iii) Decision-theoretic reading: eq. (2) is the first-order (additive-utility) approximation of a
memory’s expected contribution to return — the principled starting point before modelling factor interactions.
More generally the value is any learned scoring function V (m) = gθ (f (m)), and eq. (2) is its interpretable
linear instance; a neural gθ is validated as an interaction ablation in section 4.2 — an MLP over the same
factors ties the linear model, confirming they combine near-additively, so the linear value stays the default.

Table 1: The seven memory-value factors. The right column marks which factors are populated by the
API-free annotator used in our experiments; the remaining three require a value profile, an LLM judge, or
access logs and are held at 0 here (section 6).

              Factor                    Definition (API-free form)                            Live here?
              emotional intensity       |Vaff | · A from a lexical/structural extractor          yes
                                        1
              goal relevance            2
                                          (1 + cos(em , egoal ))                                 yes
                                        1
              self/user relevance       2
                                          (1 + cos(em , µuser ))                                 yes
              reliability               provenance heuristic (user-stated > model-stated)        yes
              value alignment           match to a value profile (SOUL)                         no (0)
              task utility              marginal task-success contribution (LLM judge)          no (0)
              usage history             r/(1 + r), r = retrieval count                          no (0)


    Here em is a sentence embedding of the memory text (all-MiniLM-L6-v2, 384-dim; 13), µuser is the running
centroid of the user’s turns (a query-agnostic “what this user is about” anchor), and egoal is the embedding
of the agent’s active goal. The goal anchor is the pivot of our central experiment (section 4.2): at retrieval
time it is the query, but at consolidation time the agent must use a query-agnostic proxy.

3.2   One value, three operations
The single scalar V (m) drives all three memory operations (fig. 1), replacing the separate, hand-tuned rules
of prior systems.

                        factors f (m)

                        emotion                                      encoding depth (4 tiers)
                        goal rel.
                        value align.                  V (m)
                        self/user rel.                P                forget score (Eq. 3)
                                                  =       wf
                                                         i i i
                        task util.
                        reliability
                        usage                                             retrieval rank


Figure 1: One value, three operations. A single learned scalar V (m) = i wi fi (m) over seven factors
                                                                                P
drives encoding depth, forgetting, and retrieval, replacing three separately tuned rules. The weights wi are fit
to a downstream objective (section 3.3).


Encoding depth. Following levels-of-processing       [5], higher-value items are encoded more deeply. We map
the normalised value V̄ (m) = V (m)/ i wi ∈ [0, 1] to four encoding tiers (shallow / semantic / schematic /
                                       P
meta) by thresholds {0.20, 0.45, 0.70}, so deeper encoding is allocated to higher-value memories at write time.



                                                             4
Forgetting.    The forget score combines universal time/access dynamics with a value-driven resistance:

                                  forget(m) = (∆t)0.7 · 1+r
                                                         1
                                                            ·  1
                                                               V (m) ,                                     (3)
                                              | {z } |{z} |1+β{z   }
                                                  recency   usage value resistance

where ∆t is age in days and r is retrieval count. High value V (m) multiplicatively resists forgetting,
generalising the emotion-only resistance of prior cognitive memory models to the full factor set. Items with
the highest forget score are dropped first when the store exceeds budget.

Retrieval. At query time the same value contributes to the retrieval rank, alongside query-specific similarity
and mood congruence, so that durable high-value memories are surfaced preferentially. Because our central
evaluation isolates the budgeted keep/drop decision (section 4.2), we rank candidates directly by V (m) —
using the regime-specific goal anchor defined there (the question under oracle, the session topic under blind)
— and report retention of the gold set.

3.3   Learning the weights from task return
The weights w are learned, not hand-set. Let a memory policy parameterised by w run the encode → forget →
retrieve → answer pipeline on a set of training episodes and return a scalar R(w) (here, mean gold-evidence
retention under a fixed keep budget; in a fully API-gated setting, downstream QA accuracy). Because the
pipeline contains discrete keep/drop decisions and an external answerer, R is non-differentiable in w. We
therefore maximise it with a gradient-free stochastic hill-climb (algorithm 1), a lightweight stand-in for
CMA-ES [7] appropriate to a seven-dimensional search.

Algorithm 1 Gradient-free weight learning (A2).
 1: w ← 1                                                                                       ▷ uniform init
 2: R⋆ ← R(w); σ ← σ0
 3: for t = 1 . . . T do
 4:    w′ ← w
 5:    for each factor i do
 6:        if rand() < 0.5 then wi′ ← max(0, wi + N (0, σ))
 7:        end if
 8:    end for
 9:    R′ ← R(w′ )
10:    if R′ > R⋆ then w ← w′ ; R⋆ ← R′
11:    end if
12:    σ ←γσ                                                                                         ▷ anneal
13: end for
14: return w


    The objective is evaluated on a held-in training split and the learned w is reported on a disjoint test
split; best-so-far return is monotone non-decreasing by construction. To keep the learned weights honest and
interpretable, we restrict the search to the factors actually populated by the annotator in a given setting
— otherwise the optimiser assigns arbitrary non-zero weight to factors that are identically 0 and therefore
multiply out of eq. (2).

4     Experiments
We ask two questions. First, can the gradient-free learner actually recover a useful weighting when factors
are confounded (section 4.1)? Second — the headline — does a learned multi-factor value retain gold
evidence better than single-factor baselines on a real long-horizon benchmark, once we evaluate forgetting
honestly (section 4.2)? Both experiments are CPU-only and use no API calls; embeddings come from a local
sentence-transformer [13].




                                                        5
4.1   Synthetic confound study: does the learner work?
Design. Each synthetic case contains 4 gold items and 16 distractors. Gold items are old but carry the
true signal (high goal relevance, task utility, reliability); distractors are recent and carry two deliberately
planted confounds (high value alignment and self relevance) plus high emotional noise. A policy that trusts
all factors equally is misled by the confounds; a recency- or emotion-only policy keeps the distractors. We
learn w on 60 training cases to maximise gold retention at keep-fraction κ = 0.4, and report retention on 60
disjoint test cases.

Result. Table 2 shows that the learner recovers a weighting that retains all gold (1.00) on held-out cases,
while uniform weighting — which trusts the confounds equally — retains only 0.62, and the emotion-, self-,
and recency-only policies we test retain 0.00 (they rank the recent, emotionally noisy distractors first). The
learned weights place the largest mass on the true-signal factors (reliability 1.36, task utility 0.88, goal
relevance 0.49) and drive the value-alignment confound down to 0.09; the self-relevance confound is not fully
suppressed (1.01), but the true-signal mass alone suffices to separate gold from distractors. This is a sanity
check, not the central claim: it shows only that the seven-dimensional black-box search can fit a separating
mixture where uniform weighting — and the single-factor policies we test — cannot. We do not test goal-,
task-, or reliability-only baselines on the synthetic case; the real-data study below tests all four live single
factors directly.

Table 2: Synthetic confound study: gold retention on 60 held-out cases (keep 40%). Gold is signalled by
goal/task/reliability; distractors carry planted value-alignment and self-relevance confounds.

                                         Policy             Gold retention
                                         learned_V                   1.00
                                         uniform_V                   0.62
                                         emotion_only                0.00
                                         self_only                   0.00
                                         recency_only                0.00



4.2   Real LongMemEval: blind vs. oracle forgetting
Setup. We use LongMemEval-S [17]: questions over long multi-session chat histories (∼ 500 turns per case)
with gold-evidence turns flagged inside a haystack of distractor sessions. Of the 500 questions, 479 carry
at least one flagged gold turn; we use all 479. For each case we annotate every turn with the four API-free
factors (emotional intensity, goal relevance, self/user relevance, reliability; table 1), rank turns by V (m), keep
the top κ = 30%, and measure the fraction of flagged gold turns retained. Weights are learned over the
live factors on a training split and evaluated on a disjoint test split; we report mean ± standard deviation
over 20 resampled 50/50 splits (240 test cases per rep), and confirm significance with a per-case bootstrap
below. This isolates the budgeted keep/drop (retention) decision: we do not run an answerer or the full
encode/forget/retrieve loop here, and we report gold-evidence retention rather than QA accuracy (section 6).
To pre-compute the factor annotations once and reuse them across all configurations, we cache the per-turn
factors; every number below is API-free and reproduces on a single CPU.

The oracle/blind distinction. Gold in LongMemEval is defined relative to the evaluation question, so
the goal-relevance factor can be computed two ways:
• Oracle: egoal is the embedding of the held-out evaluation question. This peeks at the future query — a
   retrieval signal, unavailable when the agent actually forgets.
• Blind: egoal is the centroid of the ongoing session’s user turns (“what is this session about”), the
   information genuinely available at consolidation time.
All other factors are identical across regimes; only the goal anchor moves. This is exactly the difference
between measuring retrieval and measuring forgetting.


                                                        6
Result. Table 3 and fig. 2 report both regimes. In the oracle regime, goal relevance alone retains 0.979 of
gold and the learned value reaches 0.993 (uniform 0.939) — all near the ceiling: once you can score similarity
to the question, similarity is all you need, and there is no room for a multi-factor advantage. This is the honest
negative that a query-defined retention metric produces, and it is why such metrics cannot, by themselves,
evaluate a forgetting policy.
    In the realistic blind regime the ordering inverts. Goal-relevance-to-session collapses to 0.286 (near
the 0.30 chance floor), emotion to 0.201, recency to 0.368, reliability to 0.497, and self-relevance — the
strongest single factor — to 0.518: no single cue identifies the future needle without the question. The
learned multi-factor value retains 0.770 ± 0.011, beating uniform weighting (0.657), the best single factor
(self, 0.518), and recency (0.368). A per-case bootstrap (B=103 , resampling the 479 cases) puts the paired
gaps at +0.120 vs. uniform (95% CI [0.091, 0.149]), +0.402 vs. recency ([0.350, 0.452]), and +0.277 vs.
reliability-only ([0.235, 0.319]); every interval excludes zero, and the learned policy wins on all 20 resampled
splits. Multi-factor value’s advantage is thus precisely where it should be: in the query-agnostic forgetting
decision, not in query-defined retrieval.

                                                     Blind vs. oracle forgetting (keep 30%, 479 cases, 20 splits; mean ± 1 std)
                                     1.0                                                                                  chance (0.30)
                                                                                                                          oracle (peeks at Q)
                                                                                                                          blind (realistic)




           gold-evidence retention
                                     0.8      0.77

                                     0.6

                                     0.4

                                     0.2

                                     0.0
                                           learned         uniform      reliability       self      recency        goal           emotion
                                              V               V            only           only        only         only            only

Figure 2: Blind vs. oracle gold retention (keep 30%; all 479 usable LongMemEval-S cases; 20 resampled
splits, mean ±1 std). Under the oracle goal anchor (cosine to the held-out question), similarity alone saturates
retention — a retrieval ceiling. Under the realistic blind anchor (session topic only), every single-factor and
recency baseline collapses toward the chance floor, while the learned multi-factor value retains 0.77. Recency
has no oracle variant.


Table 3: LongMemEval gold retention (keep 30%; all 479 usable cases; mean ± std over 20 resampled test
splits, 240 cases each). Oracle scores goal relevance against the held-out question (retrieval ceiling); blind
scores it against the session topic (realistic forgetting). Self-, emotion-, and reliability-only are regime-invariant
by construction (only the goal anchor moves).

                                              Policy                         Oracle (peeks at Q)       Blind (realistic)
                                              learned_V                           0.993 ± 0.005         0.770 ± 0.011
                                              uniform_V                           0.939 ± 0.011          0.657 ± 0.011
                                              self_only                           0.518 ± 0.017          0.518 ± 0.017
                                              reliability_only                    0.497 ± 0.020          0.497 ± 0.020
                                              goal_only                           0.979 ± 0.006          0.286 ± 0.021
                                              emotion_only                        0.201 ± 0.017          0.201 ± 0.017
                                              recency_only                              —                0.368 ± 0.021
                                              random (keep 30%)                         —                    0.300




                                                                                      7
Learned weights are interpretable. The mean learned blind weights are reliability 0.64, emotional
intensity 0.55, self/user relevance 0.23, and goal relevance 0.00. The policy discovered, from retention alone,
that LongMemEval gold is dominated by reliable, user-stated, often self-relevant facts — and that session-topic
similarity (the blind goal anchor) is useless for predicting the future needle, so it is driven to zero. This is
the value-directed signal a recency or similarity policy structurally cannot represent, and it accounts for the
+0.11 to +0.40 retention gap. (Self-relevance is the best standalone factor in table 3 yet reliability carries the
larger learned weight: the weights measure each factor’s marginal contribution within the learned mixture,
not its solo ranking power.)

Does a neural value help? A nonlinear ablation. Our value is linear by design (section 3.1); a natural
worry is that it leaves performance on the table by ignoring factor interactions (e.g. emotion mattering only
for self-relevant turns). We test this directly: we replace the linear value with a small MLP gθ over the
same four live factors ([16, 16] hidden units), trained by a pairwise logistic ranking loss (gold ranked above
non-gold within each case), and evaluate it under the identical blind protocol. The MLP retains 0.773 ± 0.011
versus the linear model’s 0.770 ± 0.011 — a paired difference of +0.003 ± 0.013, winning on only 55% of
splits, i.e. a statistical tie. On these four live factors the nonlinear capacity buys nothing: the factors combine
near-additively, so the interpretable linear model is not a compromise but the right choice. The MLP is an
ablation, not a replacement.

The advantage is not budget-specific. Figure 3 sweeps the keep fraction κ ∈ {0.1, . . . , 0.5}. The learned
value leads at every realistic forgetting budget (κ ≤ 0.4); only at κ=0.5 — a near-trivial 50% keep, where
all factor-based policies saturate at 0.87–0.90 — does the best single factor draw level. The multi-factor
advantage is thus largest exactly where forgetting is aggressive and the decision matters most.

                         Learned value leads at aggressive budgets; saturation at 50% keep (479 cases, 20 splits; mean +/- 1 std)
                                               1.0
                                                           learned V
                                                           uniform V
                                                           reliability only
                                               0.8         recency only




               blind gold-evidence retention
                                               0.6

                                               0.4

                                               0.2

                                               0.0
                                                     0.1                      0.2            0.3            0.4    0.5
                                                                                    keep fraction (kappa)

Figure 3: Keep-fraction sweep (blind regime, 479 cases, 20 splits, mean ±1 std). The learned multi-factor
value dominates uniform, reliability-only, and recency at every aggressive budget (κ ≤ 0.4); the gap closes
only at the near-trivial κ=0.5 where the benchmark saturates.



5    Discussion
One scalar, three operations. The practical appeal of eq. (2) is consolidation: a single learned value
replaces the separate, independently tuned rules that production systems use for write-time importance,
eviction, and retrieval ranking. A deployment exposes one seven-dimensional knob, and eq. (3) and the
encoding tiers inherit any change to it automatically. Because the value is linear, the learned weights are a


                                                                                          8
readable audit of the policy: section 4.2 shows the fitted policy says, in plain terms, “keep reliable user-stated
facts; do not trust session-topic similarity for forgetting.”

The oracle/blind lesson generalises. Our sharpest methodological point is independent of the value
function. Any retention metric whose gold set is defined relative to a future query will reward a policy that
scores relevance to that query — but that policy is unavailable at forgetting time. Reporting such numbers
measures an upper bound on retrieval, not the quality of forgetting. Evaluations of agent forgetting should
therefore (i) compute relevance only from information available at consolidation, and (ii) report the oracle
ceiling alongside, so the retrieval/retention gap is visible. The 0.979 → 0.286 collapse of goal-only between
our two regimes (table 3) is the size of the artefact a careless metric would hide.

Learned weights as a workload diagnostic. Because the weights are fit to the chosen objective, they
characterise the workload, not just the policy. On LongMemEval the signal is reliability and self-relevance; a
coding agent’s workload might instead reward task utility and goal relevance. The same harness, pointed at a
new return signal, yields a new interpretable weighting — a portable recipe for discovering what a given
agent should remember, rather than guessing it. This extends the hand-set recency/importance/relevance
blend of Generative Agents [12] in two ways: the blend is learned, and it governs encoding and forgetting,
not only retrieval.

6    Limitations
We are deliberately explicit about what the present results do and do not establish.

L1 — Retention is a proxy for end-task accuracy. Our metric is gold-evidence retention under a
keep budget, not downstream QA correctness. High retention is necessary for a correct answer that depends
on the evidence, but not sufficient: the answerer must also retrieve and use the retained turn. Measuring
final QA accuracy under each memory policy requires an answerer LLM and an LLM judge, which we leave
to an API-gated follow-up. The claim here is about what survives forgetting, not about answer quality.

L2 — Three of seven factors are inert in our annotator. Value alignment, task utility, and usage
history are held at 0 in the API-free setting (table 1): they need a value profile, an LLM judge, and access
logs respectively. The blind headline therefore uses only four live factors, and task utility — arguably the
most direct expected-utility signal — is exactly the one an answerer would unlock. Our result is thus a
conservative, four-factor, API-free estimate; the three inert factors might raise performance or, if noisy,
lower it, so we do not claim the full function is strictly better — only that a useful value signal is already
recoverable with no API budget.

L3 — Single benchmark and modality. We evaluate on LongMemEval-S (all 479 usable cases of the
500), English multi-session chat. Other agentic workloads — tool use, coding, web navigation — have different
gold structure and may favour different factors; we do not yet test them. The synthetic study controls
confounds but is, by design, not naturalistic.

L4 — The blind goal anchor is one choice among many. We proxy the consolidation-time goal
by the session’s user-turn centroid. Other query-agnostic anchors (an explicit task description, a running
objective stack) could carry more signal and would change the blind goal-relevance term. We claim the regime
distinction is essential, not that the session centroid is optimal.

L5 — Linear value and a simple optimiser. Equation (2) is linear. We tested whether this costs
accuracy by running a neural gθ ablation (section 4.2): a small MLP over the same factors, trained with a
learning-to-rank loss, ties the linear model (+0.003 ± 0.013), so on these factors linearity is not a compromise
— though a different factor set or workload could expose interactions the linear form cannot represent (e.g.
emotion mattering only for self-relevant items). The learner is a random-restart hill-climb, not CMA-ES; a
stronger optimiser could shift the fitted weights, though the blind result is stable across 20 resampled splits


                                                        9
and a per-case bootstrap (section 4.2) places every key gap’s 95% CI above zero. Because every downstream
operation consumes the value only through the scalar V (m), swapping the scoring function — linear or neural
— leaves the encoding/forgetting/retrieval machinery unchanged.

7    Conclusion
We argued that the standing triage decision in agentic memory — what to encode, forget, and retrieve under
a fixed budget — is mis-served by the single-factor similarity and recency policies in common use, because
the forgetting
         P decision is made before the future query is known. We proposed a multi-factor memory value
V (m) = i wi fi (m) whose weights are learned from a downstream objective (gold-evidence retention here;
task-QA return in general) and whose single scalar uniformly governs all three operations. On all 479 usable
LongMemEval-S cases, a learned multi-factor value retains 0.770 ± 0.011 of gold evidence in the realistic
blind-forgetting regime, versus 0.657 for uniform weighting, 0.518 for the best single factor, and 0.368 for
recency — every per-case bootstrap gap excludes zero, and a neural MLP over the same factors ties the linear
model, so the interpretable linear value is not a compromise. The learned weights recover the workload’s true
signal. We also showed why this advantage is invisible to a query-defined retention metric: under an oracle
that peeks at the evaluation question, similarity alone saturates retention and the multi-factor gap vanishes —
a distinction any honest evaluation of forgetting must draw.
    The immediate next step is to close the loop to end-task accuracy: fitting the weights to downstream QA
correctness (unlocking the task-utility factor) and measuring answer quality, not just retention, under each
policy. Beyond that, the same learned-value harness applied to tool-use and coding agents would test whether
the value-directed view of memory transfers across agentic workloads. The substrate, factor annotator, and
evaluation harness are open-source [4], and every number in this paper reproduces on a single CPU.

References
 [1] John R. Anderson and Lael J. Schooler. Reflections of the environment in memory. Psychological Science,
     2(6):396–408, 1991.

 [2] Robert A. Bjork. Memory and metamemory considerations in the training of human beings. In Janet
     Metcalfe and Arthur P. Shimamura, editors, Metacognition: Knowing about Knowing, pages 185–205.
     MIT Press, 1994.
 [3] Alan D. Castel. The adaptive and strategic use of memory by older adults: Evaluative processing and
     value-directed remembering. In Aaron S. Benjamin and Brian H. Ross, editors, Psychology of Learning
     and Motivation, volume 48, pages 225–270. Academic Press, 2007. doi: 10.1016/S0079-7421(07)48006-9.
 [4] Zhibao Chen. Learning-Multi-Factor-Memory: Open-source implementation of the multi-factor value
     model for agentic memory. https://github.com/zhibao-dev/Learning-Multi-Factor-Memory, 2026.
 [5] Fergus I. M. Craik and Robert S. Lockhart. Levels of processing: A framework for memory research.
     Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11(6):671–684, 1972.

 [6] Hermann Ebbinghaus. Über das Gedächtnis: Untersuchungen zur experimentellen Psychologie. Duncker
     & Humblot, Leipzig, 1885. English translation by Ruger & Bussenius, Teachers College, 1913.
 [7] Nikolaus Hansen. The CMA evolution strategy: A tutorial. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.00772, 2016.
     Tutorial reference for gradient-free black-box optimisation.

 [8] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
     Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela.
     Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
 [9] Zhiyu Li, Chenyang Xi, Chunyu Li, Ding Chen, Boyu Chen, Shichao Song, et al. MemOS: A memory
     OS for AI system, 2025.


                                                      10
[10] James L. McGaugh. Memory — a century of consolidation. Science, 287(5451):248–251, 2000.
[11] Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E.
     Gonzalez. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
[12] Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S.
     Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th
     Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST), 2023.
[13] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks.
     In Proceedings of EMNLP-IJCNLP, pages 3982–3992, 2019.
[14] T. B. Rogers, N. A. Kuiper, and W. S. Kirker. Self-reference and the encoding of personal information.
     Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(9):677–688, 1977.
[15] Theodore R. Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas L. Griffiths. Cognitive architectures
     for language agents. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024.
[16] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press, 2nd
     edition, 2018.
[17] Di Wu, Hongwei Wang, Wenhao Yu, Yuwei Zhang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Dong Yu. LongMemEval:
     Benchmarking chat assistants on long-term interactive memory. In International Conference on Learning
     Representations (ICLR), 2025. Metadata to be re-verified at submission.
[18] Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. MemoryBank: Enhancing large
     language models with long-term memory. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
     38(17):19724–19731, 2024.




                                                    11
