                                                What Makes Interaction Trajectories Effective for
                                                         Training Terminal Agents?


                                                Sidi Yang1 , Chaofan Tao2,† , Jierun Chen2 , Tiezheng Yu2 , Ruoyu Wang3 , Yuxin Jiang2 ,
                                                Yiming Du2 , Wendong Xu1 , Jing Xiong1 , Taiqiang Wu1 , Lifeng Shang2 , Xiao-Hui Li2 ,
                                                                                Ngai Wong1 , Haoli Bai2,†
                                            1                                    2
                                                The University of Hong Kong          Huawei Technologies 3 Nanyang Technological University




arXiv:2606.03461v1 [cs.AI] 2 Jun 2026
                                                                                     †
                                                                                       Corresponding authors
                                                                 Project: https://stephen0808.github.io/terminal-lego.github.io/



                                                                                           Abstract

                                                     Stronger code agents are commonly assumed to be superior teachers for post-
                                                     training, yet this assumption remains poorly disentangled from task difficulty,
                                                     harness design, and student capacity. We investigate this pedagogical link using
                                                     T ERMINAL -L EGO, a scalable pipeline that transforms multi-domain real-world is-
                                                     sues into environment-verified agentic tasks. Surprisingly, standalone performance
                                                     does not dictate teaching efficacy: while Claude Opus 4.6 achieves higher scores
                                                     on Terminal-Bench 2.0, students fine-tuned on trajectories from DeepSeek-V3.2,
                                                     a lower-scoring agent, exhibit significantly stronger generalization. We attribute
                                                     this "pedagogical paradox" to Environment-Grounded Supervision (EGS): trajec-
                                                     tories that explicitly expose inspect-act-verify behaviors through harness-visible
                                                     interactions allow students to internalize robust problem-solving routines rather
                                                     than fragile action sequences. Scaling analysis reveals exceptional data efficiency:
                                                     with only 15.3k T ERMINAL -L EGO trajectories, for example, Qwen3-32B achieves
                                                     a 24.3% score on Terminal-Bench 2.0, rivaling previous SOTA performance es-
                                                     tablished with over 30× the data volume. Our results suggest that the frontier of
                                                     agent post-training lies beyond mere outcome-matching, shifting the focus toward
                                                     "Harness Engineering", where the systematic design of environment-grounded in-
                                                     teraction structures serves as the primary catalyst for reproducible and generalizable
                                                     agentic intelligence.



                                        1        Introduction

                                        Code agents are undergoing a fundamental paradigm shift from static code generation toward
                                        autonomous, closed-loop interaction with development environments [5, 7, 9, 10, 13, 23, 27, 29]. In
                                        modern agentic workflows, exemplified by Cursor, Codex CLI [16], and Claude Code [3], a model
                                        is no longer judged solely by its final output, but by its ability to perceive complex environment
                                        states, execute interleaved actions, and iteratively verify outcomes. Terminal environments serve as a
                                        canonical testbed for this transition; they expose high-stakes skills such as dependency resolution,
                                        multi-file manipulation, and test-driven debugging through a unified, harness-mediated interface,
                                        offering a precise lens to study the mechanics of agentic reasoning.
                                        This shift fundamentally redefines the objectives of post-training. An agentic problem-solving
                                        trajectory is no longer a monolithic response but a sequential trace of environmental grounding,
                                        capturing how an agent inspects, reflects, and adapts. Current distillation and fine-tuning practices
                                        typically operate on the "Stronger-is-Better" assumption: the stronger the teacher, the better the

                                        Preprint.
        1          Teacher Strength (TB@2.0)            2       Student Performance after SFT                            3    Observation Support                   4        Targeted Observation Ratio
                                                                                                Qwen3-8B
                                                                                                Qwen3-32B
                                                                                                                              Relevant Observation
                                                                          5.6
                                                                                                                                                                                 Actions supported by
     Claude                                             Claude                                                                                                          15
    Opus 4.6                                   69.4    Opus 4.6                               15.5                            $ cat src/sutils.py                                     observation
                                                                                                                                                                                                         13.4
   Qwen3.5-                                            Qwen3.5-                 8.6
     Plus                              52.5              Plus                                    17.2                             Redundant Observation                 10                    7.3
                                                                                                                                                                                       6.5
                                                                                                                              $ ls /tmp/
                                                                                8.6
     GLM-5                              56.2            GLM-5
                                                                                                     19.5
                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                               2.5
   DeepSeek-                                          DeepSeek-                   10.5                                       >_     Action
     V3.2                       39.3                    V3.2                                            20.6         not                                  support
                                                                                                                   support    $ edit src/sutils.py                      0
                                                                                                                                                                               Claude Qwen3.5-       DeepSeek-
                                                                                                                                                                                               GLM-5
               0       20     40       60       80                0   5         10       15          20                                                                       Opus 4.6  Plus           V3.2




Figure 1: The Pedagogical Paradox: Discrepancy between standalone performance and teaching
efficacy. While Claude Opus 4.6 achieves the highest standalone score on Terminal-Bench 2.0, its tra-
jectories produce significantly weaker students compared to those from DeepSeek-V3.2. We attribute
this gap to the alignment between actions and environmental feedback: teachers that prioritize actions
rigorously supported by prior observations, a core property of Environment-Grounded Supervision,
provide robust, generalizable problem-solving routines that are more effective for student imitation
learning.


student. We challenge this notion by asking a critical, yet overlooked question: In the world of code
agents, is a model’s ability to solve a task truly the same as its ability to teach it?
We study this question under controlled and realistic conditions. Existing terminal-agent data
pipelines provide valuable but different substrates: TermiGen [31] injects errors into generated tasks,
TerminalTraj [25] mines executable repository trajectories, CLI-Gym [11] constructs tasks through
environment inversion, and Nemotron-Terminal [18] scales skill-based task synthesis. To isolate
trajectory teachability across teachers, we construct T ERMINAL -L EGO: a scalable pipeline that
extracts massive real StackOverflow issues and converts them into Docker-verified agentic terminal
tasks. Together with a fixed Terminus-2 harness, Terminal-Lego gives us a controlled substrate for
comparing terminal-agent trajectories under the same task difficulty and interaction interface.
Our investigation uncovers a striking pedagogical paradox: standalone mastery does not guarantee
teaching success. Under a matched-task setting, Claude Opus 4.6 [4] achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance as a standalone agent, yet its trajectories result in the least capable Qwen3 [28] students.
Conversely, DeepSeek-V3.2 [12], despite a lower standalone score, emerges as a superior teacher
across both 8B and 32B student scales. This finding suggests that task-solving and knowledge-transfer
are distinct, potentially orthogonal dimensions of agentic intelligence, where the "efficiency" of a
teacher’s solution may inversely correlate with its "teachability."
We trace this phenomenon to Environment-Grounded Supervision (EGS). We find that teachable
trajectories are characterized by an explicit "inspect-act-verify" loop, making the internal reasoning
process transparent through harness-visible interactions. While high-performing models often take
"shortcuts" that minimize interaction, EGS-rich trajectories provide robust, generalizable problem-
solving routines that allow students to internalize how to adapt rather than just what to output. To
quantify this, we propose the Targeted Observation Ratio (TOR), a metric that measures the alignment
between agent actions and environmental feedback, effectively predicting data utility prior to training.
The practical implications of our findings are substantial. By curating data based on interaction quality
rather than sheer volume, we achieve exceptional data efficiency. Using only 15.3k T ERMINAL -L EGO
trajectories, Qwen3-32B achieves a 24.3% score on Terminal-Bench 2.0 (TB 2.0), a 7× improvement
over its base performance, rivaling SOTA performance established with over 30× the data volume.
Our results suggest that the frontier of agent post-training lies in "Harness Engineering", the systematic
design of interaction structures as the primary catalyst for reproducible agentic intelligence.
Our contributions are threefold:

            • T ERMINAL -L EGO Agentic Data Pipeline: We introduce a scalable pipeline that converts
              large-scale StackOverflow-grounded issues into Docker-verified tasks spanning 90+ domains,
              establishing a new standard for controlled, real-world agentic data synthesis.
            • The Pedagogical Paradox & EGS: We identify a fundamental mismatch between agent
              performance and teachability, introducing Environment-Grounded Supervision (EGS) as a
              critical framework for curating effective post-training data.


                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                Stage 2.5: Test Generation
    Stage 1: Source Data Collection                          Stage 2: Cascaded LLM Task Generation
                                                                                                                                                  with LLM-as-Reviewer

                                                                                                                                                     1     Test Generation
                                                                             1   Instruction Generation
           1   Tag-based Topic Selection
                                                                                                                instruction.md


                                                                             2   Environment Generation                                              2     Syntax Check
                                                                                                                 environment/
           2   Accepted Answer Verification
                                                                             3   Solution Generation                                                 3 Targeted Review
                                                        Meta Data                                                  solve.sh                            (a) Re-execution of solution
                                                       Each step sees                                                                                  (b) Path comparison
                                                        all upstream
           3   Community Vote Filtering                                      4   Difficulty Assessment                                                 (c) Hardcoded value
                                                           outputs
                                                                                                                 difficulty                            (d) Missing imports
                                                                                                                                          Failed
                                                                                                                                                       (e) Assertion mismatch
                                                                             5   Dockerfile Generation
                                                                                                                 dockerfile
          High-quality Stack Overflow Q&A
                                                                                                                                                     4    Feedback Loop
                                                                             6   Test Generation
                                                                                                                   test.py


                                                                                                                                                             Passed


                                                   Stage 3: Docker Round-Trip Verification
      Candidate Task Package

                                  1. Build Image        2. Start Container        3. Run Solution         4. Run Test            5. Verification
                                                                                                                                                                 Yes          Verified Task
                                                                                                                                                         Pass?
                                    docker build           docker run              bash solve.sh          python test.py         Verify    t ests



                                                                                                    Discard or Regenerate




Figure 2: Terminal-Lego construction pipeline. StackOverflow issues are filtered into realistic sources,
converted through cascaded task construction, and retained after Docker round-trip verification.


          • Targeted Observation Ratio (TOR): We propose and validate TOR as a predictive metric
            for trajectory quality, demonstrating that interaction-centric curation enables SOTA-level
            gains with unprecedented data efficiency (up to 30× less data than existing methods).


2      Matched-Task Teacher Distillation

This section defines the distillation setting used throughout the paper. Our goal is to compare the
teachability of trajectories rather than the raw problem-solving ability of teacher agents. To do so, we
hold the task substrate, harness, student backbones, training recipe, and evaluation benchmark fixed
whenever comparing teacher-generated trajectories.
We consider supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on multi-turn terminal-agent trajectories. Each training ex-
ample records a teacher interacting with a Dockerized task environment through a fixed agent harness,
Terminus-2 [13]. It operates through a single headless terminal inside a Docker container. At each
turn, the model emits structured fields including analysis, plan, and shell commands; the harness
executes the commands in a tmux session and returns captured terminal output. We use this fixed,
model-agnostic harness for all teacher trajectory collection and student evaluation, so differences
among trajectories primarily reflect teacher interaction behavior rather than scaffold-specific tools or
model-specific agent engineering. Full Terminus-2 details are provided in Appendix B.
We use Terminal-Lego (Sec. 3) to collect trajectories from four teacher models: DeepSeek-V3.2,
Claude Opus 4.6, Qwen3.5-Plus [21], and GLM-5[2]. To isolate trajectory quality from task difficulty,
we focus on task-aligned subsets where all teacher models successfully solve the same instances, then
train Qwen3-8B and Qwen3-32B students. We evaluate student performance on Terminal-Bench 2.0
and report average pass rate across three independent trials.


3      Terminal-Lego: A Controlled Substrate from Real Terminal Issues

A study of trajectory teachability requires tasks that are realistic enough to induce genuine terminal
interaction, but controlled enough to support matched teacher comparisons. We therefore construct
T ERMINAL -L EGO, a scalable pipeline that converts real user-facing technical issues into executable,
Docker-verified agentic tasks.


                                                                                           3
Table 1: Performance of Qwen3-8B and Qwen3-32B across teacher-distilled trajectories. Although
Claude Opus 4.6 has the highest standalone TB 2.0 score, DeepSeek-V3.2 produces the strongest
student models.
                                                                          SFT Avg. Pass@1
        Teacher Model      Trajectory Num.    TB 2.0    Avg. Turns
                                                                      Qwen3-8B      Qwen3-32B
        Claude Opus 4.6          8.1K          69.4         3.8          5.6%         15.5%
        Qwen3.5-Plus             8.1K          52.5         6.7          8.6%         17.2%
        GLM-5                    8.1K          56.2         5.4          8.6%         19.5%
        DeepSeek-V3.2            8.1K          39.3         7.3         10.5%         20.6%

3.1   Source Collection from StackOverflow

We sample StackOverflow questions across 90+ technical domains. Each question is required to have
an accepted answer, which provides a practical solution signal from the original asker. We further
filter high-quality data by community vote thresholds.
This source distribution is useful for studying code agents because StackOverflow questions encode
real failure modes: dependency conflicts, path mistakes, shell behavior, package installation problems,
file-format conversions, networking configuration, and library-specific errors. These problems are
broader than repository-centric software-engineering tasks and more grounded than purely synthetic
skill templates. They also span diverse terminal-facing code-agent scenarios, making StackOverflow
a scalable source for constructing agentic data that requires models to inspect, modify, execute, and
verify real environment states.

3.2   Cascaded Task Construction

Each StackOverflow question is converted into a Terminal-Bench-style task through cascaded large
language model (LLM) generation. The key design choice is that each stage conditions on upstream
artifacts, making task construction a consistency problem rather than independent generation of
unrelated files.
Because the instruction, environment, solution, Dockerfile, and tests are generated as a dependent
chain, each retained task must describe one coherent executable terminal problem rather than a set of
loosely related files.

3.3   Test Review and Docker Round-Trip Verification

LLM-generated tests can fail in systematic ways: they may rerun the solution, assume brittle paths,
omit imports, hardcode inconsistent values, or assert properties that do not follow from the task.
We therefore use a generate-then-review loop. Candidate tests are checked and reviewed by an
independent LLM for common defect categories. Failed reviews are fed back into the next generation
round.
Finally, every retained task must pass Docker round-trip verification. The validator builds the Docker
image, runs the reference solution, executes the generated tests inside the container, and retains only
tasks whose post-solution reward is positive. This full lifecycle is important for our trajectory study:
teachers interact with tasks that are executable, automatically checkable, and comparable across
models. Additional details are provided in Appendix A.

4     Why Stronger Teachers Can Teach Worse
4.1   A Pedagogical Paradox in Matched-Task Distillation

We first test whether stronger benchmark models produce better SFT trajectories. A natural hypothesis
is that stronger models should produce better training trajectories for student agents. Intuitively,
models with higher task success rates are expected to generate more accurate and efficient interaction
sequences, which should serve as higher-quality supervision signals during SFT. In our experiments,
to eliminate potential biases arising from task variance, we curate 8.1k successfully passed trajectories
from a common task set for each teacher and train the same student models.


                                                   4
Table 2: Ruling out trajectory length and explicit error recovery. Left: longer successful DeepSeek-
V3.2 trajectories contain more error turns but produce weaker students than shortest successful
trajectories. Right: DeepSeek-V3.2 remains the strongest teacher after filtering trajectories with
explicit error messages.
      Longest vs. Shortest Successful Rollouts                  Error-Free Teacher Comparison
       Metric             Shortest Longest             Metric       Claude Qwen      GLM DeepSeek
       Avg. Turns           8.9       12.2             Traj. Num.    1.7K    1.7K     1.7K        1.7K
       Avg. Error Turns     2.7        3.8             Avg. Turns     2.9     4.9      4.1         5.4
       TOR                 15.5%     14.8%
                                                       Qwen3-8B       3.7%    5.6% 5.8%          7.9%
       Qwen3-8B            6.0%       5.2%             Qwen3-32B     10.5%   11.2% 15.4%        19.1%
       Qwen3-32B          13.9%      12.7%


Surprisingly, results in table 1 contradict the intuition. Claude Opus 4.6 is the strongest standalone
task solver in this group, yet its traces are the weakest imitation data. DeepSeek-V3.2 is the weakest
standalone task solver, yet it produces the strongest students at both model scales. This indicates
that trajectory quality does not reflect the teacher benchmark score. We next rule out two simpler
explanations–trajectory length and explicit error recovery–before isolating Environment-Grounded
Supervision as the stronger mechanism.

4.2    Are Trajectory Length and Error Recovery Truly Decisive?

DeepSeek-V3.2 trajectories are longer on average than those of other teachers. One possible explana-
tion is that longer traces contain more mistakes and recoveries, which may teach the student how to
handle failures[31]. We test this explanation in two ways.
We identify 1.1k hard instances and generate five DeepSeek-V3.2 rollouts for each. Among successful
attempts, we compare the shortest and longest successful trajectories for the same tasks. Longer
trajectories contain more error turns and therefore serve as a proxy for higher recovery density.
Results are shown in Table 2: longest trajectories do not improve training and underperform the
shortest successful trajectories. Based on the results, we find that simply extending trajectory length
or introducing error recoveries may not effectively improve trajectory quality.
On the other hand, we further filter the 8.1k successfully passed trajectories by removing those whose
terminal outputs contain error messages, yielding a 1.7k error-free common set (the same tasks across
all four teacher trajectory sets). However, even under this controlled setting, DeepSeek-V3.2 still
produces the strongest student models. More importantly, compared to the full set in Table 1, the
student models trained from DeepSeek-V3.2 exhibit only a small performance degradation (1.5%
drop on Qwen3-32B), whereas all other teachers show a degradation of more than 5%. This suggests
that DeepSeek-V3.2, as a teacher, possesses an inherent consistency that insulates its teaching quality
from task difficulty.
These results suggest that the useful signal is not simply the presence of errors or recoveries, which is
a reflection of their capability. The difference among teachers may instead arise from the inference
behavior pattern.

4.3    Environment-Grounded Supervision

The standard view treats a trajectory as valuable when it solves the task. We propose a broader view:
a terminal-agent trajectory is teachable when it exposes a reusable procedure for acting under envi-
ronmental uncertainty. We call this property Environment-Grounded Supervision (EGS): supervision
in which the teacher makes observe-act behavior visible through harness-visible commands, terminal
observations, and subsequent revisions. In terminal settings, EGS includes:

        • inspecting the initial filesystem, task constraints, dependencies, and runtime state;
        • making state-changing actions such as editing files, installing packages, or running scripts;
        • observing whether each action had the intended effect;
        • adapting based on command output or environmental mismatch.


                                                   5
Table 3: Observation command taxonomy used to interpret environment grounding in terminal-agent
trajectories.

 Category            Representative Commands             Environment State Exposed
 Content             cat, grep, head, wc, diff           File contents, output text, checksums, and other
                                                         evidence for whether produced data are correct.
 Structure           ls, find, stat, file, which         Paths, directory layouts, file types, permissions,
                                                         symlinks, and binary availability.


Table 4:       Mechanism evidence for            Table 5: Sensitivity to Targeted Observation Ratio
Environment-Grounded         Supervision         (TOR) for Qwen3-32B. High-TOR trajectories out-
(EGS). Masking observation supervision           perform low-TOR trajectories and a random baseline
in trajectories sharply reduces student          at the same data scale.
performance.
                                                   Metric        High-TOR       Low-TOR        Random
  Metric                 No Mask     Mask
                                                   Traj. Num.        1.1K          1.1K          1.1K
  Avg. Unmask Turns        7.3        4.4          TOR              14.3%         11.1%         13.5%
  TOR                     13.4%      5.3%
                                                   Qwen3-8B          7.5%         5.6%          7.1%
  Qwen3-8B                10.5%       3.8%         Qwen3-32B        14.6%         11.8%         13.8%
  Qwen3-32B               20.6%      13.8%


To quantify one aspect of this behavior, we define the Targeted Observation Ratio (TOR) as a proxy
for whether actions are supported by path-aligned prior observations. Let A denote the set of action
commands in a trajectory, and let O denote the set of observation commands, including environment
inspection and verification commands such as cat, ls, find, grep, head, wc, diff, and stat. For
each action command a ∈ A, we check whether there exists a prior observation command o ∈ O
whose target path matches, contains, or is directly related to the target path of a. We define:

                                  |{a ∈ A : ∃o ∈ O, o ≺ a ∧ align(o, a)}|
                        TOR =                                             .                             (1)
                                                    |A|

Here, o ≺ a indicates that observation o occurs before action a, and align(o, a) indicates that the
observation and action are path-aligned. For example, inspecting src/utils.py before editing
src/utils.py, listing src/ before creating a file inside it, or reading a script before executing it
is counted as aligned support. In contrast, observing unrelated files or directories is not counted.
Therefore, TOR measures the fraction of actions that are supported by relevant prior observations.
We group observation commands by the kind of environment state they expose, as summarized in
Table 3. Appendix D provides the full command-level analysis.
We find that DeepSeek-V3.2 differs from the other teachers in how frequently it observes intermediate
state. Rather than issuing a compact sequence of direct edits, it often checks the filesystem, inspects
generated files, runs partial commands, and confirms expected outcomes before proceeding. We next
test whether this environment-grounded structure directly contributes to learning, then use failed
trajectories and high/low-TOR subsets as supporting evidence that process quality is partly separable
from final task success.

4.3.1   Structured Failures Still Teach Students

If EGS is a reusable interaction pattern rather than only a byproduct of final success, then even failed
trajectories may contain positive pedagogical signal. We train students on 2.5k failed DeepSeek-V3.2
trajectories. These traces do not contain successful final solutions, so their main useful content is
procedural: how the teacher observes, acts, and verifies.
Table 6 shows that the 8B student struggles with failed traces, as expected, but the 32B student
remains competitive: with only 2.5k failed trajectories, it outperforms the model trained on 8.1k
passed Claude Opus 4.6 trajectories. This suggests that sufficiently capable students can extract
reusable interaction patterns from imperfect trajectories.


                                                   6
Table 6: Passed and failed teacher trajectories comparison. Failed DeepSeek-V3.2 trajectories still
train a surprisingly strong 32B student, suggesting that procedural EGS can transfer even without
successful final states.
    Teacher        Claude Opus 4.6    Qwen3.5-Plus     GLM-5       DeepSeek-V3.2     DeepSeek-V3.2
    Data Complexity Metrics
    Correctness       Passed              Passed       Passed           Passed           Failed
    Traj. Num.         8.1K                8.1K         8.1K             8.1K             2.5K
    TOR                2.5%                6.5%         7.3%            13.4%            14.1%
    SFT Performance (Avg Pass@1)
    Qwen3-8B            5.6%               8.6%          8.6%           10.5%            3.5%
    Qwen3-32B          15.4%              17.2%         19.5%           20.6%            16.1%

Table 7: Targeted and untargeted observation masking on Qwen3-32B. Compared with random
masking, masking targeted observation turns leads to larger performance degradation under a matched
masking budget.
              Data Complexity Metrics
              Masking Strategy     None Random Mask Mask Targeted Mask Untargeted
              Traj. Num.           8.1K     8.1K        8.1K           8.1K
              Avg. Unmask Turns     7.3      6.5         6.5            6.5
              TOR                 13.4%    12.8%       10.8%          13.4%
              SFT Performance (Avg Pass@1)
              Qwen3-32B           20.6%       19.1%             17.2%            19.7%

4.3.2   High-Observation versus Low-Observation Rollouts
We next compare high- and low-TOR trajectories from 5 rollouts by DeepSeek-V3.2 on the same
hard-task pool mentioned in Sec. 4.2. We train Qwen3-32B on 1.1k trajectories from each subset
and compare against random selection. Note that the trajectories are sampled by observation ratio
from the successfully passed trajectory pools and confirm all the tasks in three subsets are the same.
Hence, this selection strategy isolates the task difficulty and diversity.
From Table 5, the high-TOR subset produces a better student than the low-TOR counterpart. This
supports the view that targeted observation ratio is associated with teachability, beyond teacher
identity and task set.

4.3.3   Observation Masking Supervision
We next test whether observation commands are directly contribute to learning. We mask turns that
only contain observe commands in 8.1k DeepSeek-V3.2 trajectories while preserving the remaining
pure action or mix-command turns. Importantly, observation masking is implemented as a loss-level
intervention rather than a trajectory-level deletion. The selected observation turns are still kept in
the serialized trajectory and remain visible in the context for subsequent turns, together with their
corresponding terminal observations.
Masking observation commands causes large drops for both student scales, as shown in Table 4.
This provides direct evidence that explicit observation supervision is not merely redundant checking.
Students benefit not only from seeing observation results in context, but from being directly supervised
to actively generate observation actions themselves.

4.3.4   Targeted Observation Masking
Observations consist of two components: targeted and untargeted. To test whether each component
carries a learnable signal, we mask 50% of targeted observations and the same number of turns of
untargeted observations in DeepSeek-V3.2 trajectories. We then fine-tune Qwen3-32B against a
random observation masking baseline, controlling for the total number of masked turns. Note that a
turn may contain both action and observation commands; we only mask turns that contain observation
commands, since decoupling actions from turns with mixed commands is difficult.
Table 7 shows that both observation turns contribute to learning. When the number of unmasked
turns is controlled, masking untargeted observations only mildly reduces performance from 20.6%


                                                   7
to 19.7%. In contrast, random masking under the same turn budget reduces performance to 19.1%,
and masking targeted observations reduces performance further to 17.6%. This indicates that two
categories of observation contribute to the quality of trajectories, but the targeted observation turns
contain task-relevant evidence that helps the student learn how actions should be grounded in the
environment.

4.3.5    Activating Observation Behavior
To further examine the role of observation in interaction trajectories, we inject the following instruc-
tions into the system prompt to encourage more environment-grounded behavior:


      - Inspect the environment and relevant files first, as thoroughly as possible.
      - Only begin write/create/modify actions after you have fully verified the current file contents
           and directory structure.



Using the same teacher model, Claude Opus 4.6, and the common 8.1K instance, we generate another
trajectories set. We find that TOR increases from 2.5% to 6.6%. This increase is accompanied by a
substantial improvement in 32B student performance, from 15.4% to 19.5%. These results suggest
that observation behavior remains an important factor in training effective terminal agents.
We also observe an additional effect at inference time. With the modified prompt, the pass rate of
Claude Opus 4.6 on 15k Terminal-Lego instances increases from 88.7% to 95.4%. This indicates that
encouraging environment-grounded behavior can improve not only the quality of training trajectories,
but also the teacher model’s own task-solving performance during inference.

      Takeaways
      • A teacher’s raw capability does not directly determine teaching quality. Trajectory length
        and error-recovery loops are not decisive factors either.
      • EGS captures a fundamental reasoning behavior that students must acquire to act reliably.
        It benefits both inference and training.
      • Students can learn useful behavioral patterns from high targeted observation ratio trajecto-
        ries even when those trajectories fail the task, decoupling process quality from outcome.


5     Main Result

5.1     Post-Training Setup and Hyperparameters

We train Qwen3-8B and Qwen3-32B for the final results. We use a learning rate of 1e−5 , maximum
sequence length of 40,960 tokens, global batch size 8, micro-batch size 1 per GPU, AdamW with
β = (0.9, 0.95), cosine learning-rate scheduling with 5% warmup, and gradient clipping at 1.0.
Qwen3-8B is trained for 7 epochs, while Qwen3-32B is trained for 3 epochs. The final training
set contains 15k DeepSeek-V3.2 trajectories on Terminal-Lego tasks, including 12.8k successful
trajectories and 2.5k failed trajectories.

5.2     Terminal-Bench 2.0 Performance

Table 8 compares Terminal-Lego with representative official Terminal-Bench 2.0 leaderboard entries,
Qwen3 backbones, and prior post-training datasets. We keep a small number of recent high-scoring
systems as upper-bound references and include several official calibration references near or below
Terminal-Lego-Qwen3-32B to make the scale of the gains interpretable. Rows use different scaffolds
in some prior systems, so cross-row comparisons should be read as broad references rather than a
perfectly harness-matched leaderboard.
Using only 15k trajectories, Terminal-Lego-Qwen3-8B improves from 2.5% to 11.8%, clearly above
the official GPT-OSS-20B reference. Terminal-Lego-Qwen3-32B improves from 3.4% to 24.3%,
slightly exceeding official Terminus-2 results for GPT-5-Mini, Qwen 3 Coder 480B, and Grok 4. Our


                                                      8
Table 8: Compact Terminal-Bench 2.0 comparison. Official references use their submitted scaffolds;
Terminal-Lego student rows use Terminus-2. Terminal-Lego uses 15k trajectories, substantially
improves the Qwen3 backbones, and is competitive with several official leaderboard references
despite using much smaller student models.
 Model                                        Size    Post-Training Data         Scaffold       TB 2.0
 Official leaderboard references
 GPT-5.5[17]                                   –               –                Codex CLI          82.0
 Claude Opus 4.6[4]                            –               –                Terminus-2         62.9
 GLM 5[2]                                    744B              –                Terminus-2         52.4
 DeepSeek-V3.2[12]                           685B              –                Terminus-2         39.6
 GPT-5-Mini[14]                                –               –                Terminus-2         24.0
 Qwen 3 Coder 480B[20]                       480B              –                Terminus-2         23.9
 Grok 4[26]                                    –               –                Terminus-2         23.1
 GPT-OSS-120B[15]                            120B              –                Terminus-2         18.7
 GPT-OSS-20B[15]                              20B              –                Terminus-2          3.1
 Backbones and post-trained student models
 Qwen3-8B[28]                                 8B               –                Terminus-2         2.5
 TerminalTraj-Qwen2.5-Coder-7B[25]             7B           50.7K               Terminus-2        10.1
 Nemotron-Terminal-Qwen3-8B[18]                8B          490.5K               Terminus-2        13.0
 Terminal-Lego-Qwen3-8B                        8B          15.3K                Terminus-2    11.8 (+9.3)
 Qwen3-32B[28]                                32B              –                Terminus-2         3.4
 TermiGen-Qwen3-32B[31]                       32B            3.5K               Bashagent         18.0
 LiberCoder-Qwen3-32B[11]                     32B           49.5K               OpenHands         19.5
 TerminalTraj-Qwen2.5-Coder-32B[25]           32B           50.7K               Terminus-2        22.0
 Nemotron-Terminal-Qwen3-32B[18]              32B          490.5K               Terminus-2        27.4
 Terminal-Lego-Qwen3-32B                      32B          15.3K                Terminus-2    24.3 (+20.9)

Table 9: Performance of Qwen3-32B across Terminal-Lego and three same-size subsets from
Nemotron-Terminal.
           Dataset                           Trajectory Num.       Avg. Turns    SFT Avg. Pass@1
           Terminal-Lego                             15K              8.2             24.3%
           Nemotron-Terminal-sample-1                15K              8.0             19.9%
           Nemotron-Terminal-sample-2                15K              7.9             17.2%
           Nemotron-Terminal-sample-3                15K              8.0             17.9%
models do not surpass the models trained with the largest Nemotron-Terminal corpus, but we only
use roughly 3% of the reported data volume and approach its performance.

5.3   Same-Size Comparison with Nemotron-Terminal

For a fair comparison against Nemotron-Terminal, we sampled three subsets from skill-based data
of its Terminal-Corpus with the same size as ours. By keeping the teacher model (DeepSeek-
V3.2) fixed across both corpora, table 9 shows that Terminal-Lego outperforms all three same-size
Nemotron-Terminal subsets.

6     Related Work
6.1   Code Agents

Recent progress has produced agentic systems that interact directly with software environments.
Closed-source agents such as Codex[16], Claude Code[3], and Gemini CLI[6] combine long-
context reasoning with tool and environment access. Open frameworks such as SWE-agent[29],
OpenHands[24], Mini-SWE-Agent[1], and MiniSWE-Agent-Plus[19] expose repo-level editing and
execution through controlled action interfaces. Terminus and Terminus-2[13], provide a particularly
useful research substrate because every command and observation is visible through a compact
harness. This visibility lets us study not only whether an agent solves a task, but how its interaction
process can be learned by another model.


                                                       9
6.2   Agentic Coding Data Pipeline

A growing line of work constructs data pipelines to train and evaluate interactive agents. In the realm
of Software Engineering (SWE), frameworks such as SWE-rebench [5], SWE-smith [30], R2E-Gym
[8], SWE-Mirror [23] and SWE-Lego [22] have pioneered the conversion of repository-level issues
into reproducible execution environments. Beyond pure SWE, the scope of code agents is rapidly
expanding toward general computer-use. Terminal agents serve as the canonical interface for this
broader paradigm; they encapsulate not only repository-level coding but also system administration,
dependency resolution, execution debugging, and data processing workflows. To support these diverse
terminal-centric skills, recent pipelines such as TermiGen [31], TerminalTraj [25], CLI-Gym [11],
and Nemotron-Terminal [18] emphasize error-injected generation, repository mining, and skill-based
synthetic scaling. Nevertheless, these prior works primarily optimize for task realism, corpus scale,
or standalone agent robustness.


7     Conclusions

We investigated whether an agent’s standalone prowess dictates its pedagogical efficacy. Through the
T ERMINAL -L EGO framework, we identified a "pedagogical paradox": a model’s task-solving capacity
is not a reliable proxy for its teachability. We attribute this discrepancy to Environment-Grounded
Supervision (EGS), demonstrating that student learning is driven by the visibility of reasoning
processes operationalized via our Targeted Observation Ratio (TOR), rather than simple outcome-
matching. Our results advocate for shifting the post-training focus from success rates to "interactive
structures", the systematic loop of inspection, verification, and adaptation. By prioritizing these
environment-grounded signals, we achieve state-of-the-art gains with 30× greater data efficiency than
existing methods. We propose treating environment interaction as first-class supervision, positioning
"Harness Engineering" as a pivotal frontier for developing robust, autonomous agents.

Limitations and Future Work

While our work advances the understanding of trajectory teachability for code agents and provides a
high-quality executable dataset, we acknowledge several limitations that offer promising directions
for future research, without undermining the core contributions of this study.
First, our experimental evaluations focus on 8B and 32B student models trained on trajectories
generated by four representative teacher agents, covering a range of model scales and capabilities
commonly used in current terminal-agent research. However, the generalizability of our key findings
remains to be explored across a broader spectrum of model sizes. We anticipate that scaling effects or
architectural differences may introduce nuanced variations in trajectory teachability.
Furthermore, our TOR metric and masking analyses effectively capture critical aspects of observation
usefulness, providing practical and interpretable evidence for the role of observational information in
effective guidance signals (EGS). That said, these analyses do not fully address three finer-grained
questions: whether a specific observation is strictly necessary for justifying the corresponding action,
whether it is sufficient to support the action independently, and whether the teacher’s reasoning chain
from observation to action is logically rigorous. As such, our measurements should be viewed as a
practical characterization of EGS, rather than a comprehensive assessment of trajectory teachability,
and future work could incorporate more formal reasoning validation to address these gaps.
Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by the Theme-based Research Scheme (TRS)
project T45-701/22-R of the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong, and in part by the AVNET-HKU
Emerging Microelectronics and Ubiquitous Systems (EMUS) Lab.


References
 [1] Mini SWE Agent. Mini swe agent. https://github.com/SWE-agent/Mini-SWE-Agent,
     2025.

 [2] Zhipu AI. Glm-5: from vibe coding to agentic engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15763,
     2026.


                                                  10
 [3] Anthropic.  Claude code by anthropic.            https://www.anthropic.com/product/
     claude-code, 2026.
 [4] Anthropic.  Introducing claude opus 4.6.             https://www.anthropic.com/news/
     claude-opus-4-6, 2026.
 [5] Ibragim Badertdinov, Alexander Golubev, Maksim Nekrashevich, Anton Shevtsov, Simon
     Karasik, Andrei Andriushchenko, Maria Trofimova, Daria Litvintseva, and Boris Yangel. Swe-
     rebench: An automated pipeline for task collection and decontaminated evaluation of software
     engineering agents, 2025.
 [6] Deepmind. Gemini cli. https://geminicli.com/, 2025.
 [7] Xiang Deng, Jeff Da, Edwin Pan, Yan He, Charles Ide, Kanak Garg, Niklas Lauffer, Andrew
     Park, Nitin Pasari, Chetan Rane, Karmini Sampath, Maya Krishnan, Srivatsa Kundurthy, Sean M.
     Hendryx, Zifan Wang, Chen Bo Calvin Zhang, Noah Jacobson, Bing Liu, and Brad Kenstler.
     Swe-bench pro: Can ai agents solve long-horizon software engineering tasks? 2025.
 [8] Naman Jain, Jaskirat Singh, Manish Shetty, Liang Zheng, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. R2e-
     gym: Procedural environments and hybrid verifiers for scaling open-weights swe agents. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2504.07164, 2025.
 [9] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
     Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth
     International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[10] Thomas Kwa, Ben West, Joel Becker, Amy Deng, Katharyn Garcia, Max Hasin, Sami Jawhar,
     Megan Kinniment, Nate Rush, Sydney Von Arx, et al. Measuring ai ability to complete long
     tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14499, 352, 2025.
[11] Yusong Lin, Haiyang Wang, Shuzhe Wu, Lue Fan, Feiyang Pan, Sanyuan Zhao, and Dandan
     Tu. Cli-gym: Scalable cli task generation via agentic environment inversion. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2602.10999, 2026.
[12] Aixin Liu, Aoxue Mei, Bangcai Lin, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bingzheng Xu, Bochao Wu,
     Bowei Zhang, Chaofan Lin, Chen Dong, et al. Deepseek-v3. 2: Pushing the frontier of open
     large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02556, 2025.
[13] Mike A Merrill, Alexander G Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich, Lin
     Shi, Jeong Yeon Shin, Thomas Walshe, E Kelly Buchanan, et al. Terminal-bench: Benchmarking
     agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.11868,
     2026.
[14] OpenAI.     Introducing gpt         5.         https://openai.com/zh-Hans-CN/index/
     introducing-gpt-5/, 2025.
[15] OpenAI.     Introducing gpt        oss.        https://openai.com/zh-Hans-CN/index/
     introducing-gpt-oss/, 2025.
[16] OpenAI.      Introducing codex.                https://openai.com/zh-Hans-CN/index/
     introducing-codex/, 2026.
[17] OpenAI.     Introducing gpt-5.5.               https://openai.com/zh-Hans-CN/index/
     introducing-gpt-5-5/, 2026.
[18] Renjie Pi, Grace Lam, Mohammad Shoeybi, Pooya Jannaty, Bryan Catanzaro, and Wei Ping.
     On data engineering for scaling llm terminal capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.21193,
     2026.
[19] Mini SWE Agent Plus. Mini swe agent plus.             https://github.com/Kwai-Klear/
     mini-swe-agent-plus, 2025.
[20] Qwen. Qwen3-coder: Agentic coding in the world. https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/
     qwen3-coder/, 2025.


                                               11
[21] Qwen. Qwen3.5: Towards native multimodal agents. https://qwen.ai/blog?id=qwen3.5,
     2026.
[22] Chaofan Tao, Jierun Chen, Yuxin Jiang, Kaiqi Kou, Shaowei Wang, Ruoyu Wang, Xiaohui Li,
     Sidi Yang, Yiming Du, Jianbo Dai, et al. Swe-lego: Pushing the limits of supervised fine-tuning
     for software issue resolving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.01426, 2026.
[23] Junhao Wang, Daoguang Zan, Shulin Xin, Siyao Liu, Yurong Wu, and Kai Shen. Swe-
     mirror: Scaling issue-resolving datasets by mirroring issues across repositories. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2509.08724, 2025.
[24] Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi
     Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, et al. Openhands: An open platform for ai software
     developers as generalist agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16741, 2024.
[25] Siwei Wu, Yizhi Li, Yuyang Song, Wei Zhang, Yang Wang, Riza Batista-Navarro, Xian Yang,
     Mingjie Tang, Bryan Dai, Jian Yang, et al. Large-scale terminal agentic trajectory generation
     from dockerized environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.01244, 2026.
[26] XAI. Grok 4. https://x.ai/news/grok-4, 2025.
[27] Chengxing Xie, Bowen Li, Chang Gao, He Du, Wai Lam, Difan Zou, and Kai Chen. Swe-fixer:
     Training open-source llms for effective and efficient github issue resolution. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2501.05040, 2025.
[28] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu,
     Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
[29] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik
     Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software
     engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:50528–50652, 2024.
[30] John Yang, Kilian Lieret, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kabir Khandpur, Yanzhe Zhang,
     Binyuan Hui, Ofir Press, Ludwig Schmidt, and Diyi Yang. Swe-smith: Scaling data for software
     engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21798, 2025.
[31] Kaijie Zhu, Yuzhou Nie, Yijiang Li, Yiming Huang, Jialian Wu, Jiang Liu, Ximeng Sun, Zhenfei
     Yin, Lun Wang, Zicheng Liu, et al. Termigen: High-fidelity environment and robust trajectory
     synthesis for terminal agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07274, 2026.




                                                 12
A     Terminal-Lego Pipeline: Complete Technical Details
This appendix provides complete, reproducible details of the Terminal-Lego construction pipeline,
including verbatim prompt templates, the Docker round-trip validation protocol. The complete source
code will be available upon acceptance of this paper.

A.1   Pipeline Overview

The pipeline consists of six phases executed sequentially:

      1. StackOverflow Crawling – Collect ∼36k questions with accepted answers across 98
         weighted tags.
      2. Cascaded Task Generation – LLM generates 7 files per task in dependency order.
      3. Docker Round-Trip Validation – Build → solve → test → check reward.
      4. Dataset Packaging – Renumber passed tasks into final corpus.
      5. Oracle Evaluation – Sanity-check task solvability with oracle agent.
      6. Teacher Evaluation – Evaluate each teacher model on the final task set.

A.2   Phase 1: StackOverflow Crawling

The StackOverflow crawler uses 98 manually weighted tags chosen to approximate the skill distribu-
tion required by terminal-based tasks (Table 11 and figure 3). Each tag is assigned a sampling weight,
and the crawler allocates a target number of questions according to
                                   $                                      %              !
                                       weight
           tag_target = min          P            · TARGET_COUNT · 1.5 , remaining ,
                                       j weightj

where the 1.5 multiplier compensates for duplicate questions across tags. We require each question to
contain an accepted answer, and we deduplicate by StackOverflow question ID against both historical
crawls and the current crawl.
Table 10: Cascaded task construction in Terminal-Lego. Each stage conditions on upstream artifacts
to keep the instruction, environment, solution, Dockerfile, and tests mutually consistent.

                      Stage               Output and Role
                      Instruction         Executable task with paths and success
                                          criteria
                      Environment         Required input files and directory struc-
                                          ture
                      Solution            Reference solve.sh conditioned on the
                                          generated environment
                      Difficulty          Easy/medium/hard label for analysis and
                                          sampling
                      Dockerfile          Runtime image and dependency setup
                      Tests               Post-solution checks over final environ-
                                          ment state


Output: A JSON file contains a metadata wrapper and a list of question objects. Each object contains:
question_id, title, body, tags, score, accepted_answer_id, accepted_answer (with body
and score), link, search_tag, creation_date.

A.3   Phase 2: Cascaded LLM Task Generation

Model: claude-opus-4-6.
Generation order: Strictly cascaded. Each stage receives all prior outputs as context, reducing
cross-component inconsistency. The seven stages are: (1) Instruction (temp=0.7), (2) Environment
(temp=0.3), (3) Solution (temp=0.3), (4) Difficulty (temp=0.1), (5) Tests (temp=0.2), (6) Test Review
(temp=0.1, up to 3 rounds), (7) Dockerfile (temp=0.3).


                                                 13
            Figure 3: Distribution of Stack Overflow Source Questions Across Domains


Table 11: Domain grouping of StackOverflow tags used for Terminal-Lego source collection. Tags
are manually grouped for readability; the crawler samples from the full tag list with per-tag weights.

 Domain                       Tags
 Core terminal and OS         linux, bash, shell, command-line, terminal, unix, ubuntu, debian,
                              centos, systemd, cron, sudo, chmod
 Versioning and containers    git, docker, kubernetes, virtualization, qemu
 Networking and services      networking, tcp, http, https, dns, ssl, ssl-certificate, openssl,
                              curl, wget, ssh, nginx, apache, iptables, firewall
 File and text processing     file-io, tar, gzip, zip, json, csv, regex, xml, string, sed, awk, grep,
                              yaml, parquet
 Python ecosystem             python, pip, virtualenv, conda, pandas, numpy, matplotlib,
                              jupyter-notebook, scipy, sympy
 Machine learning and         machine-learning, deep-learning, pytorch, tensorflow, keras,
 data                         scikit-learn, nlp, huggingface-transformers
 Databases and storage        sqlite, mysql, postgresql, redis, mongodb
 Web automation and           web-scraping, requests, beautifulsoup, selenium, api
 APIs
 Security and cryptogra-      security, encryption, cryptography, hash
 phy
 Debugging and reliability    debugging, logging, exception
 Algorithms and concur-       algorithm, sorting, recursion, data-structures, multiprocessing,
 rency                        multithreading, asyncio
 Media and scientific tools   ffmpeg, opencv, image-processing, r
 Build and editor tooling     makefile, cmake, gcc, vim, tmux




System prompt (shared by all stages):



    You are a professional technical task designer responsible for converting
    StackOverflow questions into Terminal Bench format programming tasks.
    You need to generate clear, executable, and testable tasks. All outputs
    should be actual runnable code and scripts.
    Please ensure the generated content is in correct format and can be
    directly saved as files.




                                                   14
A.3.1   Stage 1: Instruction Generation (temperature=0.7, max_tokens=16384)


   Please convert the following StackOverflow question into a Terminal Bench
   task instruction.md file.

   **Original Question:**
   Title: {title}
   Tags: {tags}
   Content:
   {body}

   **Requirements:**
   1. Write a clear task description in Markdown format
   2. The task should be completed in a Linux terminal environment
   3. Specify clear working directory paths (use /app/task_file/ as root directory)
   4. If input files are needed, specify file location (e.g., /app/task_file/input/)
   5. If output files are needed, specify output location (e.g., /app/task_file/output/)
   6. Provide specific success criteria

   Please output the instruction.md content directly in markdown format.
   Do NOT wrap in code blocks.




A.3.2   Stage 2: Environment Generation (temperature=0.3)


   Based on the following Terminal Bench task, analyze and generate the
   required environment files.

   **Task instruction:**
   {instruction}

   **Original question info:**
   Title: {title}
   Tags: {tags}

   **Requirements:**
   1. Analyze what preset files the task needs (e.g., input data, config files)
   2. Generate reasonable test data
   3. File paths relative to environment/ directory
   4. If needed, create subdirectory structure like task_file/input/

   **Output format (JSON):**
   ‘‘‘json
   {
       "files": {
           "relative/path/filename": "file content",
           "task_file/input/example.txt": "example content..."
       },
       "directories": ["task_file", "task_file/input", "task_file/output"]
   }
   ‘‘‘

   Please output only JSON, wrapped with ‘‘‘json‘‘‘.
   If no files are needed, return empty files and directories.




A.3.3   Stage 3: Solution Generation (temperature=0.3)


   Based on the following Terminal Bench task and StackOverflow answer,
   generate solution/solve.sh file.

   **Task instruction:**
   {instruction}

   **StackOverflow answer:**
   {answer}

   **Tags:** {tags}




                                                   15
    **Environment files available in the container:**
    {env_file_list}

    **Requirements:**
    1. Generate an executable bash script
    2. The script should complete the task requirements
    3. Include necessary comments
    4. Handle possible error cases
    5. Ensure output meets task requirements
    6. The script runs inside the container at WORKDIR /app

    **Output format:**
    ‘‘‘bash
    #!/bin/bash
    # Terminal-Bench Canary String, DO NOT REMOVE:
    # terminal-bench-canary GUID {guid}

    # Your solution code...
    ‘‘‘

    Please output only bash script content, wrapped with ‘‘‘bash‘‘‘.




A.3.4   Stage 4: Difficulty Classification (temperature=0.1)


    Assess the difficulty of the following terminal/programming task for an
    experienced software engineer working in a Linux terminal.

    **Task instruction:**
    {instruction}

    **Tags:** {tags}

    **Difficulty levels:**
    - **easy**: Straightforward single-command or simple script task.
      Most engineers solve it in < 5 minutes.
      Examples: basic file operations, simple grep/find, common git commands.
    - **medium**: Requires combining multiple tools or writing a multi-step script.
      Takes 5-15 minutes.
      Examples: parsing structured data, configuring services, writing pipelines.
    - **hard**: Requires deeper domain knowledge, complex debugging, or
      multi-component system understanding. Takes > 15 minutes.
      Examples: network troubleshooting, compiler errors, distributed systems.

    Output only one word: easy, medium, or hard.




A.3.5   Stage 5: Test Generation (temperature=0.2)
Key design: Tests receive the full context (instruction + environment + solution) to ensure consistency.
The prompt explicitly forbids re-running solve.sh and requires tests to verify post-execution state
only.


    Based on the following Terminal Bench task, its environment and its
    reference solution, generate the test code.

    **Task instruction:**
    {instruction}

    **Environment files in the container:**
    {env_file_list}

    **Reference solution (solve.sh) that will be executed:**
    ‘‘‘bash
    {solution}
    ‘‘‘

    **Tags:** {tags}

    **Generate two files:**




                                                     16
1. **test.sh** - Test runner script, format:
‘‘‘bash
# Terminal-Bench Canary String, DO NOT REMOVE:
# terminal-bench-canary GUID {guid}
#!/bin/bash

apt-get update
apt-get install -y curl

# Install uv
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/0.9.5/install.sh | sh

source \$HOME/.local/bin/env

# Check if we’re in a valid working directory
if [ "\$PWD" = "/" ]; then
    echo "Error: No working directory set."
    exit 1
fi

# Run pytest tests
uvx \
  -p 3.13 \
  -w pytest==8.4.1 \
  -w pytest-json-ctrf==0.3.5 \
  pytest --ctrf /logs/verifier/ctrf.json /tests/test_outputs.py -rA

if [ \$? -eq 0 ]; then
  echo 1 > /logs/verifier/reward.txt
else
  echo 0 > /logs/verifier/reward.txt
fi
‘‘‘

2. **test_outputs.py** - pytest test file that verifies the state AFTER
solve.sh has already been executed:

**CRITICAL RULES for test_outputs.py:**
- solve.sh has ALREADY been executed before test_outputs.py runs.
  Do NOT call solve.sh again via subprocess.
- Do NOT reference or invoke solve.sh in any test. It does not exist at test time.
- Tests should ONLY check the resulting state: output files, file contents,
  directory structures, installed packages, etc.
- Use os.path.exists(), open().read(), subprocess.run() for verification
  commands (like ‘grep‘, ‘wc‘, ‘cat‘, ‘ls‘), but NEVER run solve.sh.
- Example: if solve.sh creates /app/task_file/output/results.txt, test should
  check that file exists and contains expected content.

**ROBUSTNESS RULES (very important):**
- When checking output files that list paths, NEVER compare exact path strings.
  Instead use ‘line.endswith("filename")‘ or ‘os.path.basename(line)‘ to handle
  both relative and absolute paths.
- When checking file contents, use ‘in‘ operator or regex, NOT exact equality
  (e.g., ‘assert "expected_text" in content‘).
- When counting lines, allow for trailing newlines:
  ‘len([l for l in content.strip().splitlines() if l.strip()])‘.
- When checking numeric results, allow small floating-point tolerance if applicable.
- Prefer checking that files/directories EXIST on disk (os.path.exists,
  os.path.isfile) over parsing output text files.
- If the task creates output files, read them directly with open(); if the task
  modifies existing files, check the modified content.

**Output format (JSON):**
‘‘‘json
{
    "test_sh": "#!/bin/bash\n...",
    "test_outputs_py": "# Terminal-Bench Canary String...\nimport pytest\n..."
}
‘‘‘

Please output only JSON, wrapped with ‘‘‘json‘‘‘.
Ensure Python code syntax is correct and all tests pass after solve.sh runs.




                                                 17
A.3.6   Stage 6: Test Review Loop (temperature=0.1)
After generating tests, the pipeline applies ast.parse() to catch syntax errors in
test_outputs.py, then asks an independent LLM reviewer to inspect the test against five common
failure modes. If the review fails, the reported issues are fed back into the next generation round. The
max rounds is up to 3.


    You are reviewing a pytest test file for a Terminal Bench task.
    The test runs AFTER solve.sh has already been executed.

    **Task instruction:**
    {instruction}

    **Environment files:**
    {env_file_list}

    **Reference solution (solve.sh):**
    ‘‘‘bash
    {solution}
    ‘‘‘

    **Generated test code (test_outputs.py):**
    ‘‘‘python
    {test_code}
    ‘‘‘

    **Review checklist:**
    1. Does the test try to run solve.sh via subprocess? (FAIL if yes)
    2. Does the test use brittle exact-path comparisons instead of endswith/basename? (WARN)
    3. Does the test hardcode values that don’t match the solution’s actual output? (FAIL)
    4. Does the test have missing imports or syntax errors? (FAIL)
    5. Do the assertions actually check the expected post-solve.sh state? (FAIL if not)

    **Output format (JSON):**
    ‘‘‘json
    {
        "pass": true,
        "issues": []
    }
    ‘‘‘
    or
    ‘‘‘json
    {
        "pass": false,
        "issues": ["Issue 1: ...", "Issue 2: ..."]
    }
    ‘‘‘

    Please output only JSON, wrapped with ‘‘‘json‘‘‘.




A.3.7   Stage 7: Dockerfile Generation (temperature=0.3)


    Based on the following Terminal Bench task, generate a Dockerfile for the environment.

    **Task instruction:**
    {instruction}

    **Tags:** {tags}

    **Requirements:**
    1. Choose an appropriate base image based on the task requirements:
       - For Python tasks: use ‘python:3.13-slim-bookworm‘
       - For Node.js tasks: use ‘node:20-slim‘
       - For Java tasks: use ‘openjdk:17-slim‘
       - For Go tasks: use ‘golang:1.21-bookworm‘
       - For general Linux/shell tasks: use ‘ubuntu:22.04‘
    2. Install necessary packages for the task
    3. Set WORKDIR to /app
    4. Include the COPY command to copy task_file into the container
    5. The Dockerfile must start with the canary string comment




                                                     18
      **Output format:**
      ‘‘‘dockerfile
      # Terminal-Bench Canary String, DO NOT REMOVE:
      # terminal-bench-canary GUID {guid}
      FROM <base_image>
      WORKDIR /app

      RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y <packages> && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*

      COPY ./task_file /app/task_file
      ‘‘‘

      Please output only Dockerfile content, wrapped with ‘‘‘dockerfile‘‘‘.




A.4     Phase 3: Docker Round-Trip Validation

For each candidate task, the validator performs a full Docker lifecycle test:

        1. Build: docker build -t tb2-validate-<task_name> <task_dir>/environment
        2. Start container: docker run –name <container_name> -d <image_tag> sleep
           infinity
        3. Copy solution: docker cp <task_dir>/solution/solve.sh <container>:/app/
        4. Execute solution: docker exec <container> bash /app/solve.sh
        5. Copy tests: docker cp <task_dir>/tests <container>:/tests
        6. Run tests: docker exec <container> bash /tests/test.sh
        7. Read reward: docker cp <container>:/logs/verifier/reward.txt <local>
        8. Check: If reward.txt contains “1”, copy task to output directory; otherwise skip.
        9. Cleanup:     docker stop <container> && docker rm <container> && docker
           rmi <image_tag>

Parallelization: 8 workers by default. Each worker processes one task at a time to avoid Docker
resource contention.
Timeout: 300 seconds per task (configurable via –timeout). Tasks that exceed the timeout are
marked as “timeout” and skipped.
Error handling: Build failures, runtime errors, missing solution files, and test failures are logged
separately. Only tasks with reward=1 are retained.

A.5     Phase 4: Dataset Packaging

Renumbers validated tasks as task_00000, task_00001, . . . and copies them to the final output
directory. Generates generation_summary.json with difficulty distribution, category distribution,
and task mapping.
Docker validation pass rate: 15,389 / 36,846 = 41.8%. The main failure modes are test/solution
mismatch (24.0%), build failures (11.5%), and timeouts (22.6%).

A.5.1     Test Pass Rate
After constructing the test file, we run the oracle solution and test the FAIL_TO_PASS and
PASS_TO_PASS. The results are shown in Table. 13. The datasets contains substantially more fail-
to-pass tests than pass-to-pass tests, indicating that the evaluation is primarily focused on verifying
whether solutions resolve the target issue.

B      Terminus-2 Agent Scaffold and Interaction Protocol
Terminus-2 is a minimal, unopinionated agent scaffold developed by the Terminal-Bench team as
a neutral testbed for comparing language model performance [13]. Because Terminal-Bench is an


                                                       19
Table 12: Validation funnel for Terminal-Lego task construction. The final passed set contains Docker
round-trip verified tasks used for trajectory collection.

                              Outcome                      Estimated Count
                              Test/solution failed                      8,859
                              Build failed                              4,254
                              Timeout                                   8,317
                              Runtime error                                18
                              Missing solution                              9
                              Passed                                   15,389
                              Total candidates validated               36,846

                      Table 13: Statistics of fail-to-pass and pass-to-pass tests.

                                     Test Type       Number of Tests
                                     Fail-to-Pass          8.81
                                     Pass-to-Pass          1.48



interactive framework, agent and model performance are hard to decouple—many agent scaffolds
have been engineered to accommodate the tendencies of certain models, especially when the model
and agent are developed by the same organization. Terminus-2 is designed to eliminate this confound.

Single-tool design. Whereas other agents (e.g., Claude Code, OpenHands, Gemini CLI) provide
dedicated tools for editing files, executing Bash commands, or downloading files, Terminus-2 operates
solely by issuing Bash commands through a headless terminal. The agent runs in a simple loop: a
language model produces keystrokes, which are executed in a tmux shell inside a Docker container;
after execution, the captured terminal output is returned to the model as the next observation. This
single-tool constraint gives the model full flexibility to decide how to accomplish sub-tasks—it may
echo contents directly into a file, operate an interactive text editor like vim, scroll through output, use
arrow keys to navigate a menu, or launch additional shells.

Context summarization. Terminus-2 incorporates a context summarization module that condenses
the agent’s conversation history when it approaches the model’s context limit. The module invokes
the language model itself to produce a structured handoff summary, enabling the agent to operate on
extended tasks that may require millions of tokens without losing critical information from earlier
episodes.

Interaction protocol. Each turn, the model produces a structured JSON response containing
three required fields (analysis, plan, commands) and one optional field (task_complete). Each
command object specifies verbatim keystrokes to send to the terminal and a duration (seconds to
wait before capturing output). Task completion requires double confirmation—the agent must set
task_complete: true in two consecutive turns before the trial is finalized, reducing premature
termination.

Architecture overview.      Table 14 summarizes the key components of Terminus-2.

Role in Terminal-Bench evaluation. Terminus-2 serves as the standardized baseline throughout
the Terminal-Bench 2.0 evaluation:

       • Empirical difficulty of each task is defined by Terminus-2’s average pass rate across frontier
         models (Easy ≥66.7%, Medium 33.3–66.7%, Hard <33.3%).
       • Trajectory-level error analysis uses Terminus-2 as the fixed scaffold to isolate model-level
         differences.
       • Command-level error analysis reviews individual command input-output pairs from
         recorded Terminus-2 trajectories.


                                                     20
                         Table 14: Terminus-2 agent architecture summary.

  Component                Description
  Tool                     Single headless terminal (tmux session in Docker)
  Execution                Bash commands only; keystrokes sent verbatim
  LLM Backend              LiteLLM (model-agnostic; supports vLLM, OpenAI-compatible APIs)
  Output Format            Structured JSON (analysis, plan, commands, task_complete)
  Output Truncation        10 000 bytes; head/tail split preserving boundary information
  Context Management       Proactive summarization via Q&A-based handoff protocol
  Completion               Double confirmation (two consecutive task_complete: true)
  Error Recovery           Retry up to 3×; context unwind + re-summarize on overflow


C     Training Dynamics Across Teachers

This section compares the SFT training dynamics when fine-tuning Qwen3-32B on trajectories from
four different teachers. All experiments use identical hyperparameters (learning rate, batch size,
warmup, scheduler) and train for the same number of effective steps, differing only in the source of
training trajectories.

C.1   Training Loss Across Teacher Trajectories

Figure 4 shows the training loss curves for each teacher’s trajectories.




Figure 4: Training loss curves when fine-tuning Qwen3-32B on trajectories from different teachers.
DeepSeek-V3.2 trajectories yield significantly higher loss than other teachers throughout training.


                    Table 15: Training loss statistics across teacher trajectories.

                   Teacher             Final Loss      Avg Last 10%        Min Loss
                   DeepSeek-V3.2            0.1831             0.1773        0.1264
                   GLM-5                    0.0703             0.0726        0.0552
                   Qwen3.5-Plus             0.0627             0.0713        0.0544
                   Claude Opus 4.6          0.0631             0.0661        0.0435

DeepSeek-V3.2 trajectories produce a final loss of 0.183—approximately 2.6× higher than the other
three teachers (0.063–0.070). This gap persists throughout training and does not close with additional
steps, indicating a fundamental distributional mismatch between DeepSeek-V3.2’s behavioral patterns
and Qwen3-32B’s prior. The remaining three teachers converge to similar loss levels, with Qwen3.5-
Plus trajectories (self-overlap) achieving the lowest loss as expected.


                                                  21
C.2   Gradient Norm Across Teacher Trajectories

Figure 5 shows the gradient norm curves during training.




Figure 5: Gradient norm curves during fine-tuning. Claude Opus 4.6 exhibits the highest gradient
variance despite low loss, while DeepSeek-V3.2 shows the most stable gradients.

Table 16: Gradient norm statistics across teacher trajectories. We report the average gradient norm
over the last 10% of training steps.

                          Teacher             Avg Last 10% Grad Norm
                          DeepSeek-V3.2                             0.2965
                          GLM-5                                     0.3724
                          Qwen3.5-Plus                              0.3603
                          Claude Opus 4.6                           0.4598

An inverse relationship emerges between loss and gradient stability: DeepSeek-V3.2, despite having
the highest loss, exhibits the lowest gradient norm (0.30), indicating that the model has settled into
a stable plateau—it cannot further reduce the loss but is not oscillating. Conversely, Claude Opus
4.6 achieves low loss but with the highest gradient norm (0.46), suggesting that the optimization
landscape for Opus trajectories contains sharper local structure.

C.3   Imitation Difficulty and Downstream Performance

Table 17 summarizes the relationship between imitation difficulty (measured by training loss) and
downstream task performance.

Table 17: Imitation difficulty vs. downstream performance. Teachers are ordered by training loss
(imitation difficulty).

         Teacher              Imitation Difficulty    Training Loss     Gradient Stability
         Qwen3.5-Plus         Easiest                 0.063             Stable (0.36)
         Claude Opus 4.6      Easy                    0.063             Unstable (0.46)
         GLM-5                Moderate                0.070             Stable (0.37)
         DeepSeek-V3.2        Hardest                 0.183             Most stable (0.30)


The imitation–performance paradox. The teacher whose trajectories are hardest to imitate
(DeepSeek-V3.2, loss 0.183) produces the best downstream task performance, while the easiest-
to-imitate teachers (Qwen3.5-Plus, Claude Opus 4.6) yield weaker results. This paradox resolves
when we consider what makes DeepSeek-V3.2 hard to imitate: its distinctive observation-heavy
behavioral paradigm—characterized by high targeted observation rates and systematic pre-action


                                                 22
reconnaissance—diverges substantially from Qwen3-32B’s default behavior. The high loss reflects
not training failure, but the magnitude of behavioral shift required.

Gradient stability as a convergence signal. DeepSeek-V3.2’s low gradient norm (0.30) combined
with high loss indicates that the model has converged to a stable representation of the teacher’s
behavior, even though it cannot perfectly reproduce it. The residual loss captures the irreducible gap
between the student’s capacity and the teacher’s behavioral complexity. In contrast, Claude Opus
4.6’s high gradient norm (0.46) despite low loss suggests that the model oscillates between multiple
low-loss solutions without settling on a consistent behavioral pattern.

Implications for teacher selection. These results suggest that training loss alone is a poor predictor
of downstream performance. A teacher whose behavioral paradigm is
emphcomplementary to the student’s prior—introducing novel patterns such as systematic
observation—provides greater learning signal than a teacher whose behavior the student can al-
ready approximate. The difficulty of imitation is itself evidence that the teacher offers something the
student lacks.

D     Observation-Action Patterns
This section provides a detailed analysis of how observation commands influence subsequent actions
in teacher trajectories. All statistics are computed on the DeepSeek-V3.2 trajectory corpus (15,389
samples, 120,919 assistant turns, 93,287 turns containing at least one parsed command). We distin-
guish between cat used for reading (cat file, classified as observation) and cat used for writing
(cat > file, cat « EOF, classified as action), as these represent fundamentally different behaviors
despite sharing a command name.

D.1   Turn-Level Classification

We classify each assistant turn by the commands it contains:

            Table 18: Turn-level classification of assistant turns containing commands.

                              Turn Type                Count         %
                              Mixed (obs + action)     44,768    48.0%
                              Observation-only         22,245    23.8%
                              Action-only              21,809    23.4%
                              Other                     4,465     4.8%
                              Total                    93,287    100%

Among turns that contain at least one parsed command, 71.8% (67,013 / 93,287) include an obser-
vation command. Mixed turns—where observation and action co-occur—account for 48.0% of all
command-bearing turns. Notably, once cat-write is properly classified as action, observation-only
and action-only turns appear in near-equal proportion (23.8% vs. 23.4%), revealing a balanced
interleaving of information gathering and environment modification.

D.2   Observation Command Taxonomy

We classify cat file (reading) as observation and cat > file / cat « EOF (writing) as action.
Of 88,208 total cat occurrences in the corpus, 43,330 (49.1%) are reads and 44,878 (50.9%) are
writes.
Table 19 shows the frequency of observation commands.
Two commands dominate: ls (34.1%) and cat-read (31.3%), together accounting for 65.4% of all
observation activity. Their near-parity reflects the two fundamental questions an agent asks: “what
files exist?” (structure inspection) and “what does the file contain?” (content inspection). Agents
balance structural navigation with content-level understanding, rather than strongly favoring one over
the other.


                                                 23
Table 19: Observation command frequency across 138,488 total observation command occurrences.

                  Command       Count     % of Total                     Purpose
                  ls            47,236         34.1%      List directory structure
                  cat (read)    43,330         31.3%           Read file contents
                  echo          14,790         10.7%     Display text / test output
                  grep           8,720          6.3%         Search file contents
                  head           6,639          4.8%            Preview file start
                  wc             4,650          3.4%     Count lines/words/chars
                  which          4,258          3.1%          Locate executables
                  find           3,258          2.4%           Search file system
                  diff           1,682          1.2%               Compare files
                  tail           1,275          0.9%             Preview file end


D.3   Action Command Distribution

Table 20 shows the frequency of action commands, with cat-write (heredoc file creation) classified
as action.
      Table 20: Action command frequency across 153,496 total action command occurrences.

                Command         Count     % of Total                       Purpose
                cat (write)     44,878         29.2%     Write/create file contents
                python3         28,079         18.3%       Execute Python scripts
                git             17,796         11.6%    Version control operations
                mkdir           11,608          7.6%            Create directories
                chmod           10,784          7.0%      Modify file permissions
                echo (write)     6,942          4.5%             Write text to file
                rm               4,550          3.0%                 Remove files
                python           4,444          2.9%       Execute Python scripts
                sed              3,387          2.2%               Stream editing
                node             3,332          2.2%           Execute JavaScript
                cp               2,668          1.7%                     Copy files
                bash             2,547          1.7%          Execute shell scripts

File creation via cat-write (29.2%) is the single most frequent action command, reflecting the
dominant pattern of using heredocs (cat « ’EOF’ > file) to create or overwrite files. Together
with echo-write (4.5%), file-writing operations account for 33.7% of all actions. Script execution
(python3 + python, 21.2%) is the second major category, followed by file system operations
(mkdir, chmod, rm, cp: 19.3%). The dominance of cat-write over sed (2.2%) indicates that agents
overwhelmingly prefer creating complete files over in-place editing.

D.4   Observation→Action Pairing Patterns

We analyze how observation commands relate to subsequent actions by tracking command pairs
within a window of 3 assistant turns. For each observation command in a turn, we identify the action
commands that follow within the window.

Overall pairing statistics. Across 15,389 trajectories, we identified 490,299 observation→action
pairs within a 3-turn window. The high volume reflects the dense interleaving of observation and
action throughout agent trajectories.

Most frequent observation→action pairs. Table 21 shows the most common observation→action
command pairs.
The two dominant patterns are structure inspection→file creation (ls→cat-write, 10.9%) and
content inspection→file creation (cat→cat-write, 10.0%). Together, these account for 20.9% of


                                                24
      Table 21: Top observation→action pairs within a 3-turn window (490,299 total pairs).

                Purpose                        Pair                   Count        %
                Structure → create file        ls→cat-write           53,582    10.9%
                Inspect → create file          cat→cat-write          48,912    10.0%
                Structure → execute            ls→python3             31,728     6.5%
                Inspect → execute              cat→python3            28,266     5.8%
                Inspect → version control      cat→git                19,954     4.1%
                Structure → version control    ls→git                 19,416     4.0%
                Structure → create dir         ls→mkdir               16,108     3.3%
                Structure → set perms          ls→chmod               15,383     3.1%
                Inspect → set perms            cat→chmod              12,548     2.6%
                Inspect → write text           cat→echo-write         11,613     2.4%


all pairs, revealing the core workflow: agents inspect the current state (either directory structure
or file contents), then create or overwrite files based on what they observe. The ls→cat-write
pattern captures the “check what exists, then create what’s missing” workflow, while cat→cat-write
captures “read the current version, then write an updated version.”

D.5   Turn Transition Patterns

Table 22 shows the bigram distribution of consecutive assistant turn types, revealing how observation
and action behaviors chain across turns.
                Table 22: Consecutive assistant turn type transitions (top patterns).

                          Turn t          Turn t+1       Count          %
                          Mixed           Mixed          21,089    26.9%
                          Action-only     Action-only     9,147    11.7%
                          Mixed           Action-only     7,985    10.2%
                          Mixed           Obs-only        7,280     9.3%
                          Action-only     Mixed           7,267     9.3%
                          Obs-only        Mixed           7,137     9.1%
                          Obs-only        Obs-only        4,563     5.8%
                          Action-only     Obs-only        3,259     4.2%

The most common transition is Mixed→Mixed (26.9%), indicating sustained interleaving of observa-
tion and action. The Action-only→Action-only transition (11.7%) captures consecutive file-creation
turns where agents write multiple files in sequence. The Mixed→Action-only transition (10.2%)
shows a common pattern where initial inspection (mixed turn) is followed by confident execution
(action-only turn). The Action-only→Obs-only transition (4.2%) captures post-action verification:
after modifying the environment, agents dedicate a turn to inspecting the results.

D.6   Observation Positioning Within Mixed Turns

In mixed turns (where both observation and action commands appear), we analyze the temporal
ordering of observations relative to actions.

               Table 23: Observation positioning within mixed turns (44,768 total).

                       Pattern                               Count          %
                       Observation after action only         21,482     48.0%
                       Observation before action only        13,478     30.1%
                       Observation both before and after      6,706     15.0%
                       Other (interleaved)                    3,102      6.9%



                                                 25
Post-action verification dominates (48.0%). The most common pattern is observation-after-action,
where the agent executes a command and then inspects its output or side effects. This reflects the
workflow of writing a file (cat-write) and then verifying its contents (cat-read or ls). With cat-write
properly classified as action, this verification-dominant pattern emerges clearly.

Pre-action reconnaissance (30.1%). Observation-before-action captures the information-gathering
approach: understand the environment, then act. This is the second most common pattern, indicating
that agents frequently inspect the current state before modifying it.

Bracket pattern (15.0%). Observation-both-sides forms a “sandwich” pattern: inspect, act, verify.
This provides the strongest correctness signal, as the agent can compare pre- and post-action states.

D.7   First Turn Behavior

We examine the first assistant turn in each trajectory to understand how agents initialize their problem-
solving process.

                   Table 24: First turn type distribution across 15,389 trajectories.

                               Turn Type                Count         %
                               Mixed (obs + action)      8,270    55.8%
                               Observation-only          5,936    40.0%
                               Action-only                 593     4.0%
                               Other                        32     0.2%

95.8% of trajectories begin with observation (either obs-only or mixed). Only 4.0% start with action-
only turns, indicating that agents almost universally perform reconnaissance before taking their first
action. This aligns with the principle of observe before acting: successful agents gather information
about the task environment before attempting modifications.

D.8   Key Insights on Observation-Action Behavior

Observation is pervasive but not overwhelming. 71.8% of command-bearing turns include at
least one observation command, and 48.0% of turns are mixed (obs + action). Once cat-write is
properly classified as action, observation-only and action-only turns appear in near-equal proportion
(23.8% vs. 23.4%), revealing a balanced rhythm between information gathering and environment
modification.

File creation dominates action behavior. cat-write (29.2%) is the single most frequent action
command, indicating that agents primarily modify the environment through complete file creation
rather than in-place editing (sed, 2.2%). This “write whole files” strategy is consistent with the
heredoc pattern (cat « ’EOF’ > file) that allows agents to produce complete, correct files in a
single operation.

Post-action verification is the primary observation role in mixed turns. Within mixed turns,
48.0% place observation after action (verification), compared to 30.1% that place observation before
action (reconnaissance). This reversal from naive expectation reflects the dominance of the “write
then verify” workflow: agents create a file and immediately inspect it to confirm correctness.

Structure and content inspection are balanced. ls (34.1%) and cat-read (31.3%) contribute
nearly equally to observation behavior. Agents balance understanding what files exist with under-
standing what files contain, rather than strongly favoring one inspection mode.

The inspect→create workflow dominates cross-turn patterns. The two most frequent
observation→action pairs are ls→cat-write (10.9%) and cat→cat-write (10.0%), together ac-
counting for 20.9% of all pairs. This reveals the core agent workflow: inspect the current state, then
create or overwrite files based on what was observed.


                                                   26
Distinguishing cat-read from cat-write is essential. Of 88,208 total cat occurrences, 49.1%
are reads (observation) and 50.9% are writes (action). Treating all cat as observation would inflate
observation statistics by 32% and obscure the true balance between information gathering and
environment modification. This distinction is critical for accurate behavioral analysis of coding
agents.




                                                27
