                                            Counterexample Guided Learning in the Large using Reasoning
                                                                     Agents
                                                          Hongyi Liu1 , Frederic Sala1 , Thomas Reps1 , and Adithya Murali1
                                                     1
                                                         Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
                                                           {hliu794, fredsala, reps, adithyamurali}@cs.wisc.edu




arXiv:2606.11521v1 [cs.LG] 9 Jun 2026
                                                                                             Abstract
                                                  LLMs and LLM agents should improve when given feedback, but identifying when they are able to
                                              do so is difficult: feedback is heterogeneous, domain-specific, and difficult to control. We approach this
                                              challenge by asking LLMs to perform regular-expression induction, a classical symbolic learning problem
                                              where precise mechanisms for feedback exist in the form of counterexamples. In counterexample-guided
                                              learning, a learner (LLM) proposes candidate regular expressions from positive/negative-labeled strings,
                                              and the teacher (verifier) returns counterexamples showcasing the difference between the candidate and
                                              target languages. We identify novel counterexample-guided refinement strategies that enable effective
                                              regex learning, such as regularization and symbolic counterexample clusters. We also explore agentic
                                              strategies such as reflection and repair loops. Empirically, we find that verifier feedback substantially
                                              improves sample efficiency on challenging regex-induction tasks, reducing the number of labeled examples
                                              required and enabling learning of complex target expressions where standard prompting fails. For example,
                                              on the hardest task groups, our counterexample-guided framework improves success from 3.2% to 38.1%
                                              and from 38.9% to 74.1% on two different regex domains. These results suggest that LLMs can benefit
                                              from rich feedback beyond treating it as additional data, opening the door for robust verifier-guided
                                              methods for LLM-based program synthesis and formal reasoning.


                                        1    Introduction
                                        Models, agents, and systems are increasingly required to learn and adapt from feedback. For example, coding
                                        agents must respond to errors and unit test failures, tool-using agents must revise their plans after failed
                                        API calls, and personalized assistants need to adapt their responses over time based on user corrections and
                                        preferences. Despite the importance of this capability, measuring how well models use feedback is surprisingly
                                        challenging. Feedback is diverse, heterogeneous, often closely tied to the task or domain, and difficult to
                                        control systematically.
                                            Is there a simple controllable way to measure models and agents’ ability to exploit feedback? We make
                                        the case for regular-expression induction as a clean testbed for measuring this capability. Given a set of
                                        labeled strings, the goal is to infer a description of the underlying language in the form of a regular expression
                                        by generalizing from the examples. This task is a canonical problem in symbolic learning, and a highly
                                        challenging one: many candidate expressions can fit a small set of labeled strings, and naive in-context
                                        learning can easily overfit to superficial patterns. The exploration of LLM capabilities in this setting revisits
                                        a long line of work in automata learning and program synthesis through a modern lens.
                                            This problem, and in fact our larger goal, are both not fully addressed by prior art. Traditional neural
                                        sequence models such as RNNs can treat regex recognition as a classification problem, but they do not naturally
                                        expose symbolic hypotheses and do not clearly benefit from counterexample-only learning. Conversely, LLMs
                                        can generate explicit regexes, but current usage is often prompt-driven and heuristic, with limited structure
                                        for how verifier feedback should be incorporated across rounds. Prior works also largely focus on synthesizing
                                        regexes from natural-language descriptions, as opposed to pure example-based learning Tang et al. [2026],
                                        Siddiq et al. [2024]. On the other hand, while counterexample-guided methods are well established in symbolic
                                        synthesis Solar-Lezama [2013], Abate et al. [2018], Alur et al. [2013], it remains unclear how to adapt them to


                                                                                                  1
Figure 1: Learning dynamics of our agentic counterexample-guided learner (orange) versus standard prompting
without counterexamples (blue). As the number of examples increases, the hypothesis returned by the agentic
learner converges closer1 and faster to the target concept, showing the value of leveraging rich feedback. Points
show the mean distance and shaded regions show variation.

modern LLM-based inference in a way that is sample-efficient, stable, and robust to overfitting. Furthermore,
traditional program-synthesis techniques can stall as the number of examples becomes large. Our work
contributes a much needed synergy between the two kinds of approaches, framing regex induction as an
oracle-guided symbolic generation problem where the model iteratively refines its hypothesis through verifier
feedback in the form of (potentially a large number of) counterexamples.
     Concretely, in this work we present a counterexample-guided framework for LLM-based regex learning.
Our approach uses LLMs and agents to generate candidate regexes from labeled strings, checks them against
a target expression, and synthesizes informative counterexamples from the symmetric difference between the
predicted and target languages. We further study (a) regularization strategies that bias the model toward
shorter, simpler, and more plausible symbolic hypotheses, (b) richer variants of counterexamples that cluster
several individual counterexamples with common failure information, and (c) agentic strategies that use
reflection to extract the structural implications of counterexamples and repair loops to iteratively revise
failed regex hypotheses. Empirically, we find that counterexample-guided learning is especially helpful in the
symbolic generation setting: on several challenging regexes, it substantially reduces the number of training
examples required and, in some cases, enables successful recovery where standard prompting fails, as shown
in Figure 1.
Our Contributions. The main contributions of this paper are:
• An oracle-guided formulation of LLM-based regex induction: We formulate regex induction with
   LLMs as an iterative symbolic learning problem in which candidate regexes are refined using feedback from
   an oracle in the form of counterexamples.
• An active learning methodology for regex induction using LLMs: To build effective LLM-based
   active learners for regex induction, we lift the classic teacher-learner learning framework to use LLM-based
   learners, investigating techniques such as regularization to prioritize simpler hypotheses and to cluster
   counterexamples symbolically.
• An agentic workflow for counterexample-guided learning in the large: We build novel agentic
   frameworks that learn regular expressions by reasoning about counterexamples across many rounds of
   learning, using techniques such as agentic reflection and iterative expression repair.
• A rigorous evaluation of the dynamics of LLM learning with verifier feedback: We study the
   performance of several counterexample-based learners across two datasets for regex induction. We show
   that our agentic framework improves learning performance compared to standard prompting from 3.2% to
   38.1% and 38.9% to 74.1% on the hardest instances in the two benchmark suites. We further show that
   our technique improves sample efficiency and that these gains persist across various base model families.
   We also compare our technique against baselines and perform ablation studies, demonstrating that each
   component of our agentic framework contributes significantly.


                                                       2
2     Related Work
Regular-Language Learning or Regex Induction. Learning regular languages from examples and queries
has a long history in the study of formal languages. A classic example is Angluin’s L∗ algorithm Angluin
[1987], which learns regular sets through membership and equivalence queries with counterexamples; this
oracle setting closely matches ours. Beyond query-based learning, prior work has also studied direct regex
inference from examples, including learning from positive data Fernau [2009], search-based synthesis from
labeled examples Lee et al. [2016], Bartoli et al. [2014], and constraint- or optimization-based approaches Gao
and Zhang [2020]. Prior to LLMs, neural methods also explored regular-language learning with recurrent
models trained on labeled strings, sometimes followed by automata extraction or analysis of learned finite-
state structure Cohen et al. [2018], Oliva and Lago-Fernández [2021]. These approaches provide important
background, but they do not study regex generation with verifier-guided refinement in an LLM-centered
setting.
Counterexample-Guided Symbolic Synthesis. Counterexample-guided refinement is also central to
symbolic synthesis. Counterexample-Guided Inductive Synthesis (CEGIS) combines candidate generation
with automated validation and counterexample generation, and has been highly successful in program
synthesis and related symbolic-reasoning tasks Solar-Lezama [2013], Abate et al. [2018]. Beyond program
generation, counterexample-based supervision has also been used in symbolic learning problems, such as
invariant synthesis Garg et al. [2014, 2016] and automata-related reasoning Weiss et al. [2020], where verifier
feedback helps expose mistakes that are difficult to identify from positive and negative examples alone. Our
work is aligned with this line of research, but adapts it to an LLM-centered setting in which the learner is
not a symbolic search procedure, but a language model that must interpret counterexamples and revise its
own symbolic hypothesis.
LLMs for Symbolic Reasoning, Program Synthesis, and Regex Induction. Recent work has shown
that LLMs can support symbolic reasoning and program synthesis by generating structured outputs such
as code, logical forms, and symbolic rules Chen et al. [2021], Austin et al. [2021], Shin et al. [2021]. In
regex-related tasks, prior work has shown that language models can generate explicit regular expressions from
natural-language descriptions or prompts, often combined with examples, repair heuristics, or multimodal
and sketch-based synthesis mechanisms rather than pure induction from labeled strings alone Tang et al.
[2026], Siddiq et al. [2024], Chen et al. [2020], Ye et al. [2020]. Furthermore, LLMs are increasingly used in
settings with external feedback, including process-supervision methods that verify intermediate reasoning
steps Lightman et al. [2023] and reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards Liu et al. [2025]. Our work
differs from these directions by studying LLM-based regex induction from labeled strings, and by asking not
only whether verifier-provided feedback helps, but also how it can be incorporated.


3     Problem Statement and Motivation
Our study is motivated by the long history of work on active learning where a learner actively solicits
feedback from a teacher, and uses the feedback to ‘tease out’ the hypothesis over several rounds of interaction.
Specifically, in the realm of symbolic learning/reasoning tasks, the capability frontier of LLMs can be spiky,
and there is little consensus on broad approaches for harnessing these abilities well. The setting of oracle-aware
learning through iterative feedback offers a richer framework to elicit symbolic learning capabilities from LLMs.
Simultaneously, traditional search-based approaches for counterexample-guided learning can suffer when
challenging problem instances accrue many counterexamples over many rounds, and machine-learning-based
approaches provide a compelling alternative to address this issue. Together, these facts motivate the high-level
research question of this paper: what can LLMs and Agents bring to counterexample-guided learning in the
large?
Oracle-Guided Learning. We formulate the problem we study as an active-learning problem guided by
an oracle/teacher. Let X be a domain of elements. We refer to subsets of this domain as languages. Let
L⋆ ⊆ X denote the target language we wish to learn. The learner observes finite evidence about the target
language in the form of labeled elements from the domain, and synthesizes a candidate language. The teacher
  1 Distance is measured using Diff Ratio, which is the fraction of strings up to a fixed length (32 in the figure) on which the

hypothesis regex and target regex disagree, normalized by the strings accepted by either regex.



                                                               3
                                                Initial Examples,                   Update Counterexample Set
                                           Counterexample Set

                LEARNER
                                                Reflection prompt                        TEACHER

                   Repair loop
                                                                                          Target Regex

                                                     Candidate
                    Query LLM-Learner
                                                      Regex
                                                    Reasoning           Best Candidate
                                                                                                                Solved?
                                                                           Regex


                                                       Feedback
                     Syntax Check &
                                               Syntax Error Message
                 Satisfaction Check on
                                              Mislabeled Examples                          Counterexamples


                                                    RepairScore
                 Construct repair prompt        Update best candidate
                                                      Regex
                                                    Reasoning                            Final hypothesis




Figure 2: Overview of our iterative counterexample-guided agentic refinement framework with a teacher and
a learner. The learner uses agentic reflection and repair along with counterexamples (see Section 4). The
teacher constructs counterexamples by checking equivalence between the candidate and target regexes.

then inspects the proposed candidate and provides feedback in the form of labeled elements that witness the
incorrectness of the proposed candidate, namely elements that should be included in the target language
but are not included in the candidate language, and vice versa. Note that in a concrete realization of this
framework, the teacher does not necessarily need access to the target concept to provide such feedback: it can
analyze the candidate with respect to test cases, constraints, or other properties it knows to be true about
the target, and return witnesses that showcase violations of these properties.
Problem Statement: Regular-Language Induction. We instantiate the above framework for regular-
language induction. The instance space X is a set of finite strings Σ⋆ , where Σ is a finite alphabet. The target
languages we study are those that can be represented by a regular expression or, equivalently, a finite-state
automaton. Given a regular expression r, we denote the language it represents by L(r). Given labeled
examples, a learner must synthesize a regular expression r̂ such that L(r̂) matches the target language L⋆ .
This task is both predictive and symbolic: the output must classify strings correctly, but it must also be an
interpretable expression that can be compiled, verified, and compared against the target. We construct the
teacher by sampling from the symmetric difference L(r̂)△L⋆ . We can build such a teacher in this setting
because regular languages are closed under Boolean operations, and there exist efficient off-the-shelf libraries
for constructing a symmetric-difference automaton Romero [2021].


4    Reasoning Agents for Counterexample-Guided Inductive Learning
We describe the various LLM-based learners that we built for counterexample-guided learning. Figure 2
describes the overall construction. We first present the teacher-learner interaction, and then describe the key
parts of our learning framework. We provide full prompt templates in Appendix F.
Teacher-Learner Iterative Framework. The learning framework is built around the teacher-learner
setting described earlier. The learning proceeds in several rounds. In each round, the learner proposes a
candidate regular expression. The teacher analyzes it, and determines if it is equivalent to the target language.
Note that the equivalence of regular languages is decidable, and can be performed efficiently by existing
libraries.
    If the proposed candidate is not equivalent, the teacher returns both positive and negative counterexamples,


                                                                    4
as applicable. The learner adds these counterexamples to the existing set (provided as part of the prompt)
and attempts to synthesize a better candidate. The process continues until the learner finds the target
or reaches a predetermined maximum attempt bound. Note that this process is a closed-loop refinement
procedure. Unlike learning paradigms where the training set is fixed in advance, supervision here is adaptive:
the teacher selects feedback based on the learner’s current errors. We argue that this approach is especially
useful for symbolic synthesis, where a hypothesis may fit a limited sample dataset but may fail on unseen
instances.
Improving Effectiveness of Counterexamples. We synthesize counterexamples as follows: given the
candidate regular expression r and the target r⋆ , we construct the corresponding minimal finite automata A
and A⋆ . Positive counterexamples (i.e., strings that must be included in the target language but are not a
member of the candidate language) are sampled from the difference A⋆ \ A, and negative counterexamples are
sampled from A \ A⋆ . The sampling procedure traverses the structure of the difference automata and returns
a diverse set of strings that cover different paths, representing a varied set of “mistakes” in the proposed
concept.
    However, the number of paths in an automaton can grow rapidly. Multiple symbols may induce the
same state transition, and loops—corresponding to Kleene-stars in the regular expression—generate infinitely
many counterexamples. We therefore propose the idea of clustered counterexamples, which are symbolic
counterexamples that capture many similar individual counterexample instances.
Clustered Counterexamples. We construct clustered counterexamples as follows. For a state q in the minimized
difference automaton, we group outgoing symbols by their destination state

                                        Γ(q, q ′ ) = {a ∈ Σ : δ(q, a) = q ′ }.

Symbols in the same group are behaviorally equivalent at state q, because they induce the same transition.
We represent each group with a new super-character symbol that we add to the alphabet. For example, we
represent the set {A,. . . ,Z,a,. . . ,z} as a new super-character [A-Za-z]. We may also use negations to represent
the class when convenient, e.g. [ˆ0-9]. Singleton groups are of course identified with their literal characters.
    Formally, a clustered counterexample is a path from the start state of the difference DFA to an accepting
state, where each edge contributes one super-character. A clustered counterexample compactly represents
many concrete strings that follow the same DFA trajectory and share the same disagreement label. For
example, S[0-9]#run represents strings such as S2#run and S8#run. Clustered counterexamples are
interpreted universally during learning: a clustered example is accepted only if every string represented by it
is accepted. We enumerate loop-free accepting paths and use a finite frontier and expansion budget to keep
counterexample generation bounded.
Agentic Workflow. We build on the above ideas by lifting the teacher-learner framework into an agentic
workflow. Recent work has shown that LLMs can benefit from agentic workflows where they iteratively
evaluate and improve their own hypotheses [Madaan et al., 2023, Shinn et al., 2023, Xiong et al., 2024,
Song et al., 2025]. We develop such an iterative agentic approach to help LLMs use counterexamples more
effectively. Our approach has an outer loop and an inner loop (see Figure 2). The outer loop accumulates
feedback from the teacher and uses reflection to augment the native reasoning capabilities of the underlying
model. The inner loop refines the process of proposing candidate regular expressions by performing repair
over a smaller set of counterexamples chosen from the full set of counterexamples available to the learner.
The detailed algorithm is in Appendix B.
    We now describe the reflection mechanism and the repair loop in detail.
Reflection. The key idea behind reflection is to ask the LLM to identify specific conceptual errors in previous
hypotheses and use them to improve future proposals. We therefore instruct the LLM to respond not only
with a candidate regular expression, but also a short reasoning trace explaining how the synthesized expression
was chosen. We then provide this reasoning trace back to the model along with counterexamples generated
by the teacher. The learner is then instructed to understand the previous attempt, explain what failed, and
revise the hypothesis according to the teacher’s feedback. Concretely, we construct a reflection prompt in
each epoch of the outer loop consisting of the reflection instruction, the previous hypothesis, the reasoning
trace corresponding to the previous hypothesis, and the new set of counterexamples provided by the teacher.
Repair Loop. The mere presence of examples in the context does not ensure that LLMs will return candidates
that are consistent with all of them. In fact, we observe that LLMs may return candidates that are not
consistent with provided instructions, are syntactically invalid, or most importantly fail to fit the accumulated


                                                          5
training examples. However, the hypotheses they return are not completely wrong or irrelevant either.
Therefore, we introduce a repair loop that repeatedly queries the LLM for candidates, providing pointed
feedback on the failures. Specifically, we require that the following conditions are satisfied:
• Syntax Check: the expression must be syntactically valid;
• Satisfaction Check: the regex must correctly label all counterexamples seen so far (C).
    We retry repair by providing the feedback from all previous tries until a candidate satisfying both
requirements is synthesized, or a predetermined retry budget is exhausted. We score the candidates obtained
in this manner as follows:
                                                                                  
                                                     1                 1       |e|
                          RepairScore(m, e, C) = Compiles(m) +             1−        ,
                                                     2                 2       |C|

where m is syntax error message, Compiles(m) ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether the regex compiles, e is the set of
misclassified examples, and C is the accumulated counterexample set. The repair loop returns the highest
scoring candidate synthesized across retries.
Regularization. In preliminary investigations, we observed that LLMs often fit the given examples with
overly specific or unnecessarily complex regular expressions. To address this issue we add prompt-level
regularization: we instruct the learner to prefer simpler hypotheses while remaining consistent with the
examples. During inference, we limit the maximum length of the expression, bound the nesting depth of
complex operators, and restrict the alphabet to valid symbols for the task.


5    Experiments
We study the following research questions:
• RQ1: Can feedback be used by models and agents, and what affects its usefulness? We ask
  whether counterexample feedback improves regex learning relative to learning from randomly sampled
  examples alone. We study how this effect changes with task complexity.
• RQ2: Can agentic setups make better use of feedback, and at what cost? We compare single-shot
  approaches with agentic workflows that perform reflection and repair, studying whether additional reasoning
  effort improves the use of feedback, and whether those gains justify the increased token cost.
• RQ3: How does the choice of backbone model affect feedback-guided induction? We evaluate
  whether the benefits of feedback-guided induction persist across different model families and reasoning
  configurations.
• RQ4: How robust is counterexample-guided learning to prompt design? We vary the prompt
  components used to specify the input & output formats, reasoning style, and strategy.
• RQ5: How do different ways of providing counterexamples affect performance? We compare
  clustered and non-clustered counterexamples to test whether feedback quality matters beyond the number
  of examples provided.
We also perform ablations to gauge the importance of each component in our pipeline.
Data. We evaluate our methods mainly on two datasets with different regular-expression variants. A
summary of the syntax for each variant and how we collect the datasets are provided in Appendix C.
• Simple Regex. The simple regex language uses the standard textbook regular-expression operators—
  concatenation, union, Kleene star, and epsilon—over a fixed three-symbol alphabet {a, b, c}.
• Extended Regex. The extended regular language is closer to real-world usage: beyond the simple setting,
  it additionally supports one-or-more, optional items, counted repetition, intersection, and negation, yielding
  a richer and more flexible syntax. The extended regexes we use are adapted from KB13 Kushman and
  Barzilay [2013].
    We measure regex complexity using two criteria: the number of states in the minimized DFA (#States)
and the maximum Kleene-star depth (StarDepth). We select three representative languages for each
(#States, StarDepth) combination, with #States ranging from 3 to 9, StarDepth from 0 to 4 for Simple Regex,
and from 0 to 2 for Extended Regex due to limitations of the original KB13 dataset.
Setup. Detailed configuration of LLM and hyperparameters can be found in Appendix D.




                                                       6
            Simple Regex Run-Level Success Rate↑                    Extended Regex Run-Level Success Rate↑
      Method     SD=0     SD=1     SD=2    SD=3    SD=4             Method     SD=0     SD=1       SD=2
      Standard   100.0%   50.8%    23.8%   27.0%    3.2%            Standard   100.0%   66.7%      38.9%
      Single     100.0%   92.1%    73.0%   61.9%   23.8%            Single     100.0%   77.8%      68.5%
      Agentic    100.0%   100.0%   82.5%   77.8%   38.1%            Agentic    100.0%   84.1%      74.1%

Table 1: Run-level success rate by regex complexity (aggregated by StarDepth (SD)) on the Simple Regex
and Extended Regex. Each cell reports success ratio over 21 regexes and 3 runs per regex.


5.1    RQ1: Can feedback be used by models and agents, and what affects its
       usefulness?
Setup. We evaluate three settings. Standard uses no counterexamples; instead, it constructs the training
set with randomly sampled labeled strings at logarithmically increasing scales, together with regularization.
Single uses clustered counterexamples for training data and applies regularization, but excludes the agentic
workflow. Agentic uses the full proposed framework. All counterexamples are clustered as described in
Section 4.
Results. Table 1 shows that feedback in the form of counterexamples substantially improve regex induction
on both datasets. On Simple Regex, Standard falls sharply as StarDepth increases, reaching only 3.2%
success at StarDepth 4, while Single and Agentic perform much better at 23.8% and 38.1%, respectively.
The same pattern appears on Extended Regex: at StarDepth 2, counterexample-guided methods are better
than Standard by nearly 30 percentage points, with Agentic achieving the best result. The benefit of
counterexamples becomes more significant as tasks become harder. As StarDepth increases, Standard
prompting degrades quickly, while counterexample-guided settings remain substantially more reliable. This
result suggests that counterexamples are most useful when the initial labeled examples underdetermine the
target language and the model must recover more complex symbolic structure.

5.2    RQ2: Can agentic setups make better use of feedback, and at what cost?
Setup. To isolate the value of the agentic workflow, we compare Single and Agentic. Both settings use
clustered counterexamples and regularization, but only Agentic performs additional reflection and repair
steps. We measure both final success rate and inference cost, where cost is approximated by total token
usage.
Results. The Agentic workflow makes more effective use of counterexamples. Across both datasets and
all nontrivial StarDepth levels, Agentic consistently outperforms Single. This observation indicates that
reflection and repair loops help the model extract useful information from counterexamples and translate it
into improved regex hypotheses.
     The Pareto plots in Figures 3a and 3b further show that counterexample-guided learning is more cost-
efficient than the Standard baseline. For most nontrivial StarDepth levels, Single achieves higher success
rates with fewer total tokens than Standard. The plots also indicate the cost of the Agentic workflow: it
typically achieves the highest success rate, but requires more tokens due to additional reflection and repair
rounds. Counterexamples improve both success and sample efficiency, while the full agentic workflow further
increases success but uses more tokens.

5.3    RQ3: How does the choice of backbone model affect feedback-guided induc-
       tion?
Setup. We compare different backbone models on Simple Regex while holding the task, evaluation protocol,
and maximum output-token budget fixed. We evaluate Standard and Agentic across Qwen3-235B Team
[2025], GPT-5.4 Medium, GPT-5.4 xHigh OpenAI [2026], and GPT-oss-120B OpenAI et al. [2025].
Results. Table 2 shows that for every tested model and every nontrivial StarDepth level, Agentic consistently
improves over Standard. This result indicates that the proposed framework can broadly use counterexamples
to improve regular-language induction, rather than depending on a single backbone model. However, the


                                                      7
           (a) Main Simple Regex Dataset                           (b) Main Extended Regex Dataset

Figure 3: Pareto frontiers of the main results on Simple and Extended Regex. Points at the same StarDepth
share the same color, while marker shapes distinguish learning settings. Gray dashed lines connect the same
setting across difficulty levels, showing how the cost–accuracy trade-off shifts with task difficulty. Colored
solid segments with black dashed overlays indicate Pareto-optimal trade-offs.

                                        SD=1                   SD=2                 SD=3
              Model
                                 Standard    Agentic   Standard    Agentic    Standard   Agentic
              Qwen3-235B           28.6%     61.9%         14.3%      38.1%    14.3%       38.1%
              GPT-5.4 Medium       38.1%      90.5%        14.3%      47.6%    14.3%       57.1%
              GPT-oss-120B         52.4%     100.0%        14.3%      85.7%    19.0%       76.2%
              GPT-5.4 xHigh        90.5%     100.0%        71.4%      95.2%    75.0%       85.7%

Table 2: Performance of different backbone models on Simply Regex aggregated by StarDepth. Each
cell reports run-level success ratio over 21 regexes (3 per #States), one run per regex. Qwen3-235B
denotes Qwen/Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct-2507-tput. GPT-5.4 Medium and GPT-5.4 xHigh both use
openai/gpt-5.4, with reasoning_effort set to medium and xhigh, respectively.


absolute performance still varies across models. GPT-5.4 xHigh performs best overall, while Qwen3-235B
performs worst, with the other two models in between.
   Because GPT-5.4 xHigh achieves the best overall performance, we further explored its behavior on the
harder StarDepth=4 split. Under the agentic setting, GPT-5.4 xHigh substantially outperforms GPT-oss-120B,
achieving 85.7% success, compared with 38.1% for GPT-oss-120B.

5.4    RQ4: How robust is counterexample-guided learning to prompt design?
Setup. We ablate the prompt design on Simple Regex. All prompt variants include a short task instruction
that asks the model to infer a regular language from labeled strings. We then vary four additional components:
an input instruction that explains the format of labeled examples, an output instruction that specifies the
regex syntax and answer format, a CoT-style output instruction Wei et al. [2023] that asks for intermediate
reasoning before the final answer, and a strategy component obtained from GEPA Agrawal et al. [2026]
optimization.
Results. The most important component is the output instruction (see Appendix E.3), which suggests
that models need a clear specification of the output language and answer format; otherwise, many failures
come from producing invalid or unusable regexes rather than from the induction problem alone. In contrast,
explicitly prompting for CoT does not consistently improve final success. The most likely reason for the
lack of improvement is because GPT-oss already separates reasoning from final answers, while many recent
reasoning models perform latent reasoning internally. As a result, prompt-level CoT guidance offers limited
additional benefit once the model already uses a reasoning-style decoding interface. The GEPA-optimized


                                                       8
                                              Simple                        Extended
                   Setting
                                     SD=1      SD=2        SD=3    SD=0      SD=1      SD=2
                   Non-clustered      90.5%    47.6%       52.4%   100.0%    76.2%     61.1%
                   Clustered         100.0%    85.7%       76.2%   100.0%    81.0%     77.8%

Table 3: Comparison between non-clustered and clustered counterexamples on both datasets. Each row uses
regularization and the full agentic workflow. Each StarDepth column aggregates 21 regexes, with 3 regexes
from every #States, one run per regex.

                      Ablation           C-CE Reg. Refl. Repair     SD=1     SD=2 SD=3
                      Standard            ×     ✓      ×       ×    52.4%    14.3%   19.0%
                      Single Inference    ✓     ✓      ×       ×    85.7%    71.4%   61.9%
                      No Reg              ✓     ×      ✓       ✓   100.0%    85.7%   71.4%
                      No Reflection       ✓     ✓      ×       ✓    95.2%    76.2%   76.2%
                      No Repair-loop      ✓     ✓      ✓       ×    85.7%    66.7%   66.7%
                      Agentic             ✓     ✓      ✓       ✓   100.0%    85.7%   76.2%

Table 4: Algorithm-components ablation on Simply Regex Dataset. C-CE, Reg., Refl., Repair indicates
whether clustered counterexamples, regularization, reflection, repair loops are used. Each StarDepth column
aggregates 21 runs, with 3 regexes from every #States, one run per regex.

strategy component provides some benefit, especially when regexes are easier at lower StarDepth. However,
the gain is limited and becomes less clear on harder regexes. This result may indicate mild overfitting of the
optimized strategy to simpler regex structures, and does not seem to provide a general solution for more
difficult tasks.
    Overall, the results suggest that prompt design is relatively robust once the input and output formats,
and the syntax of the desired output regex are specified clearly. The exact wording of auxiliary reasoning or
strategy instructions has a smaller effect.

5.5    RQ5: How Do Different Ways of Providing Counterexamples Affect Perfor-
       mance?
Setup. We study whether clustered counterexamples affect learning.
Results. Table 3 shows that across both datasets, clustered counterexamples consistently improve success
rates. This result suggests that the benefit of counterexamples depends not only on adding more labeled
strings, but also on how those strings cover the disagreement between the predicted and target languages.
Clustered counterexamples provide a more systematic view of the error region, making the revealed mismatch
clearer and less redundant. As a result, they give the model a stronger signal for diagnosing the failed
hypothesis and revising the regex.

5.6    Ablations
We ablate the main components of our workflow in Table 4. Regularization has only a small effect on final
success. From the trajectories, we observe that without regularization the model is more likely to overfit
early, when only a few examples are available, by producing long and overly specific regexes. As more
counterexamples are added, this issue is naturally reduced: the larger and more diverse training set makes it
harder for a highly specific expression to fit all observations, and the model is pushed toward more general
patterns. Consequently, removing regularization does not substantially hurt final performance. Reflection and
repair loops both contribute to the performance, but in different ways. Empirically, repair loops provide the
larger gain, which is expected because they use additional inference tokens to perform multiple rounds of regex
generation and verification. The Extended Regex ablation and Pareto plots are provided in Appendix E.4.
The Pareto plot in Figure 8a shows the same trade-off: Single lies on a strong efficiency frontier, while
Agentic variants usually achieve higher success, but require more tokens. We also evaluate a multi-candidate


                                                       9
repair variant, where 10 regexes are proposed simultaneously each round, and the one with the best repair
score is selected. This variant does not outperform Single, achieving 81.0%, 61.9%, and 61.9% success
at SD = 1, 2, 3, versus 85.7%, 71.4%, and 61.9% for Single. This result suggests that broader candidate
exploration alone is insufficient to improve refinement.


6    Conclusion
Counterexample-guided feedback provides a controllable way to study how LLMs use feedback for sym-
bolic learning. We showed that verifier-generated counterexamples—especially clustered counterexamples—
substantially improve regex induction. More broadly, our findings suggest that in verifiable domains, for
which informative failures can be synthesized, LLM agents can use structured feedback to move beyond
merely fitting examples and toward reliable iterative refinement.




                                                   10
References
Alessandro Abate, Cristina David, Pascal Kesseli, Daniel Kroening, and Elizabeth Polgreen. Counterexample
  guided inductive synthesis modulo theories. In Computer Aided Verification, volume 10981 of Lecture Notes
  in Computer Science, pages 270–288. Springer, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-96145-3_15.
Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav
  Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alexandros G.
  Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. Gepa: Reflective prompt evolution
  can outperform reinforcement learning, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.19457.

Rajeev Alur, Rastislav Bodik, Garvit Juniwal, Milo M. K. Martin, Mukund Raghothaman, Sanjit A. Seshia,
 Rishabh Singh, Armando Solar-Lezama, Emina Torlak, and Abhishek Udupa. Syntax-guided synthesis. In
 2013 Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design, pages 1–8, October 2013.
Dana Angluin. Learning regular sets from queries and counterexamples. Information and Computation,
 75(2):87–106, 1987. ISSN 0890-5401. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0890-5401(87)90052-6. URL https:
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0890540187900526.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen
  Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. Program synthesis with large language
  models, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732.
Alberto Bartoli, Giorgio Davanzo, Andrea De Lorenzo, Eric Medvet, and Enrico Sorio. Automatic synthesis
  of regular expressions from examples. Computer, 47(12):72–80, December 2014. ISSN 0018-9162. doi:
  10.1109/MC.2014.344. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2014.344.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan,
 Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger,
 Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder,
 Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet,
 Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-
 Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir
 Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam,
 Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer,
 Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba.
 Evaluating large language models trained on code, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.
Qiaochu Chen, Xinyu Wang, Xi Ye, Greg Durrett, and Isil Dillig. Multi-modal synthesis of regular expressions.
  In Proceedings of the 41st ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementa-
  tion, PLDI 2020, page 487–502, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
  9781450376136. doi: 10.1145/3385412.3385988. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3385412.3385988.

Mor Cohen, Avi Caciularu, Idan Rejwan, and Jonathan Berant. Inducing regular grammars using recurrent
 neural networks, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10453.
Henning Fernau. Algorithms for learning regular expressions from positive data. Information and Computation,
  207(4):521–541, 2009. ISSN 0890-5401. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ic.2008.12.008. URL https:
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0890540109000169.

Juntao Gao and Yingqian Zhang. Regular expression learning from positive examples based on integer
  programming. International Journal of Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, 30(10):1443–1479,
  2020. doi: 10.1142/S0218194020400203.
Pranav Garg, Christof Löding, P. Madhusudan, and Daniel Neider. Ice: A robust framework for learning
  invariants. In Computer Aided Verification, volume 8559 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
  69–87. Springer, 2014. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-08867-9_5.



                                                     11
Pranav Garg, Daniel Neider, P. Madhusudan, and Dan Roth. Learning invariants using decision trees and
  implication counterexamples. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on
  Principles of Programming Languages, pages 499–512. Association for Computing Machinery, 2016. ISBN
  9781450335492. doi: 10.1145/2837614.2837664. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2837614.2837664.
Nate Kushman and Regina Barzilay. Using semantic unification to generate regular expressions from
 natural language. In Lucy Vanderwende, Hal Daumé III, and Katrin Kirchhoff, editors, Proceedings of
 the 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
 Human Language Technologies, pages 826–836, Atlanta, Georgia, June 2013. Association for Computational
 Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/N13-1103/.
Mina Lee, Sunbeom So, and Hakjoo Oh. Synthesizing regular expressions from examples for introductory
 automata assignments. SIGPLAN Not., 52(3):70–80, October 2016. ISSN 0362-1340. doi: 10.1145/3093335.
 2993244. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3093335.2993244.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John
 Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
 abs/2305.20050.

Xiaoyuan Liu, Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Jiahao Xu, Wenxuan Wang, Pinjia He, Zhaopeng Tu, Haitao Mi, and
  Dong Yu. Trust, but verify: A self-verification approach to reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards,
  2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.13445.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha
 Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine
 Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with
 self-feedback, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.17651.
Christian Oliva and Luis F. Lago-Fernández. Stability of internal states in recurrent neural networks trained
  on regular languages. Neurocomputing, 452:212–223, Sept 2021. ISSN 0925-2312. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.
 2021.04.058. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2021.04.058.

OpenAI. ChatGPT (GPT-5.4) [Large language model], 2026. URL https://chat.openai.com. Accessed:
 2026-04.
OpenAI, :, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Applebaum, Edwin Arbus,
 Rahul K. Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, Boaz Barak, Ally Bennett, Tyler Bertao, Nivedita
 Brett, Eugene Brevdo, Greg Brockman, Sebastien Bubeck, Che Chang, Kai Chen, Mark Chen, Enoch
 Cheung, Aidan Clark, Dan Cook, Marat Dukhan, Casey Dvorak, Kevin Fives, Vlad Fomenko, Timur
 Garipov, Kristian Georgiev, Mia Glaese, Tarun Gogineni, Adam Goucher, Lukas Gross, Katia Gil Guzman,
 John Hallman, Jackie Hehir, Johannes Heidecke, Alec Helyar, Haitang Hu, Romain Huet, Jacob Huh,
 Saachi Jain, Zach Johnson, Chris Koch, Irina Kofman, Dominik Kundel, Jason Kwon, Volodymyr Kyrylov,
 Elaine Ya Le, Guillaume Leclerc, James Park Lennon, Scott Lessans, Mario Lezcano-Casado, Yuanzhi
 Li, Zhuohan Li, Ji Lin, Jordan Liss, Lily, Liu, Jiancheng Liu, Kevin Lu, Chris Lu, Zoran Martinovic,
 Lindsay McCallum, Josh McGrath, Scott McKinney, Aidan McLaughlin, Song Mei, Steve Mostovoy, Tong
 Mu, Gideon Myles, Alexander Neitz, Alex Nichol, Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Dana Palmie, Ashley
 Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Jongsoo Park, Leher Pathak, Carolina Paz, Ludovic Peran, Dmitry
 Pimenov, Michelle Pokrass, Elizabeth Proehl, Huida Qiu, Gaby Raila, Filippo Raso, Hongyu Ren, Kimmy
 Richardson, David Robinson, Bob Rotsted, Hadi Salman, Suvansh Sanjeev, Max Schwarzer, D. Sculley,
 Harshit Sikchi, Kendal Simon, Karan Singhal, Yang Song, Dane Stuckey, Zhiqing Sun, Philippe Tillet, Sam
 Toizer, Foivos Tsimpourlas, Nikhil Vyas, Eric Wallace, Xin Wang, Miles Wang, Olivia Watkins, Kevin Weil,
 Amy Wendling, Kevin Whinnery, Cedric Whitney, Hannah Wong, Lin Yang, Yu Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga,
 Kristen Ying, Wojciech Zaremba, Wenting Zhan, Cyril Zhang, Brian Zhang, Eddie Zhang, and Shengjia
 Zhao. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.10925.
Julien Romero. Pyformlang: An educational library for formal language manipulation. In Proceedings of the
  52nd ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, SIGCSE ’21, page 576–582, New York,


                                                     12
  NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450380621. doi: 10.1145/3408877.3432464.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3408877.3432464.
Richard Shin, Christopher H. Lin, Sam Thomson, Charles Chen, Subhro Roy, Emmanouil Antonios Platanios,
  Adam Pauls, Dan Klein, Jason Eisner, and Benjamin Van Durme. Constrained language models yield
  few-shot semantic parsers, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08768.

Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao.
 Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2303.11366.
Mohammed Latif Siddiq, Jiahao Zhang, Lindsay Roney, and Joanna C. S. Santos. Re(gex|dos)eval: Evaluating
 generated regular expressions and their proneness to dos attacks. In Proceedings of the 46th International
 Conference on Software Engineering, NIER Track (ICSE-NIER ’24), 2024. doi: 10.1145/3639476.3639757.
Armando Solar-Lezama. Program sketching. International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer,
  15(5):475–495, 2013. ISSN 1433-2787. doi: 10.1007/s10009-012-0249-7. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  s10009-012-0249-7.

Xiaoshuai Song, Yanan Wu, Weixun Wang, Jiaheng Liu, Wenbo Su, and Bo Zheng. Progco: Program helps
  self-correction of large language models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.01264.
Zipan Tang, Yixuan Yan, Rongchen Li, Hanze Dong, Bo Sun, Haiming Chen, and Hongyu Gao. Multi-modal
  regular expression synthesis method based on large language models and semantics. Journal of Systems
  Architecture, 175:103762, 2026. ISSN 1383-7621. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sysarc.2026.103762. URL
  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1383762126000809.
Qwen Team. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le,
  and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models, 2023. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903.

Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. Extracting automata from recurrent neural networks using
 queries and counterexamples, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.09576.
Weimin Xiong, Yifan Song, Xiutian Zhao, Wenhao Wu, Xun Wang, Ke Wang, Cheng Li, Wei Peng, and
 Sujian Li. Watch every step! llm agent learning via iterative step-level process refinement, 2024. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11176.

Xi Ye, Qiaochu Chen, Xinyu Wang, Isil Dillig, and Greg Durrett. Sketch-driven regular expression generation
  from natural language and examples. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:
  679–694, 2020. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00339. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.tacl-1.44/.




                                                    13
A     Background Details
We give formal definition of membership oracle queries and equivalence oracle queries:

Membership Oracle Queries. A membership oracle labels individual instances. For a queried instance
x ∈ X , it returns
                                Omem (x) = 1[x ∈ L⋆ ].
Membership queries provide local supervision about the behavior of the target language on specific examples.
In an active setting, these examples may be selected to be informative. However, finitely many membership
labels are generally insufficient to identify the full target language.

Equivalence Oracle Queries. An equivalence oracle evaluates an entire hypothesis. Given a proposed
hypothesis h, the oracle checks whether L(h) = L⋆ . If the two languages are equivalent, learning succeeds.
Otherwise, the oracle returns counterexamples

                                                C ⊆ L(h)△L⋆ ,

where △ denotes symmetric difference. Each counterexample exposes a concrete disagreement between the
hypothesis and the target, indicating either that the hypothesis is too restrictive or that it over-generalizes.


B     Pseudo Codes for Agentic Workflow
Algorithm 1 describes the outer loop. At each epoch, the teacher checks the current hypothesis and returns
counterexamples when the hypothesis is incorrect. These counterexamples are added to the aggregate training
set. The learner is then prompted to reflect on the previous hypothesis, its reasoning, and the newly revealed
failures before producing an updated hypothesis.
    Algorithm 2 describes the inner repair loop. For each retry, the learner proposes a reasoning trace and
a regex. The teacher evaluates whether the regex compiles, whether it fits the accumulated examples, and
whether it is equivalent to the target. If the candidate fails, the resulting feedback is converted into a repair
prompt for the next retry.


C     Detailed information of Regex Datasets
We summarize the main syntax feature differences between Simple Regex and Extended Regex in Table 5.
     For Simple Regex dataset, in order to synthesize regular expressions at scale, we recursively sample syntax
trees over union, concatenation, and Kleene-star under size and star-depth budgets. We use randomness to
efficiently cover a diverse range of structures without exhaustively enumerating the search space. Afterwards,
we simplify duplicated Kleene-stars, for instance, reducing “(a∗)∗” to “a∗”, and then construct the actual
regular expressions out of those syntax trees.
     The extended regexes used in our experiments come from the KB13 dataset Kushman and Barzilay [2013].
Because the expressions from KB13 have a slightly different syntax, we first parse and then covert them into
our desired form. We then group these regexes by the complexity criteria described in Section 5, which guides
the selection of our final Extended dataset.


D     Detailed Configuration and Setup
The learner is implemented by LLMs. We use the open-source model “openai/gpt-oss-120b” OpenAI et al.
[2025] (also “GPT” OpenAI [2026] and “Qwen” Team [2025] models for model ablation). For the main
experiments, we perform three trials per regex for robustness and reliability. And from RQ3 to RQ5 in
Section 5, we perform only one trial per regex for relevant experiments. For all the experiments, we set the
maximum context-window length to be 65536, the maximum output-token length to be 32768 (including
both potential reasoning tokens and revealed output tokens), and the temperature to be 0.0.


                                                       14
  Feature                      Simple Regex                             Extended Regex
  Alphabet                     Σ = {a, b, c}                            Σ = [A-Za-z0-9#]
  Literal symbols              Single characters or literal epsilon     Any single symbol in Σ
  Concatenation                Space-separated symbols, e.g., a b c     Implicit by adjacency, e.g., abc
  Union                        +                                        |
  Kleene star                  *                                        *
  One-or-more                  Not supported                            +
  Optional                     Not supported                            ?
  Counted repetition           Not supported                            {n}, {n,m}, {n,}
  Grouping                     Parentheses allowed for scope and prece- Parentheses allowed for scope and prece-
                               dence                                    dence
  Character classes            Not supported                            Allowed, e.g., [A-Z], [0-9]
  Intersection                 Not supported                            &
  Complement / negation        Not supported                            ∼R
  Epsilon                      Explicit literal epsilon                 No dedicated literal emphasized
  Precedence / associativity   Not explicitly specified beyond using Priority: quantifiers > ∼ > concatena-
                               parentheses for control                  tion > & > |; concatenation, &, and |
                                                                        are left-associative
  Typical example              (a b + a c)*                             (ab|ac)*

            Table 5: Comparison of the syntax features for Simple Regex and Extended Regex


   For “openai/gpt-oss-120b” experiments, we use 2 NVIDIA L40S GPUs to load the model and do inference.
The CPU memory used is less than 64GB, and disk usage is less than 200GB. For other models (“GPT-5.4”
and “Qwen3-235B”), we use API calls for inference.
   For implementation of regex, we use the off-the-shelf python library “pyformlang” Romero [2021]. The
maximum length of the training examples is set to be 32. For Standard setting, we start with 3 training
examples, and scale logarithmically up to maximally 3000 before reporting failure. For settings involving
counterexamples, we maximally starts with 8 initial labeled examples, and run maximally 12 epochs with
number of counterexamples added each round clipped to 250 maximally. For settings involving repair loops,
the repair budget is set to be 3.
   The main metric that we use to evaluate the performance is run-level success ratio. For example, for the
main results in Table 1, we evaluate 21 regexes per cell, and run 3 times per regex, yielding 63 runs in total,
and we report the ratio of the number of successful runs over the number of total runs.


E     More Results
E.1    Heatmaps of Main Evaluation
Figures 4 and 5 show the full main-evaluation heatmaps over both StarDepth and the number of DFA
states. These plots complement the aggregated results in Table 1, where we report success rates grouped by
StarDepth.
    The heatmaps show that StarDepth is a stronger indicator of learning difficulty than the number of states.
Within the same StarDepth level, performance varies with the number of states, but the overall degradation
is more clearly aligned with increasing StarDepth. This motivates our choice to aggregate the main results by
StarDepth in the main text.
    The heatmaps also confirm the main trend: counterexample-guided settings improve success rates across
a broad range of complexity levels. The improvement is most visible in higher-StarDepth regions, where
Standard prompting often fails but counterexample-guided methods recover a larger fraction of target
regexes.

E.2    Sample Efficiency Comparison
Figures 6 and 7 compare Standard and Agentic as a function of sample budget. For each budget, we
take the last hypothesis in the learning trajectory whose cumulative number of labeled training examples


                                                       15
Figure 4: Success rate heatmaps across regex complexity for main Simple Regex experiments. Rows correspond
to StarDepth and columns correspond to the number of DFA states. Darker colors indicate higher success
rates.




Figure 5: Success rate heatmaps across regex complexity for main Extended Regex experiments. Rows
correspond to StarDepth and columns correspond to the number of DFA states. Darker colors indicate higher
success rates.


does not exceed that budget, and evaluate this hypothesis on the corresponding evaluation set, which
contains sufficiently 800 labeled strings. The curves report mean evaluation accuracy across all regexes in the
corresponding StarDepth group, and the shaded regions indicate variation across regexes.
    Across both datasets, Agentic generally reaches higher evaluation accuracy at the same sample budget,
and it tends to improve more steadily as more examples are observed. The advantage is most visible at
nontrivial difficulty levels, where Standard often plateaus earlier or fluctuates more, while Agentic continues
to refine stronger hypotheses. This pattern indicates that verifier-guided counterexamples help the learner
extract more information from each additional example.
    Taken together, these curves show that our method is more sample-efficient: it typically achieves better
intermediate hypotheses with fewer labeled examples, and this advantage persists across a broad range of
budgets and difficulty levels.

E.3    Details on Robustness of Prompt Design
Table 6 reports a prompt ablation for the Single setting on the Simple Regex dataset. The largest
improvement comes from adding output-side instructions (syntax and output format requirements): compared
with naive prompting, specifying the regex syntax and answer format raises success from 14.3%/0.0%/4.8%
to 71.4%/33.3%/23.8% across StarDepth 1–3. Adding input-format instructions provides smaller gains, while
explicit CoT prompting and the GEPA-optimized strategy yield only modest additional improvements. These


                                                      16
Figure 6: Evaluation accuracy of hypothesis selected under sample budget on each StarDepth of Simple Regex
Dataset. For each budget, we take the last hypothesis in the learning trajectory whose cumulative number of
labeled training examples does not exceed that budget, and evaluate it on the corresponding evaluation set.
Each point is the mean evaluation accuracy, and the shaded region indicates variation.


results suggest that prompt design is relatively robust once the output structure is clearly specified.

E.4    More Ablation Study
This section provides additional ablation results for the algorithmic components. Table 7 reports the
component ablation on the Extended Regex dataset, complementing the Simple Regex ablation in the main
text. The Extended Regex results are broadly consistent with the main findings. Using counterexamples
improves over the Standard setting, and the largest gains appear on harder tasks. The agentic variants
further improve performance relative to using counterexamples only as additional training data, although
the effect of each individual component is not strictly monotonic. In particular, removing regularization
or reflection can sometimes achieve comparable or higher success on this dataset, suggesting that these
components affect the balance between exploration, correction, and overfitting rather than acting as uniformly
beneficial switches.
    Figure 8 shows the corresponding Pareto frontiers over success rate and total token cost for both Simple
and Extended Regex. The plots illustrate the main trade-off across ablation settings: simpler counterexample-
guided settings are more token-efficient, while repair-based agentic variants often achieve higher success at a
larger inference cost. Overall, these results support the conclusion that counterexamples are the primary
driver of improvement, while the remaining workflow components mainly control how effectively and how
expensively the model uses this feedback.


F     Prompt Templates
This appendix documents the prompt templates used in our experiments. Across all settings, the learner
is prompted with a task description, a description of the input format, domain-specific output-syntax
requirements, and an output-format instruction. Additional modules are optionally appended for regularization,
clustered counterexample interpretation, reflection, repair, and multi-candidate repair.


                                                      17
Figure 7: Evaluation accuracy of hypothesis selected under sample budget on each StarDepth of Extended
Regex Dataset. For each budget, we take the last hypothesis in the learning trajectory whose cumulative
number of labeled training examples does not exceed that budget, and evaluate it on the corresponding
evaluation set. Each point is the mean evaluation accuracy, and the shaded region indicates variation.

                  Method Prompt Input Output CoT Strategy SD=1 SD=2 SD=3
                           Naive      ×       ×      ×       ×     14.3%    0.0%    4.8%
                           Input      ✓       ×      ×       ×     19.0%    0.0%    9.5%
                  Single
                           Output     ×       ✓      ×       ×     71.4%   33.3%   23.8%
                           IO         ✓       ✓      ×       ×     71.4%   38.1%   33.3%
                           Zero       ✓       ✓      ✓       ×     71.4%   33.3%   33.3%
                           Full       ✓       ✓      ✓       ✓     85.7%   38.1%   38.1%

Table 6: Prompt ablation on Simply Regex varying included prompt components. For simplicity, we directly
use non-clustered counterexamples without regularization and without agentic refinements. Each StarDepth
column aggregates 21 runs, with 3 regexes from every #States, one run per regex.


Prompt Families. We use separate base prompt families for Simple Regex and Extended Regex.
Both ask the model to infer a single regex consistent with labeled examples, but they differ in the target
syntax. The Simple Regex prompt requires output in pyformlang.regular_expression.Regex syntax
over a small alphabet, while the Extended Regex prompt uses an extended regex syntax that includes
conjunction, negation, and additional quantifiers over the fixed alphabet Σ = [A-Za-z0-9#].

Regularization and Clustered Counterexamples. When regularization is enabled, we prepend a
constraints block encouraging concise, general regexes. For Simple Regex, this constrains the total regex
length and Kleene-star depth; for Extended Regex, the length bound is larger and the allowed star
nesting is smaller. When clustered counterexamples are used, the input-format section is augmented with
an explanation of grouped character classes, since some counterexamples are presented as character-class
abstractions rather than only literal strings.

Agentic Update Prompts. In agentic settings, the base prompt is augmented with additional instructions.
Reflection prompts summarize the previous reasoning, previous regex, and new counterexamples, and ask the
model to explain what failed and what should change. Repair prompts ask the model to revise the previous
regex using failure feedback and misclassified examples while preserving correct structure from the earlier
attempt. In the multi-candidate repair ablation, the model is instead asked to generate several repaired
regexes, each wrapped in its own <ans> block, after which the system selects the best one externally.

Training-Data Formatting. In all settings, the labeled examples are appended under a fixed header:
     Training Data (Each line has one input-output pair separated by comma):
Each subsequent line has the form <string>, <label>. Empty strings are represented by leaving the string
field blank before the comma.


                                                    18
                     Ablation           C-CE Reg. Refl. Repair   SD=0     SD=1 SD=2
                     Standard            ×     ✓    ×      ×     100.0%   66.7%   38.9%
                     Single Inference    ✓     ✓    ×      ×     100.0%   71.4%   55.6%
                     No Reg              ✓     ×    ✓      ✓     100.0%   76.2%   83.3%
                     No Reflection       ✓     ✓    ×      ✓     100.0%   85.7%   88.9%
                     No Repair-loop      ✓     ✓    ✓      ×     100.0%   76.2%   77.8%
                     Agentic             ✓     ✓    ✓      ✓     100.0%   81.0%   77.8%

Table 7: Algorithm-components ablation on Extended Regex Dataset. C-CE, Reg., Refl., Repair indicates
whether clustered counterexamples, regularization, reflection, repair loops are used. Each StarDepth column
aggregates 21 runs, with 3 regexes from every #States, one run per regex.




  (a) Component Ablation on Simple Regex Dataset         (b) Component Ablation on Extended Regex Dataset

     Figure 8: Pareto frontiers across full ablation settings on Simple and Extended Regex Datasets.


Base Prompt: Simple Regex.

TASK
You will be given labeled strings and must infer a single regular language
that matches all positives (label 1) and rejects all negatives (label 0).
Output a concise regex in pyformlang.regular_expression.Regex syntax.

INPUT FORMAT
- You receive a block titled “Training Data (Each line has one input-output
  pair separated by comma):”.
- Each line is "<string>, <label>" where label in {1, 0}. The string may be
  empty; an empty string appears as nothing before the comma (", 1") and
  represents epsilon.
- The alphabet is exactly the set of characters appearing in the data
  (typically a, b, c). Do not introduce other symbols.
{clustered_ce_instr}

PYFORMLANG REGEX SYNTAX
- Union: +
- Concatenation: space-separated symbols.
- Kleene star: *
- Parentheses are allowed for grouping.
- Use the literal epsilon when needed.
- Do NOT use: | . ? [] {} anchors/lookarounds, multi-character tokens,
  or any symbol not present in the training data.


                                                    19
INFERENCE STRATEGY
1) Check start/end constraints.
2) Look for block structure and repetition.
3) Choose between star-of-union and union-of-stars.
4) Prefer compact factorizations.
5) Handle epsilon only when supported.
6) Avoid over-generalization.
7) Verify all positives and negatives before finalizing.

{regularization_instr}
{agentic_reflection_instr}

OUTPUT FORMAT
- First, provide 1-3 concise sentences wrapped in <reasoning>...</reasoning>.
- Then output ONLY the final regex wrapped in <ans>...</ans>.

Training Data (Each line has one input-output pair separated by comma):
{0}

Base Prompt: Extended Regex.

TASK
You will be given labeled strings and must infer a single regular language
that matches all positives (label 1) and rejects all negatives (label 0).
Output a concise regex in our specified syntax (extended from
pyformlang.regular_expression.PythonRegex).

INPUT FORMAT
- You receive a block titled “Training Data (Each line has one input-output
  pair separated by comma):”.
- Each line is "<string>, <label>" where label in {1, 0}. The string may be
  empty; an empty string appears as nothing before the comma (", 1") and
  represents epsilon.
- The alphabet is fixed. Do not introduce other symbols.
{clustered_ce_instr}

EXT REGEX SYNTAX (Extended PythonRegex)
- Alphabet is fixed: Sigma = {sigma}
- Concatenation is implicit by adjacency.
- Union: |
- Grouping: ( ... )
- Conjunction / intersection: &
- Negation / complement: ~( ... )
- Quantifiers: *, +, ?, {n}, {n,m}, {n,}
- Do not use dot, negated character classes, anchors, word boundaries,
  lookarounds, or backreferences.

INFERENCE STRATEGY
1) Check prefix and suffix constraints.
2) Look for repeated substrings and block structure.
3) Choose between star-of-union and union-of-stars.
4) Factor common prefixes/suffixes and use character classes when appropriate.
5) Handle epsilon only when required.


                                           20
6) Avoid over-generalization.
7) Verify positives, negatives, and boundary cases.

{regularization_instr}
{agentic_reflection_instr}

OUTPUT FORMAT
- First, provide 1-3 concise sentences wrapped in <reasoning>...</reasoning>.
- Then output ONLY the final regex wrapped in <ans>...</ans>.

Training Data (Each line has one input-output pair separated by comma):
{0}

Regularization Blocks.
Simple Regex regularization:
CONSTRAINTS
- Prefer simpler, more general regexes while staying consistent with all
  datapoints.
- Total regex length (ignoring spaces) must be <= 60 characters.
- Nesting depth of Kleene stars must be <= 4.
- Use only symbols that appear in the training data.

Extended Regex regularization:
CONSTRAINTS
- Prefer simpler, more general regexes while staying consistent with all
  datapoints.
- Total regex length (ignoring spaces) must be <= 150 characters.
- Nesting depth of Kleene stars (*, +, ?) must be <= 2.
- Use only symbols that appear in the alphabet (except metacharacters).

Reflection Prompt.

AGENTIC REFLECTION UPDATE
- You will receive the previous attempt’s reasoning and regex, plus new
  counterexamples.
- First, briefly revise the previous reasoning to explain what failed and
  what should be changed.
- Then output an updated regex consistent with all training data and the
  counterexamples.
- Keep reasoning concise (1-3 sentences) and directly tied to the regex
  revision.

Reasoning of previous epoch:
<previous reasoning>
Regex of previous epoch:
<previous regex>
What failed in the previous epoch:
<feedback note, if available>
New counterexamples (string, label):
<counterexample lines>

Repair Prompt.



                                           21
AGENTIC REPAIR UPDATE
- You are repairing the previous attempt using the failure feedback and
  repair examples below.
- Repair goals:
  1) Produce a regex that compiles under the required regex syntax.
  2) Fix the specific mistakes exposed by the counterexamples, disagreement
     witness, and any reported errors.
  3) Preserve the parts of the previous solution that still fit the
     training data.
- If the previous regex is invalid, first correct the syntax.
- If a witness or repair example is handled incorrectly, revise the regex
  so that string gets the correct label.
- Keep the reasoning concise and focused on what changed.
- Return the repaired regex in the required output format.

Reasoning of previous attempt:
<previous reasoning>
Regex of previous attempt:
<previous regex>
Repair feedback:
<feedback note, if available>
Repair examples (string, label):
<repair-example lines>

Multi-Candidate Repair Prompt.
CANDIDATE REGEX GENERATION INSTRUCTION
- Do not return only one repaired regex. Generate exactly K diverse
  candidate regexes.
- Wrap every candidate regex in its own <ans> and </ans> block.
- You may include one concise shared <reasoning>...</reasoning> block
  before the candidates.
- Do not include any text after the final </ans> block.

Direct Output Format.
OUTPUT FORMAT
- Output ONLY the final regex wrapped in <ans> and </ans>.




                                           22
Algorithm 1 Outer Agentic Learning Loop
Require: Initial labeled examples D0 , task instructions I, reflection instructions Irefl , teacher T , learner M ,
    maximum epochs E, repair budget R
Ensure: Final hypothesis regex r̂
 1: Initialize aggregate training set C ← ∅
 2: Initialize current best hypothesis r̂ ← None
 3: Initialize current best reasoning ẑ ← None
 4: for e = 1, . . . , E do
 5:     if e = 1 then
 6:         c ← D0
 7:         prefl ← ∅
 8:     else
 9:         Teacher T checks r̂ against the target language
10:         Gather counterexamples from Teacher T feedback:

                                         c = {(x, y) : r̂(x) ̸= y} ⊆ L(r)△L⋆

11:       Build reflection prompt prefl ← BuildReflectionPrompt(Irefl , r̂, z, c)
12:    end if
13:    Update aggregate training set: C ← C ∪ c
14:    Construct base prompt pe from: (I, C, prefl )
15:    Run inner repair loop:
                                   (r, z, a) ← RepairLoop(pe , C, T, M, R)
16:    Update current best hypothesis: r̂ ← r, ẑ ← z
17:    if a = 1 then
18:        return r̂
19:    end if
20: end for
21: return r̂prev




                                                        23
Algorithm 2 Inner Reflection–Repair Loop
Require: Epoch prompt pe , examples C, repair instructions Irep , teacher T , learner M , retry budget R
Ensure: Best regex r̂, best reasoning ẑ, solved flag a
 1: Initialize the repair prompt, prep ← ∅.
 2: Initialize the best score, bestScore ← −∞.
 3: Initialize the best candidate, (r̂, ẑ) ← (None, None).
 4: for t = 1, . . . , R do
 5:     Query the LLM-learner: (r, z) ← M (pe ⊕ prep )
 6:     Syntax error message from compilation m ← compile(r)
 7:     Equivalence flag from equivalence queries: a ← T.Equiv(r)
 8:     Gather misclassified exmaples e ← {(x, y) ∈ C : r(x) ̸= y}
 9:     if a = 1 then
10:         return(r, z, 1)
11:     end if
12:     score ← RepairScore(c, e, C)
13:     if score > bestScore then
14:         bestScore ← score
15:         (r̂, ẑ) ← (r, z)
16:     end if
17:     Build the next repair prompt

                                 prep ← BuildRepairPrompt(Irep , r, z, m, e)

18: end for
19: return(r̂, ẑ, 0)




                                                    24
