                                                                                                                                               2026-06-01



                                        SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for
                                        LLM Skill Selection at Scale
                                        Tong Bai1∗     Zhenglin Wan2∗       Pengfei Zhou2         Xingrui Yu3‡    Yang You2   Ivor W. Tsang3
                                        1 Fudan University   2 National University of Singapore    3 CFAR, A*STAR


                                        # yu_xingrui@a-star.edu.sg     ∗ Equal Contribution.      ‡ Corresponding Author.




arXiv:2606.03056v2 [cs.AI] 2 Jul 2026
                                        Figure 1 | SkillDAG per-episode workflow. The agent issues search to obtain a three-field response
                                        (matches, neighbors, conflicts), calls show to fetch any skill body, acts in the environment, and may commit
                                        an evidence-backed graph edit through the propose-edge/edit-edge pair. Every commit passes acyclicity
                                        and non-contradiction checks with an append-only log enabling rollback; the updated graph feeds subsequent
                                        search calls. The LLM, not a graph-ranking policy, decides what to load.




                                          Abstract As LLM agents adopt large skill libraries, selecting the right subset becomes a structural
                                          problem rather than a similarity-matching one: skills depend on, conflict with, specialize, or duplicate one
                                          another, a structure invisible to both full enumeration and embedding similarity. We present SkillDAG,
                                          which models inter-skill relationships as a typed directed graph and exposes it to an LLM agent as an
                                          inference-time, agent-callable structural retrieval interface, queried and evolved during execution rather
                                          than baked into a fixed retrieval pipeline: each search returns vector matches, typed-edge neighbors,
                                          and conflict signals, and a propose-then-commit protocol lets the agent register execution-backed edges
                                          so the graph accumulates structure across episodes. On ALFWorld and SkillsBench with MiniMax-M2.7,
                                          SkillDAG reaches 67.1% success and 27.3% reward, exceeding the strongest reported Graph-of-Skills
                                          baseline by +12.8 and +8.6 points; the advantage ports to gpt-5.2-codex, and intrinsic SkillsBench
                                          Ret@K rises from 65.5 to 78.2 under matched queries. These gains trace to isolable mechanisms:
                                          candidate ranking that stays robust as the pool grows 10× where a fixed seeding–diffusion pipeline
                                          degrades, and set-monotone online edits that enlarge ground-truth recall without evicting prior hits.
                                          Code and data: https://github.com/Ericbai06/SkillDAG
                    SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


1. Introduction
Large language model agents increasingly rely on external skill libraries to extend their capabilities
beyond the procedural knowledge in model weights. A skill is a self-contained package: a unique
identifier, a natural-language description of when it applies, and a body of instructions or code
the agent runs when invoked, often with auxiliary scripts and prerequisite notes [Liu et al., 2026].
Voyager [Wang et al., 2023a], JARVIS-1 [Wang et al., 2023b], and ToolLLM [Qin et al., 2024] report
large gains once an agent is equipped with a curated skill collection. As collections grow to thousands
of entries, the bottleneck shifts from authoring to skill selection: which subset to load cannot be decided
from a name or embedding alone, and retrieval over large tool collections is itself a measurable failure
mode of LLM agents [Shi et al., 2025].
Two strategies dominate practice. Concatenating the whole library is feasible only at small scale:
token cost grows linearly and descriptions are lost in an overloaded prompt [Liu et al., 2024a]. Flat
retrieval instead embeds the task and concatenates the top- 𝐾 skills by cosine similarity [Karpukhin
et al., 2020, Reimers and Gurevych, 2019] or BM25 [Robertson and Zaragoza, 2009]. Both hide the
library’s relational structure: the top match names the task while a functionally necessary prerequisite
(a parser, converter, or setup utility) is silently omitted; analogous gaps arise from skills that interfere
when co-selected, near-duplicates that waste context budget, and pairs that jointly enable a capability
neither provides alone. Curation can mask these failures at small scale, but its cost grows with the
library.
Prior work models inter-skill structure but stops short of letting the LLM reason over it directly.
SkillNet [Liang et al., 2026] builds a 500,000-skill graph used for platform organization rather than
runtime routing. Graph of Skills [GoS; Liu et al., 2026] runs Personalized PageRank [Haveliwala,
2003, Page et al., 1999] over a typed skill graph at inference time and reports gains on SkillsBench
and ALFWorld, but computes the bundle through a fixed seeding–diffusion–reranking pipeline and
hands the agent opaque context: it cannot ask why a skill was chosen, retract a noisy retrieval, or
record a relationship the offline pipeline missed. XSkill [Jiang et al., 2026] and CUA-Skill [Chen
et al., 2026] address skill acquisition and execution respectively, not inter-skill relations.
We propose SkillDAG, built on the inverse design choice: rather than the substrate of a fixed retrieval
algorithm, the graph is exposed to the LLM as an inference-time, agent-callable structural retrieval
interface, on the same footing as the tools the agent already uses for execution. The LLM, not a
graph-ranking policy, decides how structural evidence should affect execution; the graph in turn
accumulates structural knowledge across episodes through evidence-backed agent edits.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
   • We identify that flat retrieval over large skill libraries silently omits structurally necessary skills
     and concatenates redundant or interfering ones—a failure mode invisible to similarity matching
     alone.
   • We propose SkillDAG, an agent-callable structural retrieval interface that exposes a typed skill
     relation graph to the LLM via search/show/propose-edge/edit-edge, replacing a fixed
     graph-ranking policy with structural evidence the agent reasons over directly.
   • We design an online propose-then-commit edit protocol under three structural invariants
     (acyclicity, non-contradiction, append-only reversibility) that grows the graph from single-
     episode evidence, paired with a two-view cold-start constructor that recovers cross-functional
     pairs flat self-similarity misses.
   • Experiments on ALFWorld [Shridhar et al., 2021] and SkillsBench [Liu et al., 2026] with
     MiniMax-M2.7 and gpt-5.2-codex show SkillDAG reaches 67.1%/93.6% ALFWorld success


                                                                                                          2
                   SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


      and 27.3%/36.8% SkillsBench reward, with intrinsic Ret@K of 78.2 stable across a 10× skill-pool
      expansion.


2. Related Work
Skill and tool libraries. LLM agents are augmented with external capabilities exposed as tools [Patil
et al., 2024, Qin et al., 2024, Schick et al., 2023], skills [Wang et al., 2023a,b], code actions [Liang
et al., 2023, Wang et al., 2024b], or grounded primitives [Ahn et al., 2022, Huang et al., 2022]. As
libraries scale, selection rather than authoring becomes the bottleneck: ToolkenGPT [Hao et al., 2023]
learns per-tool embeddings, AnyTool [Du et al., 2024] adds a hierarchical API retriever, CRAFT [Yuan
et al., 2024] creates and retrieves specialized tool-sets, and library-learning methods compress
trajectories into documented reusable code [Grand et al., 2024]. SkillNet [Liang et al., 2026]
organizes 500K+ skills as a graph for developer navigation, CUA-Skill [Chen et al., 2026] models
skills as executable DAGs, and GraSP [Xia et al., 2026] adds DAG repair for intra-task sequencing;
none expose inter-skill structure to the agent at runtime, so flat selection still misses prerequisites
and conflicts as the library grows.
Skill retrieval and structured RAG. Beyond flat top- 𝐾 RAG [Lewis et al., 2020], recent work injects
structure: GraphRAG [Edge et al., 2024] indexes a community graph for offline summarization,
HuggingGPT [Shen et al., 2023] composes models by task decomposition over a flat catalog, Hip-
poRAG [Gutiérrez et al., 2024] retrieves by Personalized PageRank over a KG memory, LightRAG [Guo
et al., 2025] maintains an incrementally updated graph index, and GeAR [Shen et al., 2025] performs
agent-driven graph expansion. For tools specifically, Re-Invoke [Chen et al., 2024] rewrites queries
for zero-shot retrieval and ToolGen [Wang et al., 2025] folds lookup into generation via tool tokens.
Graph of Skills [GoS; Liu et al., 2026], the closest baseline, builds a typed skill graph offline and
retrieves a bundle by reverse-aware Personalized PageRank that is concatenated into context as opaque
text. SkillDAG inverts two choices: the graph is an agent-callable structural retrieval interface rather
than a fixed retriever’s substrate, and its edges are editable during execution rather than frozen at
construction.
Self-evolving agent. ReAct [Yao et al., 2023b] interleaves reasoning [Wei et al., 2022] and action, ex-
tended by deliberate search [Yao et al., 2023a]; Reflexion [Shinn et al., 2023] and Self-Refine [Madaan
et al., 2023] add verbal self-correction; ExpeL [Zhao et al., 2024], AutoAct [Qiao et al., 2024], and
Agent-Pro [Zhang et al., 2024] distill experience into reusable insights or policies. Closer to skill
accumulation, Agent Workflow Memory [Wang et al., 2024c] induces reusable workflows online,
ICAL [Sarch et al., 2024] and STE [Wang et al., 2024a] abstract trajectories into memory, Auto-
Guide [Fu et al., 2024] retrieves state-conditioned guidelines, and OS-Copilot [Wu et al., 2024]
accumulates skills in a tool-rich OS; surveys frame these as non-parametric self-evolution [Gao et al.,
2025]. Generative Agents [Park et al., 2023] and MemGPT [Packer et al., 2023] manage free-text
memory, and XSkill [Jiang et al., 2026] updates individual skills. Recent systems also externalize
or compress agent execution context: AgentOCR renders interaction history into compact visual
memory [Feng et al., 2026], CaveAgent treats a persistent runtime as the central state store with
runtime-integrated skill management [Ran et al., 2026], while [Zhang et al., 2026] enables light-
weight deployment of modern agentic systems. In embodied settings, multi-memory frameworks
similarly structure spatial, temporal, episodic, and semantic experience for long-horizon interac-
tion [Lei et al., 2026]. Our propose/edit-edge mechanism instead mutates a typed relational structure
shared by all future agents, enabling precise, auditable updates.
Agent benchmarks. We evaluate on ALFWorld [Shridhar et al., 2021] and SkillsBench [Liu et al.,
2026], within a landscape spanning cross-domain tasks [Liu et al., 2024b], web environments [Zhou


                                                                                                      3
                   SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale




Figure 2 | A six-node subgraph from the post-run ALFWorld graph exercising all five typed relations:
cold-start specializes/similar_to edges plus an agent-registered depends_on and a later
conflicts_with on the same pair.

et al., 2024], general assistants [Mialon et al., 2024], desktop/OS control [Xie et al., 2024], API-rich
apps [Trivedi et al., 2024], tool-agent-user dialogue [Yao et al., 2024], and function calling [Patil
et al., 2025]. All share the pressure point motivating SkillDAG: retrieval over a growing capability
surface is itself a measurable failure mode [Shi et al., 2025].


3. Method

3.1. Overview

SkillDAG starts from a simple inversion: the typed graph is not hidden inside a fixed retrieval
pipeline, but exposed as an agent-callable interface the LLM can query, inspect, and revise during
execution. This makes graph structure an explicit part of the agent’s decision context rather than an
opaque ranking heuristic. The typed relation graph gives otherwise flat skill libraries operational
structure: prerequisite and specialization edges organize reusable progressions, composition and
similarity edges surface adjacent skills, and conflict edges mark combinations the agent should
avoid. The search/show interface turns that structure into action by returning semantic matches,
typed neighbors, and conflicts as separate evidence channels while loading full skill bodies only on
demand. To initialize such structure before any episode runs, the cold-start constructor links skills
from two complementary views: what a skill does and what it needs. Static structure is inevitably
incomplete, however, so the online protocol lets the agent propose and commit execution-backed
edits while acyclicity, non-contradiction, and append-only reversibility keep the graph from drifting
into incoherence. The formal graph, interface, cold-start constructor, and online edit protocol are
specified in §3.2–§3.5, with full pseudocode in Appendix A.



                                                                                                      4
                    SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale




Figure 3 | Cold-start construction: read the library, embed each skill in two views (𝑒self for what it
does, 𝑒needs for what it requires), apply an adaptive cosine threshold, run an LLM pair classifier, and
materialize the initial graph. conflicts_with is reserved for the online protocol because co-use
harm cannot be inferred from static text alone.


3.2. Skill Relation Graph Definition

Prerequisites, alternatives, and conflicts collapse onto a single cosine score under the default retrieval
baseline (rank skills by self-description similarity and concatenate the top- 𝐾 ), so a hard prerequisite
and an interchangeable alternative both surface as “high-cosine neighbors,” even though loading
the former unlocks the task while loading the latter wastes context and dilutes the agent’s attention.
To prevent this collapse, we elevate the relation type itself to be part of the agent-facing semantics,
so the LLM acts on what kind of relation it sees rather than merely how similar two skills look. We
instantiate this principle as a typed graph. Let the skill library be a finite set C = { 𝑠1 , . . . , 𝑠𝑛 } of
skill packages, where 𝑠𝑖 is also the unique identifier; the graph 𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸, 𝜏) has 𝑉 = C and a typing
function 𝜏 assigning each edge one of five operationally specified types: depends_on ( 𝐴, 𝐵) marks 𝐴
as requiring the prerequisite 𝐵; specializes ( 𝐷, 𝐴) marks 𝐷 as the narrower variant to prefer over
𝐴; composes_with marks synergistic co-use; similar_to marks functional redundancy (pick one);
and conflicts_with marks pairs that should not be co-selected.
Two operational constraints make this typed graph usable as an agent-facing interface. Conflicts as
a pruning signal, not a navigation edge. We deliberately exclude conflicts_with from traversal
because navigating a conflict edge would actively undermine retrieval by surfacing the very skills
the LLM has been told to avoid; the four positive types are walked by the retrieval interface, while
conflicts_with is only used to exclude co-selection (§3.3). Acyclicity on the backbone. We reserve
depends_on and specializes as the directed backbone whose acyclicity gives SkillDAG its
name; the invariant is enforced at commit time (§3.5). Figure 2 shows a six-node post-run ALFWorld
subgraph exercising all five types.


3.3. Agent-Callable Structural Retrieval Interface

Having typed the edges, we must decide how to expose the graph to the agent at inference time. The
default move in prior graph retrievers is to collapse typed structure back into one ranked bundle,
but doing so would undo the work of §3.2, hiding from the LLM exactly the distinctions we built
the graph to preserve. We therefore designed search (Figure 1) as an agent-callable interface that
returns semantic matches, typed neighbors, and conflicts as three separate evidence channels the
LLM reasons over independently.


                                                                                                          5
                   SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


A single search ( 𝑞, 𝐾, 𝐷) call returns three fields, each answering a distinct question the LLM would
otherwise have to ask separately: matches (“what is topically close to 𝑞?”), the top- 𝐾 skills by query–
node embedding cosine [Karpukhin et al., 2020]; neighbors (“what does the typed graph attach to
those matches?”), skills reached by bounded breadth-first traversal of depth 𝐷 over the four walkable
edge types; and conflicts (“what should I not co-load with them?”), the one-hop conflicts_with
edges incident to any match.
We chose to keep these channels separate, rather than fusing them into a single score, because the
decomposition gives the agent three capabilities that a ranked bundle cannot offer: it can drop an
entire field under a tight context budget (e.g., skip neighbors when context is scarce), schedule
search calls on its own initiative (e.g., re-query after partial progress), and leave a reasoning trace
documenting why each skill was selected or excluded.


3.4. Cold-Start Graph Construction

The interface of §3.3 assumes a graph already exists; we now describe how it is first populated,
before the agent ever runs. The obvious choice (embed each skill’s self-description and link nearest
neighbors) has a specific failure mode we set out to fix: skills that should be connected often describe
different actions, where one provides what another requires. A cooling skill and a pickup skill, for
example, have disjoint self-descriptions, yet the cooling skill requires “object in hand” produced by
the pickup skill. Self-description similarity alone systematically misses such cross-functional pairs,
so we designed a two-view embedding strategy that initializes the graph from static SKILL.md text
while explicitly recovering these bridges.
The key departure from single-view retrieval is the second embedding. For each skill 𝑣, 𝑒self ( 𝑣)
captures what a skill does (identifier, description, body preview), while 𝑒needs ( 𝑣) captures what it
requires: an LLM imagines a few invoking tasks and summarizes the shared prerequisites in one
sentence (HyDE-style [Gao et al., 2023]), then embeds the summary. 𝑒self surfaces topical neighbors;
𝑒needs surfaces functional bridges, and a candidate pair appears if either ranking exceeds the adaptive
cosine threshold. An LLM classifier [Zheng et al., 2023] then assigns one of the four static types or
none. Figure 3 traces these stages end to end: read library, embed in two views, threshold, classify,
materialize.
We reserve conflicts_with for the online protocol (§3.5) by operational necessity: a conflict is, by
definition, a pair whose co-use predictably degrades success, and that evidence simply does not exist
until execution is observed. No amount of static reading recovers it.


3.5. Online Graph Evolution

Even a well-constructed cold-start graph is necessarily incomplete. By the argument just made it
cannot contain conflicts_with edges at all; more broadly, many useful relations appear only
during execution: a prerequisite the cold-start LLM did not anticipate, an interference pair observable
only when both skills are loaded together, a refinement of an existing relation after a near-miss. To
close this gap, we make graph construction an online part of agency rather than offline preprocessing:
the per-episode loop in Figure 1 includes a propose-edge/edit-edge pair through which the
agent commits evidence-backed edits at the same pace it acts in the environment.
We split the edit into two calls so that committing is always a deliberate act rather than a side effect
of execution. propose-edge performs a dry run: it previews the change and surfaces existing edges
and history for the same skill pair, so the agent can reason about whether to commit. edit-edge then
commits the change with a natural-language reason and the supporting execution trace; the same


                                                                                                      6
                    SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


Table 1 | Main results. R = reward (%); ALFWorld R = success rate. SkillsBench R at 1000-skill scale.
Ret@K/Ret@1/MRR (↑) are intrinsic retrieval metrics. Vanilla/Vector/GoS R quoted from Liu et al.
[2026] Table 1; SkillDAG R from our runs. Best per column in bold.

                                                   SkillsBench                       ALFWorld
         Model           Method           R↑     Ret@K↑ Ret@1↑ MRR↑        R↑    Ret@K↑ Ret@1↑ MRR↑
                      Vanilla Skills      17.2     –        –        –    47.1      –         –      –
                      Vector Skills       10.4    10.8     3.6      5.8   50.7     68.6      37.9   49.2
         MiniMax-M2.7
                      GoS                 18.7    65.5    50.6     57.3   54.3     86.4      56.4   67.9
                      SkillDAG            27.3    78.2    66.7     71.3   67.1     92.1      57.9   71.1
                         Vanilla Skills   27.4     –        –        –    89.3      –         –      –
                         Vector Skills    21.5    10.8     3.6      5.8   92.9     68.6      37.9   49.2
         gpt-5.2-codex
                         GoS              34.4    65.5    50.6     57.3   93.6     86.4      56.4   67.9
                         SkillDAG         36.8    75.9    70.1     73.0   93.6     85.1      60.4   69.6



call can add, delete, or retype an existing edge, giving the agent an explicit retraction path for stale
or mistaken relations. We deliberately chose to gate commits only by the agent’s own reasoning, not
by a downstream voting threshold or a human curator, so that a single execution episode suffices and
the graph evolves at agent speed rather than curation speed. The repeated pair in Figure 2 illustrates
why the preview surfaces pair history: a later conflicts_with decision must be evaluated against
earlier depends_on evidence on the same pair.
Gating commits only by the agent’s reasoning raises the risk of single-shot corruption, which we
bound with three structural invariants every commit must pass; the invariants are chosen to limit
the blast radius of a bad edit without second-guessing the agent’s semantic judgment. Acyclicity: a
depends_on/specializes commit that would close a backbone cycle is rejected, since a circular
prerequisite chain would loop the agent through skills that each demand the next, voiding the DAG
property declared in §3.2. Non-contradiction: a pair cannot simultaneously carry conflicts_with
and a positive surfacing edge, preventing the navigation and pruning signals from cancelling each
other. Reversibility: an append-only history log supports rollback by recency, so a spurious edit is
bounded and recoverable. These invariants are structural rather than semantic by design: they
preserve the LLM’s authority over what each edge means while preventing the graph from drifting
into incoherence.


4. Experiments
Our evaluation pursues four guiding questions about when and why the interface design pays off.
We first compare SkillDAG against full-library prompting, vector retrieval, and GoS on end-task
reward—the strongest indicator that agent-callable graph access actually beats the dominant baselines.
Replaying identical queries through both retrievers then isolates how much of the gain is already
visible before any downstream execution. Contrasting MiniMax-M2.7 with gpt-5.2-codex shows
how the effect changes with backbone reasoning strength. Finally, a 10× skill-pool expansion and an
ALFWorld train/test split measure whether retrieval stays robust at scale and whether online edits
transfer to held-out episodes. Setup is in §4.1, main results in §4.2, and ablations in §4.3.


4.1. Experimental Setup

Benchmarks. We evaluate on two benchmarks used by Liu et al. [2026], which exercise differ-
ent aspects of skill selection at scale. ALFWorld [Shridhar et al., 2021] is a text-based embodied


                                                                                                           7
                                                SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


                                                                                                                                              GoS PPR                 SkillDAG


                                                                                                                     Ret@5                               Ret@1                                    MRR
                                                                                                                                                                                 80




                                                                              Retrieval quality (%)
                                                                                                      80   78.2     78.2   78.2          70    67.8     67.8   66.7                   72.3     72.1   71.3
                                                                                                                                  74.7                                           70                          65.6




ALFWorld success (%)
                                    MiniMax-M2.7            gpt-5.2-codex                                                                60                              58.6
                                                                                                                    73.6                                60.9                                   65.8
                       100           92.3           90.7               93.6                           70                                                                         60
                        80   67.1            65.0               67.1                                                                     50    50.6            50.6                                   57.3
                                                                                                                           65.5                                                       55.1
                        60                                                                                                                                                       50
                                                                                                      60   62.1
                                                                                                                                  60.9
                        40                                                                                                               40                              42.5                                49.3
                        20
                         0                                                                                 200      500 1000 2000              200      500 1000 2000                 200      500 1000 2000
                               Train         Test-initial      Test-edited                                        Skill-pool scale                    Skill-pool scale                       Skill-pool scale


(a) ALFWorld train/test.                                                      (b) Cross-scale retrieval on SkillsBench.

Figure 4 | Robustness experiments. (a) ALFWorld success (%) across Train (420 in-domain, edits
on), Test-initial (140 held-out on cold-start graph), and Test-edited (same 140 on train-produced
graph), for both backbones. (b) Same 87 SkillDAG queries through both retrievers, shared
text-embedding-3-large; SkillDAG outranks GoS at every scale and stays flat across the
10× expansion; scale-1000 matches the MiniMax row of Table 1.


environment whose six task types (pick-and-place, examine-in-light, clean-, heat-, cool-and-place,
pick-two-and-place) require composing navigation, manipulation, and state-change behaviors; we
run the 140-episode valid_seen split with a 37-skill procedural library. SkillsBench [Liu et al., 2026]
is 87 containerized code-generation tasks scored by unit-test pass fraction, shipped at four skill-pool
scales (200/500/1000/2000 SKILL.md documents) so retrieval quality can be studied as the pool
grows.
Baselines. We compare against three baselines from Liu et al. [2026]. Vanilla Skills places the entire
library in the prompt and acts via ReAct [Yao et al., 2023b] (the recall upper bound and context-cost
reference). Vector Skills concatenates the top- 𝐾 embedding-cosine matches, using no graph structure.
Graph of Skills (GoS) [Liu et al., 2026] retrieves a bundle by hybrid semantic–lexical seeding plus
reverse-aware Personalized PageRank over a typed graph, reranked under a token budget, then
concatenated into the prompt. SkillDAG (ours) exposes the graph as an agent-callable structural
retrieval interface: the agent issues search/show/propose-edge/edit-edge during execution,
acts on the three-field search response, and commits evidence-backed edges under the guardrail
checks.
Models & evaluation. We report per-episode reward R (%); for ALFWorld R equals success rate.
The Vanilla/Vector/GoS R rows (for both MiniMax-M2.7 and gpt-5.2-codex) are quoted from
Liu et al. [2026] Table 1 and were not rerun locally; the SkillDAG R rows are our own runs on
the same benchmark, backbone, task data, and skill pools, but are not paired seed-matched reruns
of the baselines. The intrinsic retrieval columns are computed by us on identical inputs: the actual
search queries issued by the SkillDAG agent during its 87-task run, evaluated by each pipeline on
the scale-1000 pool (𝑛=140 ALFWorld episodes, 𝑛=87 SkillsBench tasks).


4.2. Main Results

Table 1 reports task reward and intrinsic retrieval on both benchmarks and backbones.
SkillDAG improves most under MiniMax-M2.7: ALFWorld 54.3 → 67.1 (+12.8) and SkillsBench
18.7 → 27.3 (+8.6), while under gpt-5.2-codex ALFWorld ties at 93.6% and SkillsBench narrows
to 34.4 → 36.8 (+2.4); the routing aid signature is large where the backbone cannot reason past a
poor bundle and vanishes once it can. Intrinsic SkillsBench retrieval likewise improves over GoS on
the same MiniMax query distribution: Ret@K 65.5 → 78.2, Ret@1 50.6 → 66.7, MRR 57.3 → 71.3,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8
                   SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


isolating a retrieval-pipeline gain before any agent-side execution; with embedding and queries held
fixed, SkillDAG’s matches-field cosine over typed-graph node embeddings ranks more accurately
than GoS’s HNSW [Malkov and Yashunin, 2020] seed+PPR [Page et al., 1999] diffusion.
On gpt-5.2-codex, SkillDAG ties GoS on ALFWorld (93.6%), remains best on SkillsBench
(36.8%), and yields 75.9/70.1/73.0 Ret@5/Ret@1/MRR on codex trajectory queries.


4.3. Scale and Edit-Transfer Ablations

We isolate two effects behind the main results: whether the agent’s online edits persist as durable,
recall-safe structure, and whether the typed-graph retriever stays robust as the skill pool grows.
We measure online editing two ways: an ALFWorld train/test split that tests whether committed
edges transfer, and a SkillsBench cold-vs-edited query replay that tests what an accepted edge does
to retrieved recall (Table 2).

Table 2 | SkillsBench scale-1000 retrieval, replaying 316 search queries from 65 tasks against the
cold-start vs. edited graph. “Mean GT/q” is the average number of ground-truth skills retrieved per
query (mean ground-truth size 2.52 skills/task).

                              Graph                       Edges     Mean GT/q
                              Cold-start                  2,359         1.915
                              Edited (+27 online)         2,386         1.984


Committed edges persist as durable structure. A 420-episode in-domain train run accumulates
edits; test-initial (140 held-out episodes, cold-start graph) and test-edited (same 140, train-produced
graph) are then run with edits disabled. On both backbones train and test-initial sit within 2.1 points
(MiniMax-M2.7 67.1/65.0/67.1%; gpt-5.2-codex 92.3/90.7/93.6%; Figure 4a): transfer holds to
the held-out split, and test-edited recovers the train number, so committed edges persist as durable
structure rather than training-time stochastics.
Online edits expand ground-truth recall set-monotonically. Replaying all 316 scale-1000 search
queries, the edited graph (+27 single-observation commits) retrieves more ground-truth skills per
query (1.984 vs. 1.915; Table 2) and zero queries lose any ground-truth retrieval. This follows by
construction: the scorer takes the untruncated union of matches and BFS neighbors, so an accepted
edge can only enlarge the retrieved set, never evicting a ground-truth skill the cold-start graph already
surfaced; this is a recall property, not a context-budget claim.
SkillDAG ranking stays robust as the pool grows 10×. With the embedding backbone held
fixed, SkillDAG’s plain matches cosine outranks GoS on every retrieval metric at every pool
scale despite using no diffusion step: +16.1/+17.2/+17.2 (Ret@5/Ret@1/MRR) at 200 skills and
+13.8/+16.1/+16.3 at 2000, narrowest at 500 (+4.6/+6.9/+6.3) where GoS’s PPR pull happens to
align with the gold target; across the 10× pool expansion it loses only 3.5 Ret@5 points (78.2 → 74.7),
scaling robustly to larger libraries (Figure 4b). This isolates the offline retrieval pipeline, not the
typed-edge neighbors/conflicts fields the agent exercises during execution.


5. Conclusion
SkillDAG exposes a typed skill-relation graph as an agent-callable structural retrieval interface
(search/show/propose-edge/edit-edge) rather than hiding it inside a fixed graph-ranking

                                                                                                       9
                   SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


policy. The agent loads only the typed neighbors and skill bodies it needs, avoiding the context-
bloat failure where fixed-bundle retrievers flood the prompt with marginally relevant skills and
corrupt downstream reasoning. Against GoS, SkillDAG lifts MiniMax-M2.7 reward on ALFWorld
(54.3 → 67.1) and SkillsBench (18.7 → 27.3), with matches-field retrieval winning every metric at
every pool scale—supporting the inversion claim that the graph works best as an interface for routing
decisions, not as an opaque policy.




                                                                                                 10
                   SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


Limitations
The propose-then-commit protocol is intentionally agent-driven: a single execution observation can
suffice for the agent to commit an edge, bounded by structural guardrails (acyclicity, non-contradiction,
reversibility) rather than a statistical confidence threshold (§3.5). Aggregate edit effects are reported
(§4.3), but the long-horizon behaviour of single-observation self-evolution remains an open question
we view as a direction for future work.


References
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, and
 Chelsea Finn. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In CoRL, 2022.

Tianyi Chen, Yinheng Li, Michael Solodko, Sen Wang, Nan Jiang, Tingyuan Cui, Junheng Hao,
  Jongwoo Ko, Sara Abdali, and Leon Xu. CUA-Skill: Develop skills for computer using agent. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2601.21123, 2026.

Yanfei Chen, Jinsung Yoon, Devendra Singh Sachan, Qingze Wang, Vincent Cohen-Addad, Moham-
  madhossein Bateni, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. Re-Invoke: Tool invocation rewriting for
  zero-shot tool retrieval. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP, 2024.

Yu Du, Fangyun Wei, and Hongyang Zhang. AnyTool: Self-reflective, hierarchical agents for large-scale
  API calls. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.

Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt,
  Dasha Metropolitansky, Robert Osazuwa Ness, and Jonathan Larson. From local to global: A graph
  RAG approach to query-focused summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130, 2024.

Lang Feng, Fuchao Yang, Feng Chen, Xin Cheng, Haiyang Xu, Zhenglin Wan, Ming Yan, and Bo An.
  AgentOCR: Reimagining agent history via optical self-compression, 2026. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2601.04786.
Yao Fu, Dong-Ki Kim, Jaekyeom Kim, Sungryull Sohn, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Kyunghoon Bae, and
  Honglak Lee. AutoGuide: Automated generation and selection of context-aware guidelines for large
  language model agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.

Huan-ang Gao, Jiayi Geng, Wenyue Hua, Mengkang Hu, Xinzhe Juan, Hongzhang Liu, Shilong Liu,
 Jiahao Qiu, Xuan Qi, Yiran Wu, Hongru Wang, Han Xiao, Yuhang Zhou, Shaokun Zhang, Jiayi
 Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Yixiong Fang, Qiwen Zhao, Dongrui Liu, Qihan Ren, Cheng Qian, Zhenhailong
 Wang, Minda Hu, Huazheng Wang, Qingyun Wu, Heng Ji, and Mengdi Wang. A survey of self-
 evolving agents: What, when, how, and where to evolve on the path to artificial super intelligence.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21046, 2025.

Luyu Gao, Xueguang Ma, Jimmy Lin, and Jamie Callan. Precise zero-shot dense retrieval without
  relevance labels. In ACL, 2023.

Gabriel Grand, Lionel Wong, Maddy Bowers, Theo X. Olausson, Muxin Liu, Joshua B. Tenenbaum,
  and Jacob Andreas. LILO: Learning interpretable libraries by compressing and documenting code.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.

Zirui Guo, Lianghao Xia, Yanhua Yu, Tu Ao, and Chao Huang. LightRAG: Simple and fast retrieval-
  augmented generation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP, 2025.


                                                                                                     11
                   SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez, Yiheng Shu, Yu Gu, Michihiro Yasunaga, and Yu Su. HippoRAG: Neurobio-
  logically inspired long-term memory for large language models. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.

Shibo Hao, Tianyang Liu, Zhen Wang, and Zhiting Hu. ToolkenGPT: Augmenting frozen language
  models with massive tools via tool embeddings. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.

Taher H. Haveliwala. Topic-sensitive PageRank: A context-sensitive ranking algorithm for web search.
  IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 15(4):784–796, 2003.

Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Tomas Jackson, Noah Brown, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models. In CoRL, 2022.

Guanyu Jiang, Zhaochen Su, Xiaoye Qu, and Yi R. Fung. XSkill: Continual learning from experience
  and skills in multimodal agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.12056, 2026.

Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oğuz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen,
  and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In EMNLP, 2020.

Mingcong Lei, Honghao Cai, Yuyuan Yang, Yimou Wu, Jinke Ren, Zezhou Cui, Liangchen Tan, Junkun
  Hong, Gehan Hu, Shuangyu Zhu, Shaohan Jiang, Ge Wang, Junyuan Tan, Zhenglin Wan, Zheng
  Li, Zhen Li, Shuguang Cui, Yiming Zhao, and Yatong Han. RoboMemory: A brain-inspired multi-
  memory agentic framework for interactive environmental learning in physical embodied systems,
 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.01415.

Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela.
  Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In NeurIPS, 2020.

Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy
  Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In ICRA, 2023.

Yuan Liang, Ruobin Zhong, Haoming Xu, Chen Jiang, Yi Zhong, Runnan Fang, Jia-Chen Gu, Shumin
  Deng, Yunzhi Yao, and Mengru Wang. SkillNet: Create, evaluate, and connect AI skills. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2603.04448, 2026.

Dawei Liu, Zongxia Li, Hongyang Du, Xiyang Wu, Shihang Gui, Yongbei Kuang, and Lichao Sun.
  Graph of skills: Dependency-aware structural retrieval for massive agent skills. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2604.05333, 2026.

Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy
  Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, 12:157–173, 2024a.

Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen
  Men, and Kejuan Yang. AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. In ICLR, 2024b.

Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
 Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, and Yiming Yang. Self-Refine: Iterative refinement with
 self-feedback. In NeurIPS, 2023.



                                                                                                 12
                   SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


Yu A. Malkov and Dmitry A. Yashunin. Efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search
  using hierarchical navigable small world graphs. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 42(4):824–836, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2889473.

Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Craig Swift, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom.
  GAIA: a benchmark for general AI assistants. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2024.

Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E.
  Gonzalez. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.

Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and Terry Winograd. The PageRank citation ranking:
  Bringing order to the web. Stanford InfoLab Technical Report, 1999.

Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S.
  Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In UIST, 2023.

Shishir G. Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model
  connected with massive apis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37,
  pages 126544–126565. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. doi: 10.52202/079017-4020.

Shishir G. Patil, Huanzhi Mao, Fanjia Yan, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji, Vishnu Suresh, Ion Stoica, and
  Joseph E. Gonzalez. The Berkeley function calling leaderboard (BFCL): From tool use to agentic
  evaluation of large language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2025.

Shuofei Qiao, Ningyu Zhang, Runnan Fang, Yujie Luo, Wangchunshu Zhou, Yuchen Jiang, Chengfei
  Lv, and Huajun Chen. AutoAct: Automatic agent learning from scratch for QA via self-planning. In
  ACL, 2024.

Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru
  Tang, and Bill Qian. ToolLLM: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world
  apis. In ICLR, 2024.

Maohao Ran, Zhenglin Wan, Cooper Lin, Yanting Zhang, Hongyu Xin, Hongwei Fan, Yibo Xu, Beier
 Luo, Yaxin Zhou, Wangbo Zhao, Lijie Yang, Lang Feng, Fuchao Yang, Jingxuan Wu, Yiqiao Huang,
 Chendong Ma, Dailing Jiang, Jianbo Deng, Sirui Han, Yang You, Bo An, Yike Guo, and Jun
 Song. CaveAgent: Transforming LLMs into stateful runtime operators, 2026. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2601.01569.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
  In EMNLP, 2019.

Stephen Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza. The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and beyond.
  Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, 3(4):333–389, 2009.

Gabriel Sarch, Lawrence Jang, Michael J. Tarr, William W. Cohen, Kenneth Marino, and Katerina
  Fragkiadaki. VLM agents generate their own memories: Distilling experience into embodied
  programs of thought. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach
  themselves to use tools. In NeurIPS, 2023.



                                                                                                  13
                   SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. HuggingGPT:
  Solving AI tasks with ChatGPT and its friends in hugging face. In NeurIPS, 2023.

Zhili Shen, Chenxin Diao, Pavlos Vougiouklis, Pascual Merita, Shriram Piramanayagam, Enting Chen,
  Damien Graux, Andre Melo, Ruofei Lai, Zeren Jiang, Zhongyang Li, Ye Qi, Yang Ren, Dandan Tu,
  and Jeff Z. Pan. GeAR: Graph-enhanced agent for retrieval-augmented generation. In Findings of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL, 2025.

Zhengliang Shi, Yuhan Wang, Lingyong Yan, Pengjie Ren, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, and Zhaochun
  Ren. Retrieval models aren’t tool-savvy: Benchmarking tool retrieval for large language models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01763, 2025.

Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2023.

Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
 Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In ICLR,
 2021.

Harsh Trivedi, Tushar Khot, Mareike Hartmann, Ruskin Manku, Vinty Dong, Edward Li, Shashank
 Gupta, Ashish Sabharwal, and Niranjan Balasubramanian. AppWorld: A controllable world of apps
 and people for benchmarking interactive coding agents. In Annual Meeting of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2024.

Boshi Wang, Hao Fang, Jason Eisner, Benjamin Van Durme, and Yu Su. LLMs in the imaginarium: Tool
  learning through simulated trial and error. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (ACL), 2024a.

Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
 Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. In
 NeurIPS, 2023a.

Renxi Wang, Xudong Han, Lei Ji, Shu Wang, Timothy Baldwin, and Haonan Li. ToolGen: Unified tool
  retrieval and calling via generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2025.

Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Executable
  code actions elicit better LLM agents. In ICML, 2024b.

Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. Agent workflow memory. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2409.07429, 2024c.

Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. JARVIS-1: Open-
  world multi-task agents with memory-augmented multimodal language models. In arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2311.05997, 2023b.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V.
  Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In
  NeurIPS, 2022.

Zhiyong Wu, Chengcheng Han, Zichen Ding, Zhenmin Weng, Zhoumianze Liu, Shunyu Yao, Tao Yu,
  and Lingpeng Kong. OS-Copilot: Towards generalist computer agents with self-improvement. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.



                                                                                                   14
                   SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


Tianle Xia, Lingxiang Hu, Yiding Sun, Ming Xu, Lan Xu, Siying Wang, Wei Xu, and Jie Jiang. GraSP:
  Graph-structured skill compositions for LLM agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.17870, 2026.

Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing
  Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, Yitao Liu, Yiheng Xu, Shuyan Zhou, Silvio
  Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Tao Yu. OSWorld: Benchmarking multimodal agents
  for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2024.

Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In NeurIPS,
  2023a.

Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
  ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In ICLR, 2023b.

Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. 𝜏-bench: A benchmark for
  tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12045, 2024.

Lifan Yuan, Yangyi Chen, Xingyao Wang, Yi R. Fung, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. CRAFT: Customizing
   LLMs by creating and retrieving from specialized toolsets. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations (ICLR), 2024.

Geng Zhang, Yuxuan Han, Yuxuan Lou, Yiqi Zhang, Wangbo Zhao, and Yang You. Mone: Replacing
  redundant experts with lightweight novices for structured pruning of moe. ICLR, 2026.

Wenqi Zhang, Ke Tang, Hai Wu, Mengna Wang, Yongliang Shen, Guiyang Hou, Zeqi Tan, Peng Li,
 Yueting Zhuang, and Weiming Lu. Agent-Pro: Learning to evolve via policy-level reflection and
 optimization. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2024.

Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. ExpeL: LLM
  agents are experiential learners. In AAAI, 2024.

Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin,
  Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Judging
  LLM-as-a-judge with MT-Bench and chatbot arena. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks, 2023.

Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue
  Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. WebArena: A realistic web environ-
  ment for building autonomous agents. In ICLR, 2024.




                                                                                                 15
                     SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


A. End-to-End Algorithms
Algorithms 1 and 2 together specify the SkillDAG workflow end to end. Algorithm 1 builds the initial
typed graph offline from the skill library (§3.4); Algorithm 2 runs the per-episode online loop covering
retrieval and graph edits (§3.3, §3.5). The pair classifier 𝜓 returns one of depends_on, specializes,
composes_with, similar_to, or none; conflicts_with is reserved for the online phase. Agent-
facing calls (search, show, propose-edge, edit-edge) and the three commit-time invariants
(acyclicity, non-contradiction, and append-only reversibility) appear inline in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 1 Cold-start graph construction.
Require: Skill library C; embedder 𝜙; pair classifier 𝜓; per-ranking adaptive thresholds 𝜃self , 𝜃needs
Ensure: Initial typed graph 𝐺0 = (𝑉, 𝐸, 𝜏)
 1: for each 𝑣 ∈ C do
 2:    𝑒self ( 𝑣) ← 𝜙 (SKILL.md( 𝑣))
 3:    𝑒needs ( 𝑣) ← 𝜙 (HyDE-summary( 𝑣)) {⊥ if self-contained}
 4: end for
 5: 𝑃self ← {( 𝑖, 𝑗) : cos( 𝑒self ( 𝑖) , 𝑒self ( 𝑗)) ≥ 𝜃self }
 6: 𝑃needs ← {( 𝑖, 𝑗) : 𝑒needs ( 𝑖) ≠ ⊥ ∧ cos( 𝑒needs ( 𝑖) , 𝑒self ( 𝑗)) ≥ 𝜃needs }
 7: 𝐸0 ← ∅; 𝜏0 ← empty map
 8: for each ( 𝑎, 𝑏) ∈ 𝑃self ∪ 𝑃needs do
 9:    𝑡 ← 𝜓 ( 𝑎, 𝑏)
10:    if 𝑡 ≠ none then
11:        𝐸0 ← 𝐸0 ∪ {( 𝑎, 𝑏)}; 𝜏0 ( 𝑎, 𝑏) ← 𝑡
12:    end if
13: end for
14: 𝐺0 ← (C , 𝐸0 , 𝜏0 ) {conflicts_with reserved for online phase}
15: return 𝐺0



Algorithm 2 Per-episode online loop.
Require: Initial graph 𝐺0 ; task distribution T ; LLM agent 𝜋; budgets 𝐾, 𝐷
Ensure: Evolved graph 𝐺 and append-only history log 𝐻
 1: 𝐺 ← 𝐺0 ; 𝐻 ← ∅
 2: for each task 𝑇 ∈ T do
 3:   while episode not terminated do
 4:      𝜋 calls search/show as needed, then acts and observes outcome
 5:      if evidence supports an edit Δ then
 6:         (preview, history) ← propose-edge ( 𝐺, Δ)
 7:         if edit-edge commits and Apply(𝐺, Δ) passes invariants then
 8:            𝐺 ← Apply( 𝐺, Δ); append Δ to 𝐻 {reversible by recency}
 9:         end if
10:      end if
11:    end while
12: end for
13: return 𝐺, 𝐻



Cold-start configuration.
   • Embedder: text-embedding-3-large
   • LLM classifier: gpt-5-nano for pair classification
   • Candidate pair threshold: adaptive (mean cosine similarity +1𝜎, clipped to [0.35, 0.75])
   • Maximum candidates per node: 12, with a minimum floor of 3


                                                                                                          16
                   SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


B. Failure Analysis

B.1. ALFWorld Failure Modes

Among the 11 failures in the 30-task pilot evaluation, we identify three categories:
Tight loops (8/11). The agent enters a cycle of repeated actions that produce “Nothing happens”
observations. The most common pattern is attempting to interact with an object that is not in
the current room, without recognizing the need to navigate elsewhere. The graph provides the
correct procedural skills, but the agent fails at the grounding level (mapping skill instructions to valid
environment actions).
Meta-mode confusion (1/11). A single failure (task index 17) exhibited a pathological pattern
where the model’s internal reasoning tokens leaked into the action output, causing the agent to
hallucinate observations and believe the task was complete. This is a model-specific artifact (MiniMax
</think> tag leakage) rather than a skill-selection failure.
Step budget exhaustion (2/11). The agent explores correctly but exhausts the 30-step budget before
completing all required subtasks. These tasks involve longer action sequences (e.g., cleaning an object
requires finding it, picking it up, navigating to a sink, using the sink, then navigating to the target
location).


C. Edge Type Operational Definitions
We provide expanded operational definitions for each edge type, including the counterfactual tests
that would ideally validate them:
depends_on ( 𝐴, 𝐵). Removing skill 𝐵 from the agent’s available set drops the success rate of 𝐴
by a measurable margin. This captures prerequisite relationships: 𝐵 provides setup, context, or
intermediate results that 𝐴 requires. Transitivity holds: if 𝐴 depends on 𝐵 and 𝐵 depends on 𝐶 , then
𝐴 implicitly depends on 𝐶 .

composes_with ( 𝐴, 𝐵). The joint success rate of tasks where both 𝐴 and 𝐵 are selected exceeds
max(success( 𝐴) , success( 𝐵)) by a measurable margin. This captures synergistic combinations where
skills complement each other. Symmetry holds. Transitivity does not, because composability is
pairwise rather than chainable.
similar_to ( 𝐴, 𝐵). Skills 𝐴 and 𝐵 achieve comparable success rates on the same task distribution
and can substitute for each other. Co-selecting both wastes context but does not cause harm. This is
the weakest relationship type: it signals redundancy rather than interaction.
conflicts_with ( 𝐴, 𝐵). Co-selecting skills 𝐴 and 𝐵 causes a measurable drop in success rate com-
pared to selecting either alone. This captures genuine interference: resource contention, contradictory
instructions, state contamination, or protocol conflicts. Symmetry holds. Transitivity does not.
specializes ( 𝐷, 𝐴). Skill 𝐷 achieves higher success than 𝐴 on a specific subdomain of 𝐴’s applicability,
while inheriting 𝐴’s core functionality. When 𝐷 is available and the task falls in its subdomain, 𝐷
should be preferred over 𝐴. Transitivity holds within specialization hierarchies.


D. Reproducibility Details
Search budgets. All search calls use 𝐾 = 5 vector matches and BFS neighbor depth 𝐷 = 2. The agent
may issue any number of search calls per episode and chooses query strings on its own schedule.

                                                                                                      17
                   SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


Models and embeddings. Agent runs use MiniMax-M2.7 (via the official MiniMax Anthropic-
compatible endpoint) and gpt-5.2-codex (via the OpenAI Codex CLI with reasoning_effort=high).
Cold-start pair classification uses gpt-5-nano. Query embedding at runtime uses text-embedding-3-large,
matching each GoS workspace’s embedding configuration.
Step and attempt budgets. ALFWorld episodes are capped at 30 steps with 𝑛attempts = 2 following
Liu et al. [2026] §4.1. SkillsBench uses 𝑛attempts = 1 for the MiniMax cross-scale retrieval replay
and 𝑛attempts = 2 for main task-reward results; the gpt-5.2-codex retrieval row replays the codex
agent’s queries under the same 𝑛attempts = 2 budget.
Online edit logging. Each accepted edit-edge writes an entry with origin (cold-start vs. online),
reason (natural-language justification), and task_id (the episode that produced the supporting
evidence) into the graph’s edge metadata.
Cold-start cost. At scale 1000 the cold-start construction takes approximately 200 gpt-5-nano calls
in batched bucket mode (one call per anchor skill, classifying all candidate pairs in that bucket), plus
one embedding call per skill for each of the two views (𝑒self and 𝑒needs ).


E. Worked Example Subgraph
Edges are unweighted (present or absent); the LLM decides whether to add, remove, or retype an
edge based on execution evidence, not statistical accumulation. Table 3 lists the runtime role of each
type; the main-text Figure 2 shows a worked subgraph exercising all five.

Table 3 | Edge type taxonomy; runtime roles.

                           Type                      Runtime role
                           depends_on                Selecting 𝐴 pulls in 𝐵 as
                                                     prerequisite
                           composes_with             Surfaces composition op-
                                                     portunities
                           similar_to                De-duplication: select one,
                                                     not both
                           conflicts_with            Prune: selecting 𝐴 ex-
                                                     cludes 𝐵
                           specializes               Prefer specialized 𝐷 over
                                                     general 𝐴



F. Search Interface Field Semantics
Matches. Cosine similarity is computed between the query embedding and each node’s pre-computed
embedding; the top- 𝐾 are returned, ranked by similarity.
Neighbors. From the match set, BFS proceeds along walkable types (specializes, composes_with,
depends_on, similar_to) up to depth 𝐷, traversed bidirectionally so the agent sees both ends of
a relationship (for depends_on, both the prerequisite and any skill requiring the match as setup);
the typed label travels with the edge. Each neighbor records its shortest distance from a match,
predecessor, and edge type. conflicts_with is not traversed. Skills already matched are excluded.



                                                                                                    18
                       SkillDAG: Self-Evolving Typed Skill Graphs for LLM Skill Selection at Scale


Conflicts. All conflicts_with edges incident to any match within one hop are returned separately.
They have opposite polarity from neighbors: skills that should not be co-selected. No transitive
expansion (conflicts-of-conflicts are undefined).
Properties. (i) The agent issues queries on its own schedule and rephrases as understanding evolves,
rather than receiving one episode-start bundle. (ii) The three-field decomposition lets the agent drop
a whole field under tight budget rather than truncating an opaque concatenation. (iii) Edges carry an
explicit type and reason, so the agent’s trace documents selection/exclusion. After search, the agent
issues show for chosen candidates; the decision is unconstrained (all matches, only typed neighbors,
or skip the graph).


G. Online-Edit Protocol Detail
The protocol separates inspection from mutation. propose-edge performs a dry-run returning
what the change would do and surfacing all existing edges and recent history entries for the same
skill pair, so the agent sees what prior episodes established before proceeding. edit-edge com-
mits, appending a history entry with task ID, natural-language reason, and timestamp. The per-
edit reason and task_id log preserve auditability without gating the edit, placing graph-quality
responsibility on the same agent that consumes it. The three commit-time invariants (acyclicity
of the depends_on/specializes backbone; non-contradiction, meaning no conflicts_with
edge on a pair that already carries a positive surfacing edge such as depends_on, specializes,
composes_with, or similar_to; and rollback by recency or task ID via the append-only log) are
enforced on both propose-edge and edit-edge.


H. Cold-Start Pipeline Detail
The first view 𝑒self ( 𝑣) embeds 𝑣’s identifier, description, and a body preview. The second view 𝑒needs ( 𝑣)
prompts an LLM to imagine two or three concrete tasks invoking 𝑣 in a longer chain and summarize the
shared prerequisites in one sentence, which is embedded; skills with no clear shared prerequisite emit
self-contained and are excluded from the second view. Candidate pairs come from two rankings:
cos( 𝑒self ( 𝑖) , 𝑒self ( 𝑗)) over all pairs, and cos( 𝑒needs ( 𝑖) , 𝑒self ( 𝑗)) for each 𝑖 with non-empty needs. A pair is
kept when its cosine exceeds an adaptive threshold max(0.35, min(0.75, 𝜇 + 𝜎)) (𝜇, 𝜎 the mean/SD
of that ranking’s similarities). The two-view design exists because 𝑒self alone misses cross-functional
pairs: a cooling skill and a pickup skill are distant under 𝑒self , but the cooling skill’s needs text (“object
in hand”) bridges to the pickup skill’s self-description. The candidate union is bucketed by anchor
(lower-index skill) and sent to an LLM in one call per bucket assigning similar_to, specializes,
depends_on, composes_with, or none; none pairs are discarded and the rest become cold-start
edges carrying the LLM’s reason.




                                                                                                                      19
