                                                 Embodied CAD: Solver-Grounded LLM Agents for Parametric
                                                               B-Rep Assembly Modeling
                                                                          Fumin Liu* Haoyu Zhou† Fei Hao                 Lin Yang‡
                                                                                      Nanjing University
                                                                  602025710018@smail.nju.edu.cn; haoyu.max@gmail.com
                                                                  6020250201012@smail.nju.edu.cn; linyang@nju.edu.cn




arXiv:2606.31252v1 [cs.AI] 30 Jun 2026
                                                                                                  Abstract
                                                       Large language models can write plausible CAD scripts, but reliable industrial CAD modeling re-
                                                   quires more than syntactically valid code: every feature, placement, and assembly relation must be ac-
                                                   cepted by an exact geometric kernel while remaining editable as parametric boundary representation
                                                   geometry. We present Embodied CAD, a closed-loop framework that grounds an LLM agent in a CAD
                                                   execution environment. Instead of generating a complete script in one pass, the agent iteratively selects
                                                   actions from a stratified L0–L4 CAD skill library, resolves them into typed geometric operations, exe-
                                                   cutes them in a CAD backend, and uses solver feedback to plan, repair, and learn. The framework com-
                                                   bines operation-family prediction, deterministic parameter resolution, and solver-derived rewards for su-
                                                   pervised warm-up and GRPO-style refinement. We evaluate Embodied CADon multi-step mechanical,
                                                   industrial-equipment, and mold-oriented assembly tasks using solver-aligned metrics: executable rate,
                                                   skill accuracy, operation-family accuracy, exact policy accuracy, task completion, and FreeCAD execu-
                                                   tion success. The results show that solver-grounded planning executes all strong-planner workflows in
                                                   the current benchmark, while learned controllers reach high executable rates and expose the remaining
                                                   gap between valid tool calls and exact long-horizon policy prediction.


                                         1        Introduction
                                         Large language models (LLMs) have made rapid progress in program synthesis, tool use, and interactive
                                         software automation [Ouyang et al., 2022, Yao et al., 2023, Schick et al., 2023, Madaan et al., 2023, Shinn
                                         et al., 2023]. Computer-aided design (CAD), however, remains a difficult target for autonomous generation.
                                         A useful engineering CAD artifact is not just a visually plausible mesh. It must be represented as editable
                                         parametric B-Rep geometry, respect dimensional and topological constraints, preserve feature dependencies,
                                         and compose multiple parts through precise assembly relations.
                                              This gap is especially visible in long assembly workflows. An LLM may emit syntactically valid Cad-
                                         Query or FreeCAD code while placing a cutter in the wrong coordinate frame, selecting a stale local face,
                                         duplicating repeated holes with an incorrect offset, or stacking components at the origin. These errors are
                                         often invisible at the token level but fatal at the CAD-kernel level. Existing sequence, sketch, and text-to-
                                         CAD systems have shown strong progress on part-level modeling and command generation [Wu et al., 2021,
                                         Xu et al., 2022, Khan et al., 2024, Doris et al., 2025, Guan et al., 2025], yet industrial assemblies require a
                                         different form of grounding: the model must repeatedly act in, inspect, and recover from an exact geometric
                                         environment.
                                             * Equal contribution.
                                             †
                                                 Equal contribution.
                                             ‡
                                                 Corresponding author.


                                                                                                      1
Figure 1: Overview of Embodied CAD. The LLM planner predicts skill-level actions or operation families.
A deterministic resolver instantiates typed arguments, the skill executor calls the CAD backend, and the
solver returns execution diagnostics. The same feedback supports online repair and training rewards.


    Embodied CAD addresses this problem by treating CAD generation as closed-loop embodied tool use.
The agent receives a natural-language specification and a structured parameter set, chooses the next CAD
skill, executes it through a deterministic backend, observes solver feedback, and continues until the assembly
is complete. The framework follows the loop
      Intent → Skill Planning → CAD Execution → Solver Feedback → Reflection / Policy Update.
The key design choice is to constrain the model to semantically meaningful CAD skills while leaving fragile
geometric bookkeeping to deterministic resolvers and the CAD solver.
     The paper makes four contributions. First, we formulate autonomous parametric assembly modeling
as a solver-grounded skill-trajectory problem rather than open-loop script generation. Second, we design an
L0–L4 CAD skill hierarchy that spans workspace operations, primitive construction, feature machining, spa-
tial assembly, and domain-level macros. Third, we introduce operation-family resolution and solver-derived
feedback as a bridge between LLM planning and exact B-Rep execution. Fourth, we evaluate the frame-
work on multi-category industrial assembly tasks with solver-aligned metrics and report both quantitative
controller performance and qualitative construction traces.


2    Related Work
Parametric CAD generation. Large CAD datasets and sequence models have made parametric CAD gen-
eration a practical learning problem. ABC provides a large B-Rep-oriented corpus for geometric learning
[Koch et al., 2019]; the Fusion 360 Gallery dataset exposes human design histories for programmatic CAD
construction [Willis et al., 2021]. DeepCAD models CAD commands as a sequence generation problem
[Wu et al., 2021], SkexGen improves sequence generation with disentangled codebooks [Xu et al., 2022],
and Text2CAD maps natural language to CAD command sequences [Khan et al., 2024]. Recent CAD-code
systems further explore vision- and text-conditioned code generation [Doris et al., 2025, Guan et al., 2025].
In contrast, Embodied CAD does not ask the model to emit an entire CAD program in one pass. It constrains
generation to solver-checked skill trajectories whose intermediate states can be inspected and repaired.
    B-Rep learning and executable structure. Engineering CAD models contain topology, analytic sur-
faces, curves, feature history, and constraints that are not captured by visual surface similarity alone. BRep-

                                                      2
Figure 2: Step-wise PhyClaw construction snapshots for three representative strong-planner workflows: a
press machine, a mold-core insert, and a cooling-tower workflow whose early checkpoints emphasize the
lower module before the final 175-step assembly. Each row uses the same number of solver-checked stages
to show base geometry, repeated feature construction, and the final editable state.


Net performs topological message passing over solid models [Lambourne et al., 2021]; UV-Net learns
from parametric curve and surface domains [Jayaraman et al., 2021]; SolidGen and BRepGen target di-
rect boundary-representation synthesis [Jayaraman et al., 2022, Xu et al., 2024]. Programmatic approaches
such as CSGNet and ShapeAssembly show the value of explicit executable structure [Sharma et al., 2018,
Jones et al., 2020]. Embodied CAD shares this preference for executable structure but focuses on long,
editable assembly workflows in which each intermediate CAD state is validated by a solver.
    Assembly generation and tool-using agents. Assembly modeling adds repeated parts, joint relations,
and spatial constraints beyond single-part generation. JoinABLe studies bottom-up assembly of parametric
CAD joints [Willis et al., 2022]. Tool-augmented CAD systems, including CAD-Assistant, ArtiCAD, and
TOOLCAD, connect foundation models to CAD tools or tool-use training pipelines [Mallis et al., 2025,
Shui et al., 2026, Gong et al., 2026]. Our work is closest to these tool-augmented systems, but emphasizes
typed skill calls, operation-family resolution, and solver-aligned evaluation rather than visual-only judging.


3    Problem Formulation
Given an industrial modeling request x and a parameter set p, the goal is to produce an executable trajectory

                                  τ = (a1 , . . . , aT ),       at = (ℓt , ft , θt ),                      (1)

where ℓt is the skill level, ft is a skill or operation family, and θt contains typed arguments. A CAD kernel
K deterministically updates the state:
                                                 st = K(st−1 , at ).                                      (2)

                                                            3
Algorithm 1 Closed-loop CAD skill execution
 1: Initialize CAD state s0 from intent x and parameters p.
 2: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 3:    Planner proposes skill or operation family ft .
 4:    Resolver derives typed arguments θt from st−1 .
 5:    Execute at = (ℓt , ft , θt ) with CAD kernel K.
 6:    Collect solver feedback ot from the resulting state st .
 7:    if execution fails then
 8:       revise ft or θt using ot and retry within budget.
 9:    end if
10: end for
11: Return the final parametric B-Rep assembly and trajectory log.



A trajectory is solver-feasible if every action executes without kernel error and the final state satisfies task-
specific checks such as valid solids, expected components, bounding boxes, feature counts, and assembly
completion. The central challenge is that θt often depends on the current geometric state: a hole center,
chamfer target, mirrored instance, or repeated fastener index must be selected consistently with previous
operations.
    Embodied CAD separates this problem into planning, resolution, and execution. The LLM predicts
high-level skills or operation families; deterministic modules derive geometry-dependent arguments; the
CAD backend executes each skill; and the feedback is returned to the planner and to the learning objective.
This separation reduces hallucinated coordinates and makes failure modes observable.


4     Method
4.1   Closed-Loop Architecture
Figure 1 summarizes the architecture. The planner observes the user intent, parameters, construction his-
tory, and solver feedback. It selects the next skill or operation family. The resolver maps reusable operation
families, such as build_pin_body or cut_hole_grid, to concrete instance identifiers and typed pa-
rameters. The executor dispatches the resolved call to the CAD backend. The solver returns structured feed-
back, including success or failure, object names, validity checks, volumes, bounding boxes, and topology
summaries when available.

4.2   Skill Stratification
A raw CAD scripting space is too large for reliable long-horizon LLM planning. We therefore organize
actions into five levels (Table 1). The hierarchy keeps the model’s choices close to engineering operations
while preserving enough expressivity to build multi-part assemblies.

4.3   Operation Families and Deterministic Resolution
Industrial assemblies contain repeated structures: balls in bearings, pins in manifolds, screws in mold plates,
guide posts in press machines, and ribs on shafts. Directly predicting instance-specific operation keys en-
tangles semantic intent with fragile indexing. We instead ask the model to predict operation families. The
controller resolves a family into the next valid instance using construction state, counters, symmetry rules,



                                                       4
 Level       Role                     Representative skills
 L0          Workspace and inspec-    Reset workspace, import references, parse parameters, query handbook en-
             tion                     tries, render checkpoints, inspect solids and bounding boxes.
 L1          Primitive construction   Boxes, cylinders, oriented cylinders, spheres, truncated cones, plates, spline
                                      extrusions, profile-based solids, and reusable cutters.
 L2          Machining features       Boolean cuts, hole grids, ring cutters, spline cutters, chamfers, fillets, wash-
                                      ers, nuts, counterbores, and repeated feature arrays.
 L3          Spatial assembly         Move, align, mirror, pattern, mate, group, finalize assembly, and export ed-
                                      itable CAD states.
 L4          Domain macros            Higher-level modules such as bearings, springs, gears, press plates, cooling-
                                      tower modules, mold plates, and mold-core inserts.

Table 1: L0–L4 skill hierarchy used by Embodied CAD. The hierarchy constrains the action space while
keeping operations interpretable and editable.


and derived geometry. This design preserves the agentic planning role of the LLM while moving coordinate-
sensitive computations into deterministic modules.
    For example, after the planner predicts a family such as place_guide_post, the resolver determines
which post is next, retrieves the corresponding plate corner, computes the local axis and clearance, and
produces the typed skill call. The solver then checks whether the post intersects the expected plate stack and
whether the resulting solid remains valid. Failures are returned as structured feedback rather than hidden in
a failed final script.

4.4   Learning from Solver Feedback
We use solver feedback in two ways. First, supervised fine-tuning warms up the planner on validated tra-
jectories. Second, GRPO-style refinement samples multiple candidate actions for the same state and scores
them with a structured reward:

                                  R = wf Rformat + wp Rpolicy + we Rexec .                                          (3)

Here Rformat checks whether the model emits a parseable action block, Rpolicy checks whether the selected
skill or operation family matches the expected transition, and Rexec measures whether the resolved action
executes successfully in the CAD backend. The relative reward within each group updates the policy. We
report skipped-update and fallback-SFT rates because a high parse rate alone does not guarantee informative
reward variance.


5     Benchmark and Metrics
The benchmark is organized around executable CAD-skill trajectories. Each task provides a natural-
language industrial specification and a structured parameter set. The system must generate a sequence of
skill calls that can be resolved and executed by the FreeCAD backend. The current task families are:
    Standard mechanical assemblies: bearing tasks involving coaxial rings, polar ball arrays, repeated
separators, editable ring dimensions, and chamfered mechanical details.
    Industrial equipment assemblies: press-machine, cooling-tower, and linear-manifold tasks involving
layered structures, repeated connectors, springs, guide posts, fans, holes, and pipe-like features.
    Mold assemblies: mold-machine and mold-core insert tasks involving plate stacks, guide posts, hole
grids, counterbores, grooves, spline ribs, and editable core-shaft layouts.


                                                        5
 Policy variant             Evaluation protocol                          Valid/Exec.   Skill   Op. family   Exact
                                                                             (%)       (%)        (%)        (%)
 Strong planner             Best solver-checked workflow per task          100.0        –          –         –
                            family
 Weak-planner SFT           State policy, full validation                  100.0       97.8      93.1       93.1
 Weak-planner GRPO          State policy, full validation                  100.0       97.8      93.2       93.2
 Skill-family SFT           Direct family prediction, stress aggregate      98.7       83.5      79.9       76.6

Table 2: Main solver-aligned performance by controller mode. The strong-planner row reports FreeCAD ex-
ecution success for deterministic workflows, so learned-action accuracy columns are not applicable. Weak-
planner rows evaluate compact state-action prediction. The skill-family row aggregates boundary-value,
random-parameter, and language-paraphrase stress tests for direct next-family prediction.


    We evaluate two evidence levels. The solver-execution level measures whether a resolved trajectory
executes in the CAD backend. The learned-policy level measures whether an SFT or GRPO controller
predicts the correct next skill or operation family. The distinction is important: deterministic strong-planner
trajectories test the capacity of the skill library and resolver, whereas learned-policy metrics measure how
much of the planning decision can be delegated to the model.
    Metrics are solver-aligned. Valid/executable rate checks parseability or FreeCAD execution success.
Skill accuracy checks whether the predicted skill matches the target. Operation-family accuracy checks the
reusable family. Exact policy accuracy requires action, skill, and family to be correct for the current state.
Task completion evaluates all steps in a full workflow when the workflow log is available. For GRPO, we
additionally report group-valid rate, group-exact rate, skipped-update rate, and fallback-SFT rate.


6     Results
6.1   Solver-Aligned Performance
Table 2 shows the main quantitative results. Deterministic strong planning executes all evaluated workflow
families in the current benchmark. The weak-planner SFT policy reaches 93.1% exact accuracy on the state-
policy benchmark, and GRPO refinement gives a small gain to 93.2%. The direct skill-family SFT model
is more challenging because it must predict the family directly under boundary, random-parameter, and
paraphrase stress tests; it reaches 76.6% exact accuracy in the aggregate.
    The GRPO run contains 18,335 candidate groups. Its group-valid rate is 100.0%, and its group-exact
rate is 73.5%. The skipped-update rate is 68.3%, and the fallback-SFT rate is 10.3%. These diagnostics
indicate that format validity is not the bottleneck; the main learning challenge is obtaining reward variance
that distinguishes plausible but geometrically incorrect next actions.

6.2   Task-Level Evidence and Ablations
Table 3 breaks the evidence down by controller and task family. The strong-planner rows confirm that the
skill library and deterministic resolver can generate complete solver-checked assemblies for the evaluated
families. The learned-policy rows show that exact next-action prediction remains task dependent. Bearing
tasks are relatively regular because repeated features follow polar patterns, while press-machine and mold-
machine tasks require more mixed feature orders and spatial relations.
    The ablation trend supports the design choice behind operation families. Direct family prediction ex-
poses the model to many similar but index-sensitive decisions, producing lower exact accuracy. The weak-
planner state policy predicts a compact controller action and leaves deterministic geometry and instance

                                                        6
 Controller              Evidence scope               Task family                 Metric        Value (%)
 Strong planner          FreeCAD execution            bearing                     Exec.             100.0
 Strong planner          FreeCAD execution            press machine               Exec.             100.0
 Strong planner          FreeCAD execution            cooling tower               Exec.             100.0
 Strong planner          FreeCAD execution            linear manifold             Exec.             100.0
 Strong planner          FreeCAD execution            mold core                   Exec.             100.0
 Weak-planner SFT        State policy                 linear manifold             Exact              93.1
 Weak-planner GRPO       State policy                 linear manifold             Exact              93.2
 Skill-family SFT        Direct next-family predic-   bearing                     Exact              86.8
                         tion
 Skill-family SFT        Direct next-family predic-   sprocket shaft              Exact              74.8
                         tion
 Skill-family SFT        Direct next-family predic-   press machine               Exact              62.8
                         tion
 Skill-family SFT        Direct next-family predic-   linear manifold             Exact              79.4
                         tion
 Skill-family SFT        Direct next-family predic-   mold machine                Exact              76.6
                         tion

Table 3: Task-level evidence in the current artifact snapshot. We list only evaluated task-method pairs to
avoid implying that missing entries are zero-valued results.

                             Method                    Visual   Exec.   Coverage
                             Embodied CAD best         1.000    1.000     1.000
                             ArtiCAD-style proxy       1.000    0.000     0.702
                             TOOLCAD-style proxy       1.000    0.000     0.552

Table 4: Same-prompt diagnostic comparison. Coverage is exact workflow coverage for Embodied CAD
and heuristic feature coverage for proxy baselines.


resolution to the controller, which improves exact state-policy performance. GRPO refinement provides a
limited gain in the current logs, but the skipped-update rate suggests that future reward shaping should create
more informative contrasts among candidate actions.

6.3   Qualitative Analysis
Figure 2 visualizes intermediate states rather than only final renders. This is useful for CAD-agent evaluation
because many failures occur before the final view: a guide post can be created at the wrong height, a cutter
can remove the wrong plate, or an array can be mirrored around the wrong origin. Intermediate solver-
checked snapshots make these errors diagnosable.
    Figure 3 compares same-prompt outputs against paper-inspired ArtiCAD-style and TOOLCAD-style
proxy baselines rendered in the same viewer. These proxy columns are not official reproductions and should
not be interpreted as definitive baseline numbers. They are included as diagnostic comparisons for visual
feature coverage under the same prompts. The key difference is that Embodied CAD produces executable
skill workflows, whereas the proxy outputs are evaluated by visual coverage only.




                                                      7
6.4   Failure Modes
The remaining failures fall into four recurring categories. Family confusion occurs when the model selects
a plausible but wrong next operation, such as a chamfer before all cuts have been applied. Index ambiguity
occurs when repeated instances are not grounded to the construction state. Coordinate-frame errors occur
when local and global frames are mixed, especially for mirrored or rotated features. Reward sparsity occurs
when many sampled candidates are parseable and executable but have identical group rewards. Operation-
family resolution reduces the second and third categories, while richer solver diagnostics are needed for the
first and fourth.


7     Discussion and Limitations
Embodied CAD is most effective when the assembly can be decomposed into reusable engineering opera-
tions. This is also its main limitation: new domains require new skills, resolvers, and validation checks. The
current benchmark emphasizes parametric mechanical and mold-oriented assemblies; free-form surfacing,
complex organic shapes, tolerance-stack analysis, and downstream manufacturing simulation are outside
the present scope. The proxy comparisons are useful for debugging but should be replaced with official
implementations or standardized benchmark submissions when available. Finally, the current GRPO results
show that solver feedback is necessary but not sufficient: a training signal must distinguish geometrically
meaningful alternatives, not only executable syntax.


8     Conclusion
We introduced Embodied CAD, a closed-loop framework for autonomous parametric B-Rep assembly mod-
eling with LLM agents. By separating LLM planning, deterministic operation-family resolution, and CAD-
kernel execution, the framework converts open-loop script generation into solver-grounded skill trajectories.
Experiments on multi-category industrial assemblies show that the skill library and resolver can execute
complete workflows, while learned policies achieve high valid rates but still face long-horizon exact-action
errors. The results suggest that future text-to-CAD systems should evaluate not only visual plausibility, but
also solver execution, editability, and intermediate state validity.


References
A. C. Doris, M. F. Alam, A. H. Nobari, and F. Ahmed. CAD-Coder: An open-source vision-language model
  for computer-aided design code generation, 2025. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14646.

Yuxuan Gong, Xuan Wu, Wei Liu, and Kewei Tu. TOOLCAD: Exploring tool-using large language models
  in text-to-cad generation with reinforcement learning, 2026. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.07960.

Yuhang Guan, Xiaogang Wang, Xing Xing, Jiaqi Zhang, Dong Xu, and Qiang Yu. CAD-Coder: Text-to-cad
  generation with chain-of-thought and geometric reward. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2025.

Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman, Aditya Sanghi, Joseph G. Lambourne, Karl D. D. Willis, Thomas Davies,
  Hooman Shayani, and Nigel Morris. UV-Net: Learning from boundary representations. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.




                                                      8
Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman, Joseph G. Lambourne, Nishkrit Desai, Karl D. D. Willis, Aditya Sanghi, and
  Nigel J. W. Morris. SolidGen: An autoregressive model for direct b-rep synthesis, 2022. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.13944.
R. Kenny Jones, Homer Walke, and Daniel Ritchie. Shapeassembly: Learning to generate programs for 3d
  shape structure synthesis. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 39(6), 2020.
Muhammad S. Khan, Emilien Dupont, S. A. Ali, Kseniia Cherenkova, Anis Kacem, and Djamila Aouada.
 Text2CAD: Generating sequential cad designs from beginner-to-expert level text prompts. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Sebastian Koch, Albert Matveev, Zhongshi Jiang, Francis Williams, Alexey Artemov, Evgeny Burnaev,
  Marc Alexa, Denis Zorin, and Daniele Panozzo. ABC: A big cad model dataset for geometric deep
  learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2019.
Joseph G. Lambourne, Karl D. D. Willis, Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman, Aditya Sanghi, Peter Meltzer, and
  Hooman Shayani. BRepNet: A topological message passing system for solid models. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha
 Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Sean Welleck, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Shashank
 Gupta, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Dimitrios Mallis, Arda S. Karadeniz, Sebastiano Cavada, Danila Rukhovich, Nefeli Foteinopoulou, Kseniia
  Cherenkova, Anis Kacem, and Djamila Aouada. CAD-Assistant: Tool-augmented vllms as generic cad
  task solvers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2025.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke
  Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe.
  Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 2022.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-
  moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
  use tools. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Gopal Sharma, Difan Goyal, Haofan Liu, Evangelos Kalogerakis, and Subhransu Maji. CSGNet: Neural
  shape parser for constructive solid geometry. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2018.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Lan-
  guage agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2023.
Yifan Shui, Yuhang Guan, Zhen Zhang, Jiawei Hu, Jiaqi Zhang, Dong Xu, and Qiang Yu. ArtiCAD: Artic-
  ulated cad assembly design via multi-agent code generation, 2026. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.10992.
Karl D. D. Willis, Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman, Joseph G. Lambourne, Hang Chu, and Yewen Pu. Fusion 360
  gallery: A dataset and environment for programmatic cad construction from human design sequences.
  ACM Transactions on Graphics, 40(4), 2021.

                                                   9
Karl D. D. Willis, Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman, Hang Chu, Yunsheng Tian, Yifei Li, Daniele Grandi, Aditya
  Sanghi, Linh Tran, Joseph G. Lambourne, and Armando Solar-Lezama. JoinABLe: Learning bottom-up
  assembly of parametric cad joints. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2022.

Rundi Wu, Chang Xiao, and Changxi Zheng. DeepCAD: A deep generative network for computer-aided
  design models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.

Xiang Xu, Karl D. D. Willis, Joseph G. Lambourne, Chin-Yi Cheng, Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman, and Ya-
  sutaka Furukawa. SkexGen: Autoregressive generation of cad construction sequences with disentangled
  codebooks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.

Xiang Xu, Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman, Joseph G. Lambourne, Karl D. D. Willis, and Yasutaka Furukawa.
  BRepGen: A b-rep generative diffusion model with structured latent geometry. ACM Transactions on
  Graphics, 43(4), 2024.

Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct:
  Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2023.




                                                  10
Figure 3: FreeCAD-normalized same-prompt qualitative comparison. PhyClaw outputs are executable skill
workflows; ArtiCAD-style and TOOLCAD-style columns are paper-inspired proxy baselines rendered
through the same FreeCAD viewer for visual style consistency. The proxy columns compare visual fea-
ture coverage and are not official executable reproductions.




Figure 4: Mold-core insert construction snapshots for the current strong-planner POC path. The same pa-
rameterized workflow supports fast regeneration after user edits to shaft radii, rib count, and segment layout.


                                                      11
