                                         LeanMarathon: Toward Reliable AI Co-Mathematicians through
                                                    Long-Horizon Lean Autoformalization
                                                 Yuanhe Zhang∗            Yuekai Sun†         Taiji Suzuki‡         Jason D. Lee§          Fanghui Liu¶




arXiv:2606.05400v1 [cs.AI] 3 Jun 2026
                                                                                                 Abstract
                                                  Long-horizon autoformalization of research mathematics fails not only at hard lemmas, but at scale:
                                              statements drift, dependencies tangle, context decays, and local repairs corrupt distant work. We
                                              present LeanMarathon, a multi-agent harness for reliable research-level Lean autoformalization. Its core
                                              abstraction is an evolving blueprint: a Lean file that serves simultaneously as formal proof skeleton,
                                              natural-language proof graph, and shared system of record. Four contract-scoped agents construct,
                                              audit, prove, and repair this blueprint. These agents are coordinated by a two-stage orchestrator that
                                              first stabilizes target fidelity through adversarial review and then discharges the proof directed acyclic
                                              graph (DAG) from its dynamic leaves upward in parallel CI-gated rounds. LeanMarathon turns one
                                              brittle multi-hour run into many local, recoverable, parallel transactions. We evaluate LeanMarathon
                                              on two recent research papers spanning four Erdős problems (#1051, #1196, #164, #1217). Across
                                              three autonomous runs, it formalizes all seven target theorems with no sorry , proving 258 lemmas and
                                              theorems. These results show that reliable AI co-mathematics requires not only stronger provers, but
                                              durable harnesses that preserve target fidelity across long mathematical developments. The code can be
                                              found at https://github.com/YuanheZ/LeanMarathon.


                                        1     Introduction
                                        AI-assisted mathematics can be organized into three interlocking stages, as emphasized by Tao (2026): proof
                                        generation large language models (LLMs), verification via Lean 4, and digestion by human. Generation by
                                        LLMs has advanced fast, such as Aletheia (Feng et al., 2026; Zheng et al., 2026) and GPT-5 (Bubeck et al.,
                                        2025). These agents can produce long natural-language proofs and solve open problems, subject to human
                                        verification. Verification, the stage that turns such a natural language proof into a machine-checked artifact,
                                        has kept pace only on isolated goals: a prover discharges one or multiple Lean 4 lemmas at a time. Verifying
                                        an entire research paper remains largely open: every definition, lemma, and theorem must be formalized so
                                        the whole argument type-checks with no sorry .
                                            The difficulty is therefore not merely the formalization of one hard lemma. A research paper may
                                        require hundreds of mutually dependent declarations, and these declarations must remain coherent while an
                                        autonomous system repeatedly edits, checks, and repairs a growing Lean development. A local change to a
                                        definition can invalidate distant proofs; a misformalized intermediate lemma can make downstream work
                                        formally correct but mathematically irrelevant; and a seemingly successful repair can silently move the formal
                                           ∗ Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, UK; also Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Japan. Email:

                                        yuanhe.zhang@warwick.ac.uk
                                           † Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, USA. Email: yuekai@umich.edu
                                           ‡ Department of Mathematical Informatics, The University of Tokyo; also Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN,

                                        Japan. Email: taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
                                           § Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, also Department of Statistics, University of California,

                                        Berkeley, USA. Email: jasondlee@berkeley.edu
                                          ¶ School of Mathematical Sciences, Institute of Natural Sciences and MOE-LSC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Email:

                                        fanghui.liu@sjtu.edu.cn (Corresponding author)



                                                                                                     1
proof away from the intended theorem. Long-running autoformalization thus fails in ways that resemble
software-engineering failure as much as theorem-proving failure: stale context, dependency tangles, statement
drift, and repairs whose effects are hard to localize.
    Automating this verification stage is important for two reasons. First, machine-checked formalization,
e.g., Lean 4, is the strongest available guarantee that an AI-discovered proof is correct rather than merely
plausible. It is therefore a prerequisite for making AI-assisted mathematics reliable enough to accelerate
research at scale. Second, formalization can also support proof digestion. Since a Lean proof records a
proof at a very fine level of detail, it can be translated back into natural language at multiple resolutions: a
high-level overview for orientation, a structured proof outline for learning, and a fully detailed derivation for
verification. This suggests a future form of mathematical textbook in which the same formal artifact supports
both machine checking and human-facing explanations at different levels of granularity.
    For research-level formalization, the core bottleneck is formalization shifts. The limiting factor is not (just)
the model’s capability on a single goal but its agent durability: whether an autonomous system stays coherent
across a multi-hour run, preserves the intended target, calibrates the failure state, and keeps one wrong
decision from corrupting the rest of the proof. This differs significantly from textbook formalization (Wang
et al., 2026; Gloeckle et al., 2026) that provides the agent with a fine-grained blueprint of the full reasoning
pipeline then the agent’s core task is to translate this existing blueprint into formal Lean code, rather than
to discover the logical structure of the reasoning itself. In research-level formalization, no such blueprint is
available in advance. The only fixed anchors are the terminal target theorems specified by human researchers.
The source proof, whether written by humans or generated with AI assistance, may contain noise, implicit
steps, gaps, or even errors.
    This absence of a trusted fine-grained proof plan creates two pervasive failure modes. The first is goal
drift, where the agent’s intermediate reasoning gradually deviates from the logical path required to prove the
target theorem, resulting in a formally correct but irrelevant reasoning graph; The second is lost-in-the-middle,
where the agent becomes trapped in an exponentially growing space of unproductive subproblems, unable
to navigate back to the core target or prioritize high-impact intermediate steps. Both failure modes are
relatively muted in textbook settings where the proof graph is supplied, but they become central in research
settings where the system must discover, maintain, and repair the graph itself.
    A monolithic agent asked to read the paper, design the formal skeleton, prove the lemmas, diagnose
failures, and repair its own mistakes is fragile. A single defect such as missed hypothesis, drifted statement,
or confident but wrong repair can invalidate hours of downstream work with high risk of context rot. The
question addressed in this paper is therefore not simply how to make an LLM prove a Lean goal, but how to
design a multi-agent harness that makes long-horizon Lean autoformalization of research mathematics legible,
recoverable, and resistant to drift. More generally, our work explores the possibility of autoformalization of
research mathematics via harness design if the related Lean library (e.g., Mathlib) is sufficient and complete.

1.1    Contributions
We propose LeanMarathon, a multi-agent harness for long-horizon Lean autoformalization of research
mathematics, exemplified by Erdős problems (#1051, #1196, #164, #1217) from two recent papers (Barreto
et al., 2026; Alexeev et al., 2026). At its center is the blueprint: a single Lean file that is at once a formal
proof skeleton and a natural-language proof graph. Each lemma or theorem is a node pairing a Lean
type with the LaTeX statement and proof it formalizes; when one node’s proof invokes another, it induces a
directed dependency edge. These nodes and edges form the proof directed acyclic graph (DAG) that every
agent reads, extends, and repairs (definitions are shared global context, not nodes). The formalization is
complete when every node carries a Lean proof and the file type-checks with no sorry . We expect the
proof DAG as well as harness design for long-horizon autoformalization follows four principles:
   • Decompose with dynamic proof DAG. The initial decomposition is uncertain, so the system never
     freezes it. It generates the DAG and then lets it evolve, splitting an over-large node or repairing a
     misformalized one, until each piece is small enough for one agent to discharge.
   • External or deterministic verification. No agent judges its own output. The progress is decided
     by the the deterministic verifier and external agents, not by an agent’s self-assessment, which avoids
     potential formalization drifts.


                                                         2
  Inputs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Agent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Artifact
                                                                                        Blueprint (system of record)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CI
     Natural-language             Canonical target
                                                                                        Lean declarations + prose +
       proof source                 statements                                          dependency DAG                                                                                                              Issue / PR flow




  Stage 1: Cold Start / Target Review
             1. Blueprinter                                                                3. CI verifier                                 4. Target Reviewer
                                                          2. Initial                                                                                                           clean review                     Proceed to
                                                                                          deterministic CI                                 reviews targets and
             constructs initial
                                                          blueprint                      verifies build, lints,                              prose; may raise                                                      Stage 2
              Lean blueprint
                                                                                         dependencies, etc.                                       issues

                                                                                                                                                      grouped issue

                                                                                                        repair PR                        5. Refiner
                                                                                                                                      analyzes issues and
                                                                                                                                        proposes fixes




  Stage 2: DAG-Orchestrated Proof Discharge
                                                                           3. Worker                   local refinement
                                                                                                            region                      4. proof PR
                                                                           one node
                                                                                                                                          or issue
                                                                           per worker




                                                                           3. Worker                   local refinement                                                                        pass
                                                                                                            region                      4. proof PR                        5. CI gate
                                                                           one node                                                                                                                          6. main branch /
          1. Main branch /                2. Build proof DAG                                                                              or issue                       deterministic CI
                                                                           per worker                                                                                                                        merged blueprint
          current blueprint                 and find dynamic                                                                                                             the only merge                                           7. Fully proven
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (updated system
                                                leaves                                                                                                                       authority                                            Lean blueprint
         (system of record)                                                                                                                                                                                     of record)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (completion)

                                                                           3. Worker                   local refinement
                                                                                                            region                      4. proof PR
                                                                           one node                                                                              repair PR              fail / diagnostics
                                                                                                                                          or issue
                                                                           per worker

                                                                                                                                                                     8. Refiner
                                                                                                                                                                 runs once per round;
                                                                                                                                                                  triages issues and
                                                                                                                                                                     proposes fixes
                                                                                               repeat rounds until all nodes proven




                                                                       Figure 1: Overview of LeanMarathon.


   • Restrict tools scope. Each agent is expected to edit only a bounded region. Constraining the action
     space calibrates the agent’s trace, so the worst outcome of a mistake is a rejected patch rather than
     corruption of another agent’s state.
   • Informalize while formalizing. Each node keeps its LaTeX prose beside its Lean type. This keeps
     the artifact human-readable and also guards against drift: the verifier enforces parity between the prose
     dependency graph and the elaborator’s, so the natural-language and formal graphs cannot silently
     diverge.

    Fig. 1 shows how LeanMarathon instantiates these principles. Four contract-scoped agents share the
blueprint, each with a narrow input, a single output, and a bounded edit scope. The Blueprinter reads
the source proof and the canonical target statements and writes the initial skeleton, with every statement
type-checking and every proof body a sorry placeholder. The Target-Reviewer audits that skeleton
for fidelity, checking that each Lean type states the theorem the paper intends, and files an issue on any
mismatch. The Worker discharges one node behind a quality gate, proving its body inside a frozen local
region. The Refiner collects open issues and repairs multi-node defects in one pull request (PR) per round.
    These agents are coordinated by a two-stage orchestrator. Stage 1 runs an adversarial review loop between
the Target-Reviewer and Refiner until the target statements are certified as faithful. Stage 2 repeatedly
extracts the current proof DAG, identifies dynamic leaves whose dependencies have already been proved,
and assigns them to Workers in parallel. All pull requests pass through a deterministic CI gate before
reaching main ; passing non-conflicting PRs are squash-merged independently as their checks complete. The
contributions of this paper can be summarized as below.

   • We identify agent durability as the central bottleneck in research-level autoformalization, and
     characterize three failure modes any long-running agent exhibits. Coherence loss: the task is globally
     coupled, like Sudoku, where every step must respect the whole proof, so a monolithic agent turns
     myopic and robs one part of the proof to patch another. Self-evaluation bias: asked to evaluate its own


                                                                                                              3
      output, the agent appears to be overly confident. Irreversibility: once the work drifts from the target,
      the agent cannot recover it, and the damage compounds across the rest of the proof. A single agent will
      always make such errors, so the design goal is not an infallible agent but a system of fallible agents in
      which no one error spreads: fault containment. We realize it through four contract-scoped agents and
      a two-stage orchestrator that separates adversarial target review from parallel proof discharge, turning
      one brittle multi-day run into many short, recoverable, parallel ones.

   • Our core formulation is the dynamic proof DAG: one blueprint that is at once a formal Lean skeleton,
     a natural-language proof graph, and the shared system of record. The harness never freezes the initial
     decomposition; instead it grows and repairs the DAG and discharges it from its dynamic leaves upward
     in parallel. Holding this moving graph coherent is the job of the whole harness, enforced concretely by
     deterministic CI gate and encoded into the contracts of agents.

   • We evaluate LeanMarathon on research-level Erdős problems for autoformalization. Across two
     2026 papers spanning four Erdős problems (Barreto et al., 2026; Alexeev et al., 2026), LeanMarathon
     formalizes all seven target theorems with no sorry , proving 258 lemmas and theorems in total.
     A commercial single-agent baseline (Achim et al., 2025) fails on both papers after tens of hours.
     LeanMarathon localizes failures to individual nodes and keeps incorrect early formalizations from
     silently consuming downstream prover compute.

1.2    Related Work
Autoformalization and neural theorem proving. Early systems prompt an LLM to translate state-
ments (Wu et al., 2022) or to draft informal proofs into formal sketches (Jiang et al., 2023), and later work
scales paired data and Lean-specific translators (Ying et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2025). In parallel, neural
provers search for proofs: tactic models trained on proof data (Polu & Sutskever, 2020; Han et al., 2022), tree
search (Lample et al., 2022), premise retrieval (Yang et al., 2023), interleaved informal reasoning (Lin et al.,
2025a), reinforcement learning from proof-assistant feedback and subgoal decomposition (Xin et al., 2024;
Ren et al., 2025), self-correction from compiler errors (Lin et al., 2025b), and large reasoning provers (Wang
et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025). The targets which can be formalized by these systems are at most IMO-level.

AI for research-level mathematics. Recent systems push AI from competition problems toward open
research questions. AlphaProof reached olympiad-medal level by proving in Lean with reinforcement
learning (Hubert et al., 2026), while AlphaGeometry (Trinh et al., 2024) and AlphaEvolve (Novikov et al.,
2025) attack open problems through specialized or evolutionary search, though their outputs are constructions
and programs, not machine-checked proofs. Benchmarks confirm the distance to research difficulty (Glazer
et al., 2024). General models now contribute steps to live mathematics: a Gemini system surveyed hundreds
of Erdős problems (Feng et al., 2026) and GPT-5 produced new results with mathematicians (Bubeck et al.,
2025). Both episodes drew scrutiny over whether claims were proved or merely retrieved, which is exactly what
a formal proof settles (Tao, 2025; Bloom, 2026). AlphaProof Nexus (Tsoukalas et al., 2026) is an evolutionary
Lean proof-search system: prover subagents edit marked regions of Lean sketches, invoke AlphaProof on
subgoals, validate candidates, and use rater agents with a population database to select promising sketches,
resolving 9 of 353 Erdős problems and 44 of 492 OEIS conjectures. In contrast, LeanMarathon targets
paper-level autoformalization: it builds an audited blueprint DAG from source and proves the resulting
multi-result Lean development bottom-up.

Autonomous formalization agents and large-scale formalization. A wave of 2025 and 2026 systems
formalize at the scale of whole results or papers, the regime LeanMarathon targets. AxiomProver (Axiom
Math, 2025), Gauss (Hariharan et al., 2026), and Aristotle (Achim et al., 2025) are capable to formalize papers
but they are fully close-source company products. However, we have no clues about such harness design.
Besides, large-scale community projects are growing: the Polynomial Freiman-Ruzsa conjecture (Dillies
et al., 2023), the Liquid Tensor Experiment (Scholze, 2022), Fermat’s Last Theorem (Buzzard et al., 2024),
Carleson’s theorem (Becker et al., 2024), the Equational Theories Project (Bolan et al., 2025), statistical
learning theory (Sonoda et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2026b), and reinforcement learning theory (Zhang, 2025).



                                                       4
   We present LeanMarathon in two parts: its infrastructure design in Section 2 which introduces the
blueprint and the agents that act on it, and then the orchestration that drives them to be a multi-hour,
parallel autoformalization recoverable and resistant to drift in Section 3. Section 4 provides the experimental
evaluations. The conclusion is drawn in Section 5.


2     Harness Infrastructure
This section covers our harness’s fundamental ingredients. Section 2.1 describes the blueprint format we
use. Section 2.2 then introduces the four contract-scoped agents that maintain the blueprint, each owning a
well-separated task, skilled workflow, and bounded edit scope.

2.1     The Blueprint as the System of Record
The central artifact in our harness is the blueprint, a Lean file, that serves simultaneously as a formal proof
skeleton, a natural-language proof graph, and the task interface exposed to agents. All durable mathematical
state is stored in this file: theorem statements, intermediate lemmas, definitions, prose explanations, and
declared proof dependencies. Agents may read, prove, review, or repair parts of the blueprint, but they do
not maintain any hidden shared memory outside it.
    Each mathematical node in the blueprint is represented by a Lean declaration annotated with structured
metadata, in the format of LeanArchitect (Zhu et al., 2026): the blueprint metadata lives in an in-source
 @[blueprint ...] attribute, and the dependency graph and sorry -status are inferred from Lean’s
elaborator. This complements the original blueprint methodology (Massot, 2020). A typical proof node has
the form:

    @[blueprint "lem:weighted-tail-bound"
      (statement := /-- LaTeX statement text -/)
      (proof     := /-- LaTeX proof prose with \cref{...} citations          -/)
      (title     := /-- one-line LaTeX title                                 -/)
      (latexEnv := "lemma")]
    lemma weighted_tail_bound ... : ... := by
      sorry_using [aux_lemma_one, aux_lemma_two]


The Lean declaration gives the formal statement that must type-check. The statement field records the
corresponding mathematical statement in LaTeX. The proof field records the natural-language proof
sketch, including explicit references to earlier nodes. The title and latexEnv fields provide presentation
metadata and allow the verifier to check that the Lean declaration and the prose environment agree.
    Proof nodes may have one of three proof-body states: unproved, unproved but with a dependency list,
and proved. A node may be unproved, written as by sorry ; it may be unproved but equipped with an
intended dependency list, written as by sorry_using [...] ; or it may contain a complete Lean proof.
Definitions are treated as global context and are not proof nodes in the dependency DAG. The proof DAG is
formed only from lemma and theorem declarations. Note that, \cref{...} citations in the LaTeX prose
are not decorative: the verifier extracts the actual proof dependencies via Lean’s elaborator metadata and
enforces two-way parity between the \cref edges and the elaborator’s edges. The blueprint obtains the
property that the natural-language graph and the typed graph cannot drift apart: a PR that lets either side
disagree with the other is rejected before it merges.

2.2     Contract-Scoped Agents
Our harness decomposes research-level autoformalization into four contract-scoped agents: the Blueprinter,
the Target-Reviewer, the Worker, and the Refiner. Each agent owns a narrow interface, a bounded
edit scope, and a specific failure mode that it is designed to expose or contain. Table 1 summarizes the four
agents along these axes.



                                                      5
Table 1: The four contract-scoped agents. Only the Blueprinter and Refiner are given the source proof;
the Target-Reviewer and Worker see only the canonical statements and the blueprint. Every PR reaches
 main only through the CI verifier.
    Agent                 Input                  Output       Allowed edits           Failure mode
    Blueprinter           source proof, canon- PR             writes the whole skele- poor decomposition, i.e.
                          ical      statements,               ton, bodies as place- a large repair radius
                          blueprint                           holders
    Target-Reviewer       canonical statements, issue/None    none (read-only)        a misformalized target: a
                          blueprint                                                   valid but wrong theorem
    Worker                canonical statements, PR/issue      the node’s prose, its   a local proof failure, or
                          blueprint                           proof body, its local   silently proving a misfor-
                                                              refinement region       malized node
    Refiner               source proof, canoni- PR            one connected illness   blueprint drift and source
                          cal statements, open                sub-DAG                 gaps
                          issues, blueprint


   This separation is essential: a single agent asked to design the proof graph, judge its own fidelity, discharge
proofs, and repair global errors has no reliable mechanism for detecting its own drift. In our harness, every
agent produces an externally checkable artifact, and every artifact is accepted only through the verifier.

2.2.1   Blueprinter
The Blueprinter converts the source proof and the canonical target statements into the initial blueprint.
Its job is not to prove the paper but to choose a decomposition of the argument that is faithful enough for
later review and local enough for later repair. A good blueprint should isolate mathematical commitments so
that, if one statement is later found to be misformalized, the number of downstream declarations that must
be changed is small.
    We frame the Blueprinter’s job as a repair-radius optimization problem: draft an initial blueprint
which minimizes the expected number of declarations that must change if one declaration turns out to be
wrong. The decomposition follows a published rubric via decomposition.md . The Blueprinter writes
every proof body as sorry or sorry_using , and delivers a single PR to merge the blueprint into the
 main branch. The agent is supposed to exit after PR creation, then the stop hook is triggered to monitor
the merge status. If merge fails, the stop hook will block the exit, serve a resume instruction with CI run’s
job logs. Mathematical repair of the source is explicitly out of scope, the agent’s job is to isolate it, not
to fix it. This boundary design provides a clear separation with later Refiner and allocate more agent’s
workloads for decomposition. The in-workspace knowledge-store layout of Blueprinter is given in Fig. 6
from Appendix A.

2.2.2   Target-Reviewer
The Target-Reviewer audits the blueprint before large-scale proving begins. Its role is to prevent the most
expensive failure mode in research-level autoformalization: proving a formally valid Lean theorem that is
not the theorem intended by the source paper. For instance, if a root theorem statement is misformalized,
every lemma the Worker proves afterwards is wasted compute, so an early certification at the roots is
what makes later orchestration loop more productive.
    For every target theorem, the Reviewer compares three objects: the canonical target statement, the
LaTeX statement stored in the blueprint, and the Lean type. It checks whether they express the same
mathematical claim, with the same hypotheses, quantifiers, definitions, and conclusion.
    The Reviewer is not allowed to edit the blueprint. A clean review allows our harness to enter the
proof-discharge stage. A failed review produces a grouped issue describing the suspected mismatch and the
affected nodes; the issue is then handled by the Refiner.



                                                        6
    Misformalization                Numeric
                                                              Statement polish                                                                                        Formalization
         audit                     stress test



                                                                                                                                                              Post proof polish
                             file issue to early issue,
                              e.g., wrong claim, gap


                                                                                                                                                                              Create PR


                         Figure 3: The executable workflow of per-node Worker.


2.2.3   Per-node Worker
A Worker is assigned one proof node whose declared dependencies                                                                                 r - u ; m |                                                         r - u ; m |  
have already been proved. Its job is local: either prove the assigned
Lean statement or report why the node should not yet be proved.
The Worker proceeds through four ordered phases, see Fig. 3.



                                                                              o r | b o m - Ѵ  Ѵ o 1 - Ѵ  u ; = b m ; l ; m |  	  
Phase 1: Misformalization audit. The Worker first treats the
Lean type as a suspect specification. It compares the Lean statement
with the blueprint prose, checks why the node exists, identifies which
downstream nodes use it, and verifies that the statement provides the
fact those downstream nodes need. If the type is missing a hypothesis,                                                                                                $ - u ] ; |  m o 7 ;
states the wrong conclusion, uses an unsuitable abstraction, or does                                                                       Ɛ        7 b | - 0 Ѵ ;  | ;  |  Ő v | - | ; l ; m | ķ  | b | Ѵ ; ķ  r u o o = ő
not match its intended role in the proof DAG, the Worker stops
                                                                                                                                           Ƒ                     u o  ; m   ; - m  v | - | ; l ; m |
and files an issue.
                                                                                                                                           ƒ                         7 b | - 0 Ѵ ;  r u o o =  0 o 7 

Phase 2: Cheap falsification. When the claim admits finite,
                                                                                  7 b | - 0 Ѵ ;   u o  ; m
numerical, or boundary-case testing, the Worker attempts to refute
it before spending prover compute. Failure to find a counterexample is
not treated as a proof; it is only a low-cost sanity check. A discovered
counterexample or suspicious boundary case is reported as an issue. Figure 2: Expected editing behaviour.

Phase 3: Statement polish. If the Lean type passes the first two phases, the Worker may edit only the
node’s prose fields: the LaTeX statement, title, and proof text. The goal is to make the natural-language
text describe the Lean statement exactly, neither stronger nor weaker.

Phase 4: Formalization. The Worker then attempts to replace the placeholder body with a complete
Lean proof. The Lean type of the assigned node is frozen throughout this phase. The Worker may introduce
fresh helper lemmas only inside the local refinement region immediately before the target node. These helpers
must precede the target, depend only on already visible declarations or earlier local helpers, and terminate at
the assigned target. If Worker cannot complete the formalization within all boundaries, then it needs to
file an issue with clear evidence to exit.
     During formalization, The Worker’s edit scope is mechanically enforced via an editing MCP server built
by patching Codex’s apply-patch tool, illustrated in Fig. 2. It may edit the assigned node’s prose fields,
its proof body, and its local refinement region, but not the Lean type of the target or unrelated blueprint
nodes. This restriction makes parallel formalization safe: different Workers operate on disjoint editable
regions, so successful patches commute by construction, while failed attempts become rejected local patches
or diagnostic issues rather than global corruption. To be specific, the Lean file is partitioned around the
assigned target node T into frozen and editable spans:




                                                          7
  -- previous node ends here
  -- BEGIN editable local refinement area for T
  @[blueprint "lem:X" ...]
  lemma X ... := by
  ...

  @[blueprint "lem:Y" ...]
  lemma Y ... := by
  ...
  -- END editable local refinement area for T
  @[blueprint "lem:T" -- frozen
    (statement := /-- editable -/)
    (proof := /-- editable -/)
    (title := /-- editable -/)
    (latexEnv := "lemma")] -- frozen
  lemma T ... : ... := by -- frozen
  -- editable proof body


    This harness design makes the parallel multi-agent loop against the same frozen substrate commit works.
Workers acting on disjoint editable regions produce patches that commute by construction so PRs can land
in any order without merge conflict. Within its editable region, the Worker may grow a local refinement
DAG consisting of fresh helper nodes before the target node which is the unique terminal, which aims to
overcome the possible risk of under-decomposition brought from Blueprinter or Refiner.

2.2.4   Refiner
The Refiner repairs blueprint-level defects reported by the Target-Reviewer or Workers. Unlike a
Worker, which is restricted to one proof node, the Refiner can edit the whole blueprint since a defect
might affect multiple declarations.
    Given the open issue(s), the Refiner first identifies the affected region, called the illness area: the
smallest connected sub-DAG that must be inspected or changed to resolve the defect. We develop an MCP
server called dag-tracker for agent to call for live parent/child identification.
    The Refiner classifies each defect as either blueprint drift or a source gap. Blueprint drift means
that the Lean blueprint has diverged from the source proof: for example, a statement was misformalized, a
dependency was wrong, or the prose no longer describes the Lean declaration. A source gap means that the
source proof itself is incomplete, ambiguous, or false at the level required for formalization. During the repair
phase, the proof bodies are governed by the following decision tree node by node:
   Is the node NEW or EXISTING?
      NEW: body as placeholder
      EXISTING: what is the current proof body’s shape?
         placeholder: keep and align with new dependency set if prose changed.
         complete tactic proof: still compiles after repair?
            YES: preserve the complete proof body byte-identical to the input blueprint.
            NO: wholesale-replace with placeholder
Compilation is decided by Lean compiler, never by the agent. Wholesale replacement is recorded in the
PR summary and never negotiated. There is no path that lets the Refiner partial-edit a complete proof
body. Although a downstream Worker needs to prove the downgraded node again, the discipline keeps the
Refiner’s blast radius proportional to the issues it is closing, not to the file it is editing. Furthermore, the
source gap should be fixed via reasoning and the new solution should be updated in the LaTeX fields.




                                                       8
        source proof
                                                    PR                        Target-
      (e.g., paper.tex)         Blueprinter                 CI                                       Stage 2
                                                                             Reviewer
    + target statements
                                           PR
                                                                               finding
                            Refiner                   grouped issue



                                   Figure 4: The orchestration of stage 1.


3      System Orchestration
After introducing harness infrastructure, we are ready to discuss our system orchestration in two stages. The
first stage constructs and audits a faithful blueprint before formalization begins. The second stage discharges
the proof DAG through parallel, CI-gated proof attempts.

3.1     Stage 1 – Cold Start and Target Review
We frame this stage as a nested Ralph-Wiggum loop, shown in Fig. 4, which is designed to digest the
input natural language source into an initial Lean blueprint.
   The Blueprinter produces an initial Lean blueprint in which all declarations elaborate and all proof
bodies are placeholders which must pass the CI gate. The Target-Reviewer then compares the theorem
nodes against the canonical targets and the blueprint’s own LaTeX and Lean.
   If the review is clean, our harness proceeds to Stage 2. If the Reviewer finds a target mismatch, missing
hypothesis, incorrect dependency, or other blueprint-level defect, it files a grouped issue. The Refiner
repairs the affected region and submits a repair PR. After the PR passes CI and merges, the Reviewer runs
again. Stage 1 terminates only when the target review exits clean.

3.2     Stage 2 – DAG-orchestrated Loop
Stage 2 proves the blueprint via the pipeline in Fig. 5. Each round starts from the current main branch,
which is the system of record. The orchestrator extracts the proof DAG from the blueprint and identifies the
current dynamic leaves: unproved proof nodes whose dependencies have already been proved.
   The orchestrator assigns each dynamic leaf to an independent Worker. Every Worker receives the
same frozen substrate commit and a mechanically restricted editable region around its target node. Workers
run in parallel. A successful Worker submits a proof PR; otherwise it files an issue instead.
   Proof PRs are accepted only by the CI gate.Passing PRs are merged into main; failing PRs are rejected
with diagnostics. After all Workers in a round have finished, the Refiner processes the accumulated issues,
submits repair PR through the same CI gate, and updates the blueprint if the repairs pass.
   Our harness repeats these rounds until every proof node in the DAG has a complete Lean proof. At
termination, the main branch contains a fully proven blueprint with no remaining placeholders.

Why direct merge, not Github auto-merge. The orchestrator merges via gh pr merge –squash
directly, not gh pr merge –auto –squash . Auto-merge requires a pending required check (branch pro-
tection) and serialises across parallel PRs, i.e., only the first PR to finish CI can enable auto-merge, and a
later parallel PR finds main has moved and the GraphQL mutation refuses. Direct merge needs no pending
check and lets every non-conflicting parallel PR land independently as its own CI completes.

3.3     Sustaining hours-long runs
The following composable properties keep a multi-hour run resumable without drift.




                                                      9
                  initial PR                  PR               PR                 main branch               PR                                   PR


                                                                                  CI Gate

                                                                                                     one Refiner repair

 one worker for one dynamic leaf
                                              #1 gaps               #2 misformalized




               Stage 1                               Round 1/Worker                                  Round 1/Refiner                          Round N

   Shapes                initial lemma   new lemma           target theorem                 Colors               unproven       proven   GitHub issue

                                               Agents                 PR Worker                 Issue Worker                Refiner




                                         Figure 5: The DAG-based orchestration of stage 2.


CI verifier as continuous integration The CI verifier is the single gate for any merge request to
 main branch. The verifier encodes the blueprint contract ( blueprint-format.md ) as the following seven
executable checks:
   1. Lean compilation: every diagnostic must be either none, or declaration uses ’sorry’ warning.

   2. Node well-formedness: every @[blueprint] attribute has non-empty statement / title /
       proof fields. Placeholders are multi-line by followed by sorry or sorry_using . Incomplete
      proof body is prohibited.
   3. latexEnv consistency: the Lean keyword and the latexEnv field must agree (e.g. lemma ↔ lemma ,
      theorem ↔ theorem ).
   4. Label-name normalization: blueprint labels like lem:foo-bar normalize ( - → _ ) to the actual
      Lean name.
   5. Unique labels: each blueprint node’s Lean naming should be unique.

   6. Proof-dependency parity: Based on the proof DAG exatracted via Lean’s elaborator metadata, a
      two-way parity then requires every Lean dep to be \cref -cited in the prose and every \cref{lem:_}
      or \cref{thm:_} to be a Lean dependency. sorry_using references additionally must precede the
      citing node in file order and must point at proof nodes only. We treat the definitional nodes as global
      context which are intentionally excluded from the proof DAG.

   7. Lemma closeness: every lemma must be cited by some later lemma or theorem ; a theorem
      is a target claim and is treated as a terminal sink, allowed to have no children. Equivalently, every
      non-terminal node of the proof DAG must have positive out-degree toward a target, so no lemma is
      an orphan that feeds nothing. Inspired by the logical closeness defined by Zhang et al. (2026a), which
      requires every non-sink node of a reasoning DAG to have positive out-degree, this check is a structural
      guard against task drift: an orphan lemma is exactly the footprint a drifting agent leaves when it proves
      machinery absent from the source, the failure mode that stalled our earlier harness (Section 4.7).
Either successful or failed verification triggers an upserted PR comment for live feedbacks. These checks
are deliberately structural rather than stylistic/semantic. Lemma closeness in particular is the structural
counterpart to feeding the Refiner the source proof (Section 2.2.4): source-anchored repair realigns proof


                                                                                       10
content to the paper, whereas lemma closeness enforces goal-directedness on the dependency graph alone,
mechanically and without reading the mathematics.
    This harness does not try to prescribe the exact tactic script a Worker should discover; instead, it
enforces the interfaces that make independent agents composable. Formal statements must compile, prose
citations must match proof dependencies, graph edges must be visible and acyclic, and every pull request
must preserve the blueprint as a coherent system of record. This is the main methodological advantage of
our harness: it converts long-running agent work from an opaque sequence of prompts into a set of small,
recoverable, mechanically checked transactions.

Stop-hook-driven self-recovery. Each PR-enabled agent’s stop hook runs after the agent declares itself
done. The hook validates delivery.yml as the terminal-delivery record; if the agent opened a PR, the
hook polls GitHubfor either a successful merge or a CI failure. On a CI failure the hook extracts the verifier’s
upserted comment and the raw failed-job logs as context inside the worktree, and blocks the agent with a
templated debug-fix-push instruction.

Bounded scope, deterministic enforcement. Every agent receives a contract that names the spans of
the workspace it may edit. The contracts are not advisory: the apply-patch MCP server rejects every
patch to a frozen span, the read-only Codex sandbox rejects every constructive operations, and the
CI path-allowlist rejects every PR that touches a path outside blueprint. The principle averts the failure
mode in which one agent’s mistake silently corrupts another agent’s working state. The worst outcome any
misbehaving agent can produce is a rejected patch, never a poisoned PR.

Context management. All inter-agent communication flows through the on-disk Lean blueprint and the
GitHub PR/issue stream. There is no scratch memory, no shared in-RAM channel, no out-of-tree file written
by one agent and read by another. The principle averts cross-agent context bleed : with no hidden channel, an
agent that misbehaves cannot poison another agent’s context, and a Codex auto-compaction that wipes one
agent’s window does not corrupt anything any other agent will run on.


4     Experiments
We test LeanMarathon on two research papers (Barreto et al., 2026; Alexeev et al., 2026) on Erdős problems.
Each input is the paper’s LaTeX source together with a separate file of canonical target statements; each
output is a Lean blueprint in which every proof node is proven (Section 2). The harness formalized all seven
target theorems across the two papers, covering four Erdős problems (#1051, #1196, #164, #1217), with no
 sorry and under the seven-check CI contract of Section 3.3. It discharged 258 lemmas and theorems in
total. Aristotle (Achim et al., 2025), the only commercial Lean agent we could access, failed on both papers
after tens of hours.

4.1     Two research papers for evaluation
We chose two papers that are recent, research-level, and AI-assisted in their genesis. Difficulty rules out
competition-style targets: both papers are analytic number theory with multi-page estimates, not some tricks.
AI provenance makes formalization the decisive artifact: both proofs were discovered with AI help, and an
AI-discovered proof is exactly the case where a machine-checked formalization, rather than prose, is the
guarantee that the argument is correct.1

Erdős–Graham irrationality (Barreto et al., 2026). This paper answers Erdős ProblemP#1051, posed
by Erdős and Graham in 1980 (Bloom, 2026): a double-exponential growth condition forces n 1/(an an+1 )
to be irrational. The headline case was solved autonomously by the agent Aletheia (Gemini Deep Think), one
of four Erdős problems DeepMind reported solving autonomously in December 2025 (Feng et al., 2026). We
   1 In the broader Erdős-problem sweep that produced one of our targets, DeepMind reported that of 200 candidate solutions

marked correct or incorrect, only 6.5% were “meaningfully correct” (Feng et al., 2026). This gap is what a sorry -free Lean
proof closes.


                                                            11
Table 2: Formalization outcomes. Proof nodes counts lemma and theorem declarations; definitions are
global context. The Prim row includes the 59-node #1196 blueprint reused as its seed.
                                    Erdős–Graham          #1196         #164 & #1217
             Metric                  ( ErdosGraham ) ( Erdos1196 )           ( Prim )
              Target theorems                      4                1                    2
              Lean lines                        8,513            3,988               14,592
              Nodes (def / lem / thm)        39 / 106 / 5      15 / 43 / 1         57 / 144 / 3
              Proof nodes                        111               44                  147
              Remaining sorry                      0                0                    0
              Status                         complete          complete            complete


stress that #1051 is the easy part. Its d = 2 golden-ratio instance follows from a short Borel-peak argument;
the depth of the paper lies in two later results that we also formalize. The general irrationality theorem fixes
a weight tuple w, defines a growth threshold cw as the unique positive root of a polynomial Pw , and proves
irrationality of a weighted series via Mahler’s criterion, a local-peak selection lemma, and a three-regime tail
analysis. The construction theorem is its sharp negative counterpart: for every C > 1 it builds an integer
sequence whose weighted sum is rational, through a non-constructive nested-interval covering argument. The
original question already drew formalization attention, but these two generalizations were unformalized.

Primitive sets and von Mangoldt chains (Alexeev et al., 2026). This paper introduces a method,
suggested by output of GPT-5.4 Pro, that bounds Erdős sums of primitive sets using Markov chains with von
Mangoldt weights on the divisibility poset. The single method resolves several conjectures at once. We target
three. Erdős–Sárközy–Szemerédi #1196 (a 1966 conjecture) asserts f (A) ≤ 1 + O(1/ log x) for a primitive set
A ⊆ [x, ∞), sharpening the previous record of ≈ 1.399 to the conjectured constant 1. The Erdős Primitive Set
Conjecture #164 asserts f (A) ≤ f (N1 ) = 1.6366 . . . . Erdős–Sárközy–Szemerédi #1217 produces an infinite
divisibility chain inside any set of positive doubly-logarithmic density. The proofs use the sub-invariance of
the doubly-harmonic weight under the von Mangoldt chain, Mertens-type estimates, and the monotonicity of
the Dirichlet eta function. This paper is a strong reference point because parts of it were already formalized
by others: #1196 by Math Inc.’s Gauss agent in roughly 4,000 lines of Lean (Math, Inc., 2026), and #164 by
Boris Alexeev using Codex (Alexeev et al., 2026). Conjecture #1217 had not been formalized by anyone.

4.2    Setup
We ran the harness three times; every agent runs on Codex (GPT-5.5-xhigh, 258K, read-only, no web access).
For Erdős–Graham, one run ( ErdosGraham 2 ) formalizes all four target theorems. For the primitive-sets
paper we split the work into two runs to test incremental development: whether a finished formalization
can be extended by adding targets to the problem file and rerunning the harness, rather than starting over.
A first run ( Erdos1196 3 ) formalizes #1196. We then seed a second repository ( Prim 4 ) with the final
#1196 blueprint, add #164 and #1217 to the target statements, and rerun the harness; both build on the
#1196 infrastructure. Each run receives only the paper source and the target statements; success means
the main branch reaches a state where every blueprint proof node carries a complete proof, no sorry or
 sorry_using remains, and CI passes all seven structural checks (Section 3.3).

4.3    Results
Every target is formalized. LeanMarathon discharged all seven target theorems with complete, machine-
checked proofs (Table 2): every run is sorry -free, with no axiom or native_decide .
  2 https://github.com/YuanheZ/ErdosGraham
  3 https://github.com/YuanheZ/Erdos1196
  4 https://github.com/YuanheZ/Prim




                                                        12
Incremental development works. Seeding Prim with the final #1196 blueprint, the harness reused all
59 nodes unchanged and added 145 new nodes (103 new proof obligations) to discharge #164 and #1217,
reaching 14,592 lines over 204 nodes. It extended a finished formalization to new targets rather than restarting,
confirming the incremental-development mode Section 4.2 set out to test. Across the three runs the harness
proved 258 distinct lemmas and theorems: 111 for Erdős–Graham, 44 for #1196, and 103 more for #164 and
#1217.

Formalization feedback sharpens the mathematics. The Lean compiler is not only a checker but
also can provide ground-truth mathematical signal, and the issue-to-Refiner loop turns that signal into
better mathematics. Across the three runs essentially every blocked-node issue is grounded in a concrete
formalization artifact rather than a prose disagreement, and three kinds recur. The compiler refutes false
statements: a Worker instantiates a tail estimate and collapses its conclusion to 1 ≤ 0 (issue #431), or a
two-window inequality to 4/3 ≤ 2/3 (issue #465), each forcing a corrected hypothesis. Mathlib’s totalization
conventions expose vacuous targets that prose hides: a non-summable real tsum is defined to be 0, so the
formalized #1196 bound held even for a divergent series until a Summable hypothesis was added (issue #2),
and a real limsup of an unbounded count returns 0, so the divisibility-chain density target was unsound
until it was recast in ENNReal (issue #102). And failed tactic probes together with Mathlib-absence findings
locate the missing mathematics: when positivity cannot sign the derivative of the Dirichlet eta function
and no monotonicity lemma exists (issue #16), and the naive route then reduces to a false inequality between
Gamma measures (issue #20), the Refiner is driven to the paper’s actual argument, eta monotonicity
via stochastic domination of Gamma laws. A human reads “f (A) ≤ · · · ” charitably, assuming the series
converges; the formalization does not, and that mechanized skepticism, surfaced as an issue and resolved by
the Refiner, is where much of the harness’s mathematical value lies.

The runs are autonomous. Table 3 reports the orchestration cost of each fully autonomous run. The
Erdős–Graham run took 19 rounds, launched 58 Workers and 7 Refiners, and cost $257 in GPT-5.5
API-equivalent tokens; the #1196 run took 17 rounds and $189; the #164/#1217 run was the largest, at
$624. The CI gate is selective rather than ceremonial: of the 58 Erdős–Graham Workers, 44 produced PRs
that passed all checks and merged, the rest being rejected before reaching main .

Parallel PRs never conflict. Across the three runs, 135 Worker pull requests landed on a continuously
moving main by direct squash-merge, as many as 16 in a single round’s parallel batch, and not one produced
a merge conflict. This realizes the central guarantee of the frozen editable region (Section 2.2): Workers
acting on disjoint spans produce patches that commute, so PRs land in any order without collision.

Human observation tightens the harness. We observe the agent’s working trace to constantly reshape
the design. Early Erdős–Graham runs fixed the maxHeartbeats to 0, which disables Lean’s deterministic
timeout. Reading the Worker traces, we found a strong preference for automation ( nlinarith , simp ,
 aesop ) over explicit tactic scripts. With no deterministic ceiling, such a search runs until a coarse external
timeout cuts the whole build, stalling a node with no reproducible signal. We changed the header to a fixed
500K-budget, restoring a per-declaration deterministic ceiling: a runaway search now fails fast and locally
instead of exhausting wall-clock time, and the agent’s reliance on unbounded automation dropped sharply. To
make efficient proofs the path of least resistance, we gave the Worker two skills, proof-refactoring.md
and performance-optimization.md , from lean4-skills (Freer, 2025). The first refactor under the new
budget shows the effect: PR #447 replaced broad nlinarith / simp search in a peak-bound lemma with
direct order arguments and hoisted shared sub-proofs, exactly that discipline.

4.4    Case study: Erdős–Graham
The Erdős–Graham run shows where formalization effort concentrates. Its four target theorems were proven
in 19 rounds, yet every one of the 16 refinement issues fell into just two families: Proposition 9’s three-case
tail bound, the analytic core of the general theorem (8 issues, spanning all seven refiner rounds), and the



                                                       13
Table 3: Orchestration statistics for the three runs, computed from the agents’ session histories. Cost is
GPT-5.5 API-equivalent ($5 / $0.50 / $30 per million input / cached-input / output tokens). Critical path is
agent compute under parallelization; times are hh:mm:ss.
          Metric                           Erdős–Graham ESS #1196 #164 & #1217
            Rounds                                  19                17                 40
            Workers launched                        58                33                111
            Refiners                                7                  6                 25
            Merged PRs                              53                32                 93
            Critical path (excl. CI wait)        11:38:23          11:32:40           40:43:21
            Aggregate agent active time          21:29:41          16:26:32           71:16:52
            Stop-hook / CI wait time             07:15:10          02:15:33           07:05:26
            Tool-call parsed wall time           10:16:25          06:16:40           49:08:03
            Total tool calls                      5,273             4,067              12,204
            Total tokens                          308M              245M               796M
            GPT-5.5 API-equiv. cost              $257.17           $189.43            $623.54


nested-interval covering lemma behind the construction theorem (8 issues, across 6 rounds). No other node
ever blocked. These are exactly the two results the baseline leaves unproven (Section 4.8).
    The Refiner converged each family by splitting the failed node into progressively finer sub-nodes that
Workers discharged bottom-up. Most repairs corrected blueprint drift: a dyadic tail estimate that was false
as written, its hypotheses letting the right-hand logarithmic factor vanish while the finite sum stayed positive
so the claim collapsed to 1 ≤ 0 (issue #431); a Lean index convention realigned to the paper’s (issue #480);
and a strengthened statement that forced a complete proof to be downgraded to a placeholder rather than
left unsound (issue #468), the wholesale-replacement rule of Section 2.2 in action.
    The run also caught a genuine gap in the published proof. In Case C of Proposition 9 the paper picks a
Borel peak R and the largest exponential failure P < R beneath it, then uses an ≥ en throughout [P +1, R+1].
But the peak condition bounds only aR+1 , not aR , and Case C explicitly permits aR < eR : the chosen peak
can itself be a failure, in which case P = R and the block breaks at its lower end. A Worker flagged the
unjustified step (issue #469) and the Refiner repaired it by weakening the selection lemma to admit a
failure at the peak (PR #473), recovering the conclusion. This step is the analytic heart of the general
theorem and exactly the kind of gap a machine-checked formalization is built to surface.

4.5    Case study: #1196
The #1196 run shows the opposite pattern: one deep cascade rather than many independent defects, and no
node refiled twice. Over five successive rounds the Refiner drilled downward from the surface estimate to
the genuinely missing core, inserting one deeper upstream lemma each round. The surface node needed the
bound −ζ ′ (1 + u)/ζ(1 + u) ≤ log 2/(2u − 1); that reduced to monotonicity of the Dirichlet eta function; that
reduced to stochastic domination of Gamma distributions in the shape parameter together with a Mellin
representation of η. None of these are in Mathlib, so the harness built the entire probabilistic argument the
paper compresses into a single sentence.
   Once the chain reached the Mathlib-absent facts it converged with no further refinement: Workers
proved the inserted leaves in dependency order, closing the original round-one defect seven rounds later from
the bottom up. Five of the 6 refiner rounds and 6 of the eight issues targeted this one analytic spine, and the
repairs added missing lemmas rather than rearranging existing ones, since the paper states in a line what a
proof assistant needs a Gamma-coupling argument to establish. The eta-monotonicity step is precisely the
blocker the baseline could not discharge (Section 4.8).




                                                         14
Table 4: The most-refiled blueprint nodes in the Prim run, with the span and number (n) of distinct
Refiner rounds that reopened each. Labels are abbreviated: the path-data, model, and reverse-Fatou nodes
form the #1217 adjoint-chain cluster ( mangoldt-adjoint-* ); the last is an EPS node ( eps-* ).
                       Blueprint node (abbreviated)              Target     Rounds (n)
                       kernel-path-data-exists                    #1217      14–28 (10)
                       constructed-path-data-exists               #1217       13–28 (8)
                       random-model-exists                        #1217       10–28 (8)
                       chain-density-selection                    #1217        9–26 (7)
                       reverse-fatou-path-extraction              #1217       10–26 (7)
                       eps-modified-chain-subinvariant            #164          1–6 (4)


4.6    Case study: #164 and #1217
The Prim run is the harness’s hardest case and its sharpest illustration of the refinement loop. It ran 40
rounds and merged 93 pull requests (one Blueprinter, 66 Worker, and 26 Refiner) while filing and
closing 46 issues. It is by far the harness’s largest run: its agents spent 71 hours of active compute, 41 of
them along the critical path under parallelization, and $624 in GPT-5.5-equivalent tokens (Table 3). The two
targets behaved very differently: #164, the Erdős primitive set conjecture, was proven early, while #1217,
the divisibility-chain theorem, occupied the bulk of the run. The Refiner ran in 24 of the 40 rounds; the
last nine were refiner-free and completed the cleaned blueprint.

Drift dominates source-gaps. The Refiner classifies every illness area as drift (the blueprint diverged
from a sound source proof) or source-gap (the paper’s argument is itself incomplete); see Section 2.2. Its
reports record 32 illness areas, split 26 to 6 in favor of drift. The drift defects are telling. A Worker’s
misformalized sub-invariance statement for #164 was satisfied by the trivial identity kernel P n m = [n=m],
so it constrained nothing (issue #5). Several statements asserted a real tsum or limsup of a divergent
or unbounded quantity, which Lean silently totalizes to 0; this hid the missing summability and forced a
real-to- ENNReal reformulation of the chain-density definitions (issues #2, #33, #102). The 6 source-gaps
are where the paper compresses: the invariant-weight asymptotic the authors call “a routine calculation”
(issue #76: “not syntactic rewrites. . . substantive analytic obligations”), the occupation identity it derives by
stating that “an induction gives” the result, and Mertens’ theorem invoked as a black box (issue #127).

Hard nodes converge over many rounds. A few nodes were refiled and repaired repeatedly before
converging (Table 4). The cluster behind #1217 (an adjoint upward Markov chain, an occupation-measure
identity, a uniform second-moment bound, and a reverse-Fatou extraction) dominated; its existence lemma
kernel-path-data-exists was reopened in 10 distinct rounds. The recurrence came in two waves. Through
round 21 the Refiner pushed the construction upstream and bundled the analytic content (visit identity,
second moment, reverse Fatou) into a single path-data package, so each downstream node could project what
it needed (issue #69: “over-bundled for its position in the DAG”). At round 25 it reversed course and un-
bundled the package to match the paper’s derivation order; removing those fields invalidated four downstream
projection proofs at once, each replaced wholesale with a placeholder. Round 26 then corrected the real-
versus- ENNReal limsup semantics, and round 31 supplied the remaining analytic bridges: a measurability
fix, a hit-count moment interface, and a Mertens estimate, the run’s last source-gap. The node stabilized and
the run closed.

The discipline holds. The run produced 12 complete-proof downgrades across 7 rounds: when a parent’s
statement or type changed, the dependent proof was replaced wholesale, never partially edited (Section 2.2).
The churn stayed safe because the downgrade is mechanical, decided by the Lean compiler, not negotiated by
the agent.




                                                       15
Formalization expands the compressed steps. Comparing the converged blueprint against the paper
quantifies the gap. The #1217 proof occupies about 62 lines of paper prose with no intermediate lemmas; the
blueprint discharges it in roughly 84 nodes, a sixteen-fold expansion in lemma count. The single “routine
calculation” for the von Mangoldt weight became about 14 explicit lemmas (a sum-integral interchange, a
reciprocal-zeta derivative identification, and an integration-by-parts endpoint evaluation), and the phrase “an
induction gives” became a 22-node construction of the probability space and its occupation measure. The
expansion concentrates not in the number theory the authors wrote out carefully, but at the boundary where
the paper defers to standard probability and analysis, exactly where a machine-checked proof cannot.

4.7    Ablation: which design choices matter
The Erdős–Graham paper was first attempted with an earlier version of the harness, giving a controlled
ablation on the same target. That run (PRs #46–#429) differs from the one above in exactly two design
choices, and it never finished: over roughly twelve days it filed 137 issues and restarted its blueprint about
eight times, ending with a larger file (12,910 lines) that still carried 26 sorry placeholders and none of the
four target theorems proven.

The Refiner must see the source. In the earlier harness only the Blueprinter ever read the source
proof; the Refiner saw only the blueprint DAG. Unable to separate blueprint drift from a genuine source
gap, it answered blocked nodes by inventing upstream machinery the paper never contained, and the blueprint
drifted further from the source each round. GitHub gave us enough observability to watch the run stall;
we then intervened by hand, launching two human-in-the-loop passes that were given the source proof and
tried to realign the blueprint (PRs #405, #429). They diagnosed the damage exactly, finding that the
blueprint had “drifted toward early-prefix and moving-band chain-cover machinery as if those were the source
construction” (PR #429) and that an invented predicate was “not the paper’s Case (C)” and “forced the
wrong trajectory” (PR #405), but the drift was too deep to undo. That failure motivated the redesign and a
fresh restart from scratch at PR #430, in which the Refiner reads the source proof and must classify every
defect against it as drift or source gap. The current run closed all 16 issues with 7 source-aware repairs in a
single pass.

The Worker needs a principled stopping rule. The earlier harness wrote its “cannot formalize” test
directly into the Worker spec as a budget of physical Lean lines: a node could be declared un-formalizable
once its estimated proof exceeded a fixed line count. Workers gamed this rule, filing blocked-node issues
that cited size rather than a real defect (“exceeds 1000 physical lines”), at nearly one block per Worker PR.
The current Worker spec removes every size signal. Its four-phase audit permits an issue only on a concrete
defect, e.g., a misformalized or false statement, a numerical counterexample, a Lean contradiction, or an
invalid input, and explicitly forbids filing “merely because the proof is substantial.” A proof that is merely
long, or that needs a helper the blueprint lacks, must instead be discharged inside the node’s mechanically
frozen edit region by growing a local refinement DAG, because “a missing or out-of-order upstream helper is
never a blocker.” None of the new run’s 16 issues cite size, and every one names a real defect.

Takeaway. The two changes are complementary and both necessary. A source-blind Refiner turns repair
into guesswork that compounds into drift; a budget-based Worker turns “cannot formalize” into an escape
hatch. Together they explain a twelve-day run that never converged; removing them turned the same paper
into a fast, fully proven formalization.

4.8    Baseline: Aristotle
We gave Aristotle the same inputs, the paper source and the target statements, and let it run to its own
stopping point. It failed on both papers (Table 6). On Erdős–Graham it ran seven turns over 40 hours and
delivered 751 lines with two sorry s. The two gaps are precisely the paper’s deepest content: Proposition 9,
the three-regime tail bound at the heart of the general theorem, and the nested-interval construction.
Aristotle’s own report calls both the paper’s “deepest mathematical content,” beyond what it could automate.
On #1196 it ran four times over 24 hours and delivered a 24-line file whose single theorem is a sorry ; its


                                                      16
Table 5: Ablation on Erdős–Graham: the same paper under the earlier harness (Refiner blind to the source;
Worker governed by a physical-line budget) versus the current harness.
                Metric                              Earlier harness        Current harness
                Outcome                                    stalled             complete
                Wall-clock                               ∼12 days               ∼3 days
                Blueprint restarts                           ∼8                      1
                Issues filed                                 137                    16
                   citing a line budget                      14                      0
                Source proof given to Refiner                no                    yes
                Final Main.lean                    12,910 ln, 26 sorry     8,513 ln, 0 sorry


report identifies the missing piece as the flow inequality, equivalently the monotonicity of the Dirichlet eta
function, and notes that the published proof “has been formalized in Lean by Math Inc.,” reading this as
evidence that the task “typically requires a dedicated team effort.” LeanMarathon closed exactly these gaps
autonomously, proving every target with no sorry .


Table 6: Head-to-head with Aristotle on identical inputs. Aristotle ran >40 h on Erdős–Graham and >24 h
on #1196 without eliminating its sorry s.
                                          Erdős–Graham                    ESS #1196
                                      Aristotle LeanMarathon        Aristotle LeanMarathon
               Targets proven            0/3          3/3              0/1          1/1
               Lean lines delivered      751          8,513             24          3,988
               Remaining sorry            2             0               1             0
               Outcome                  failed      complete          failed      complete



4.9    Failure case: the unit-distance disproof
We tried to formalize an OpenAI’s recent disproof of the Erdős unit-distance conjecture (OpenAI, 2026). The
disproof’s clever geometric trick relies deep algebraic number theory, almost none of which exists in Mathlib.
Our harness lets a proof stay incomplete only through explicit sorry placeholders and forbids assuming
results as axioms per CI gate rejects, so with that theory missing the Blueprinter had no honest foothold.
The run instead faked the number theory: it modeled a number field as a dummy record and discharged the
key step with placeholder values. This type-checks and passes CI, but proves nothing real. The run then
stalled, stuck on the same node round after round, because the later geometric steps needed real objects the
fake record could not supply, and the target was never reached. The lesson is a scope boundary, not about
formalization capability: when the hardest part lives in prerequisites the library significantly lacks, the
harness can organize the work but cannot fill the missing results since it is far away from the distribution of
proof source.


5     Conclusion
We present LeanMarathon, a long-running multi-agent harness that formalizes entire research papers into
Lean 4. Treating long-horizon autoformalization as a problem of agent durability, it decomposes a paper
into an evolving proof DAG and contains faults behind four contract-scoped agents and a deterministic CI
gate, turning one brittle multi-day run into many short, recoverable, parallel ones. On two 2026 papers
spanning four Erdős problems it formalizes all seven target theorems with no sorry , while a commercial
agent baseline fails. LeanMarathon is a step toward AI co-mathematicians whose long-running work stays
legible, recoverable, and verifiable.


                                                      17
Acknowledgments and AI disclosure
Y. Z. is supported by Warwick Chancellor’s International Scholarship and RIKEN-AIP Overseas Student
Collaboration Program. JDL acknowledges support of Open Philanthropy, NSF IIS 2107304, NSF CCF
2212262, ONR Young Investigator Award, NSF CAREER Award 2144994, and NSF CCF 2019844. TS was
partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI (24K02905) and JST CREST (JPMJCR2015). YS was partially
supported by the National Science Foundation under awards 2027737, 2113373, 2414918 and a gift from
OpenAI. This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore and the Ministry
of Digital Development and Information under the AI Visiting Professorship Programme (award number
AIVP-2024-004). Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of National Research Foundation, Singapore and the
Ministry of Digital Development and Information.
   ChatGPT was used to generate several images (e.g., Fig. 1) and proofread the paper.


References
Tudor Achim, Alex Best, Alberto Bietti, Kevin Der, Mathïs Fédérico, Sergei Gukov, Daniel Halpern-Leistner,
  Kirsten Henningsgard, Yury Kudryashov, Alexander Meiburg, et al. Aristotle: IMO-level Automated
  Theorem Proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01346, 2025.
Boris Alexeev, Kevin Barreto, Yanyang Li, Jared Duker Lichtman, Liam Price, Jibran Iqbal Shah, Quanyu
  Tang, and Terence Tao. Primitive sets and von Mangoldt chains: Erdős Problem #1196 and beyond, 2026.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.00301.
Axiom Math. Axiom Math. Website, 2025. URL https://axiommath.ai/. Accessed: 2026-06-01.
Kevin Barreto, Jiwon Kang, Sang-hyun Kim, Vjekoslav Kovač, and Shengtong Zhang. Irrationality of rapidly
  converging series: a problem of Erdős and Graham, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.21442.
Lars Becker, María Inés de Frutos-Fernández, Leo Diedering, Floris van Doorn, Sébastien Gouëzel, Asgar
  Jamneshan, Evgenia Karunus, Edward van de Meent, Pietro Monticone, Jasper Mulder-Sohn, Jim Portegies,
  Joris Roos, Michael Rothgang, Rajula Srivastava, James Sundstrom, Jeremy Tan, and Christoph Thiele.
  A blueprint for the formalization of Carleson’s theorem on convergence of Fourier series, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.06423.
Thomas F. Bloom. Erdős problems. https://www.erdosproblems.com, 2026. Accessed 2026-05-30.
Matthew Bolan, Joachim Breitner, Jose Brox, Nicholas Carlini, Mario Carneiro, Floris van Doorn, Martin
 Dvořák, Andrés Goens, Aaron Hill, Harald Husum, Hernán Ibarra Mejia, Zoltan A. Kocsis, Bruno Le Floch,
 Amir Livne Bar-on, Lorenzo Luccioli, Douglas McNeil, Alex Meiburg, Pietro Monticone, Pace P. Nielsen,
 Emmanuel Osalotioman Osazuwa, Giovanni Paolini, Marco Petracci, Bernhard Reinke, David Renshaw,
 Marcus Rossel, Cody Roux, Jérémy Scanvic, Shreyas Srinivas, Anand Rao Tadipatri, Terence Tao, Vlad
 Tsyrklevich, Fernando Vaquerizo-Villar, Daniel Weber, and Fan Zheng. The Equational Theories Project:
 Advancing collaborative mathematical research at scale, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.07087.
Sébastien Bubeck, Christian Coester, Ronen Eldan, Timothy Gowers, Yin Tat Lee, Alexandru Lupsasca,
  Mehtaab Sawhney, Robert Scherrer, Mark Sellke, Brian K. Spears, Derya Unutmaz, Kevin Weil, Steven
  Yin, and Nikita Zhivotovskiy. Early science acceleration experiments with GPT-5, 2025. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2511.16072.
Kevin Buzzard et al. The Fermat’s Last Theorem project. https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/
  FLT, 2024. Lean 4 formalization project, Imperial College London. Accessed 2026-05-30.
Luoxin Chen, Jinming Gu, Liankai Huang, Wenhao Huang, Zhicheng Jiang, Allan Jie, Xiaoran Jin, Xing
  Jin, Chenggang Li, Kaijing Ma, Cheng Ren, Jiawei Shen, Wenlei Shi, Tong Sun, He Sun, Jiahui Wang,
  Siran Wang, Zhihong Wang, Chenrui Wei, Shufa Wei, et al. Seed-Prover: Deep and broad reasoning for
  automated theorem proving, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.23726.


                                                   18
Yaël Dillies, Terence Tao, et al. Formalization of the polynomial Freiman-Ruzsa conjecture of Marton.
  https://github.com/teorth/pfr, 2023. Lean 4 formalization project. Accessed 2026-05-30.
Tony Feng, Trieu Trinh, Garrett Bingham, Jiwon Kang, Shengtong Zhang, Sang-hyun Kim, Kevin Barreto,
  Carl Schildkraut, Junehyuk Jung, Jaehyeon Seo, Carlo Pagano, Yuri Chervonyi, Dawsen Hwang, Kaiying
  Hou, Sergei Gukov, Cheng-Chiang Tsai, Hyunwoo Choi, Youngbeom Jin, Wei-Yuan Li, Hao-An Wu,
  Ruey-An Shiu, Yu-Sheng Shih, Quoc V. Le, and Thang Luong. Semi-autonomous mathematics discovery
  with Gemini: A case study on the Erdős problems, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.22401.
Cameron Freer. Lean 4 Skills: Theorem proving skill and workflow pack for AI coding agents, October 2025.
  URL https://github.com/cameronfreer/lean4-skills.
Guoxiong Gao, Yutong Wang, Jiedong Jiang, Qi Gao, Zihan Qin, Tianyi Xu, and Bin Dong. Herald: A
 natural language annotated Lean 4 dataset. In International Conference on Learning Representations
 (ICLR), 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10878.
Elliot Glazer, Ege Erdil, Tamay Besiroglu, Diego Chicharro, Evan Chen, Alex Gunning, Caroline Falkman
  Olsson, Jean-Stanislas Denain, Anson Ho, Emily de Oliveira Santos, Olli Järviniemi, Matthew Barnett,
  Robert Sandler, Matej Vrzala, Jaime Sevilla, Qiuyu Ren, Elizabeth Pratt, Lionel Levine, Grant Barkley,
  Natalie Stewart, Bogdan Grechuk, Tetiana Grechuk, Shreepranav Varma Enugandla, and Mark Wildon.
  FrontierMath: A benchmark for evaluating advanced mathematical reasoning in AI, 2024. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2411.04872.
Fabian Gloeckle, Ahmad Rammal, Charles Arnal, Remi Munos, Vivien Cabannes, Gabriel Synnaeve, and
  Amaury Hayat. Automatic textbook formalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.03071, 2026.

Jesse Michael Han, Jason Rute, Yuhuai Wu, Edward W. Ayers, and Stanislas Polu. Proof artifact co-training
  for theorem proving with language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.06203.
Sidharth Hariharan, Christopher Birkbeck, Seewoo Lee, Ho Kiu Gareth Ma, Bhavik Mehta, Auguste Poiroux,
  and Maryna Viazovska. A milestone in formalization: The sphere packing problem in dimension 8. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2604.23468, 2026.
Thomas Hubert, Rishi Mehta, Laurent Sartran, Miklós Z. Horváth, Goran Žužić, Eric Wieser, Aja Huang,
 Julian Schrittwieser, Yannick Schroecker, Hussain Masoom, Ottavia Bertolli, Tom Zahavy, Amol Mandhane,
 Jessica Yung, Iuliya Beloshapka, Borja Ibarz, Vivek Veeriah, Lei Yu, Oliver Nash, Paul Lezeau, Salvatore
 Mercuri, Calle Sönne, Bhavik Mehta, Alex Davies, Daniel Zheng, Fabian Pedregosa, Yin Li, Ingrid von
 Glehn, Mark Rowland, Samuel Albanie, Ameya Velingker, Simon Schmitt, Edward Lockhart, Edward
 Hughes, Henryk Michalewski, Nicolas Sonnerat, Demis Hassabis, Pushmeet Kohli, and David Silver.
 Olympiad-level formal mathematical reasoning with reinforcement learning. Nature, 651:607–613, 2026.
 doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09833-y. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09833-y.
Albert Q. Jiang, Sean Welleck, Jin Peng Zhou, Timothée Lacroix, Jiacheng Liu, Wenda Li, Mateja Jamnik,
  Guillaume Lample, and Yuhuai Wu. Draft, sketch, and prove: Guiding formal theorem provers with
  informal proofs. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2210.12283.
Guillaume Lample, Timothée Lacroix, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Aurélien Rodriguez, Amaury Hayat, Thibaut
 Lavril, Gabriel Ebner, and Xavier Martinet. HyperTree proof search for neural theorem proving. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11491.

Haohan Lin, Zhiqing Sun, Sean Welleck, and Yiming Yang. Lean-STaR: Learning to interleave thinking
 and proving. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025a. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2407.10040.
Yong Lin, Shange Tang, Bohan Lyu, Ziran Yang, Jui-Hui Chung, Haoyu Zhao, Lai Jiang, Yihan Geng,
  Jiawei Ge, Jingruo Sun, Jiayun Wu, Jiri Gesi, Ximing Lu, David Acuna, Kaiyu Yang, Hongzhou Lin, Yejin


                                                    19
  Choi, Danqi Chen, Sanjeev Arora, and Chi Jin. Goedel-Prover-V2: Scaling formal theorem proving with
  scaffolded data synthesis and self-correction, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.03613.
Patrick Massot. leanblueprint: A plasTeX plugin to build formalization blueprints for Lean. https:
  //github.com/PatrickMassot/leanblueprint, 2020. Accessed 2026-05-30.

Math, Inc. Erdos1196: A Lean formalization of Erdős Problem #1196. https://github.com/math-inc/
 Erdos1196, 2026. Formalized by the Gauss autoformalization agent. Accessed 2026-05-30.
Alexander Novikov, Ngân Vũ, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner,
  Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, M. Pawan Kumar,
  Abigail See, Swarat Chaudhuri, George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian Nowozin, Pushmeet Kohli,
  and Matej Balog. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery, 2025. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13131.
OpenAI. An OpenAI model has disproved a central conjecture in discrete geometry. https://openai.com/
 index/model-disproves-discrete-geometry-conjecture/, 2026. Accessed 2026-06-01.
Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.03393.
Z. Z. Ren, Zhihong Shao, Junxiao Song, Huajian Xin, Haocheng Wang, Wanjia Zhao, Liyue Zhang, Zhe
  Fu, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Shirong Ma, Hongxuan Tang, Yuxuan Liu, Wenjun
  Gao, Daya Guo, and Chong Ruan. DeepSeek-Prover-V2: Advancing formal mathematical reasoning via
  reinforcement learning for subgoal decomposition, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21801.

Peter Scholze. Liquid tensor experiment. Experimental Mathematics, 31(2):349–354, 2022. doi: 10.1080/
  10586458.2021.1926016. URL https://doi.org/10.1080/10586458.2021.1926016.
Sho Sonoda, Kazumi Kasaura, Yuma Mizuno, Kei Tsukamoto, and Naoto Onda. Lean formalization of
  generalization error bound by rademacher complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19605, 2025.

Terence Tao. Machine-assisted proof. Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 72(1):6–13, 2025. doi:
  10.1090/noti3041. URL https://doi.org/10.1090/noti3041.
Terence Tao. The three components of problem solving: proof generation, proof verification, and proof
  digestion. Mathstodon post, 2026. URL https://mathstodon.xyz/@tao/116450581967483825. Accessed:
  2026-06-01.

Trieu H. Trinh, Yuhuai Wu, Quoc V. Le, He He, and Thang Luong. Solving olympiad geometry without
  human demonstrations. Nature, 625(7995):476–482, 2024. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06747-5. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06747-5.
George Tsoukalas, Anton Kovsharov, Sergey Shirobokov, Anja Surina, Moritz Firsching, Gergely Bérczi,
 Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Arun Suggala, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Eric Wieser, Lei Yu, Aja Huang, Miklós Z.
 Horváth, Andrew Ferrauiolo, Henryk Michalewski, Codrut Grosu, Thomas Hubert, Matej Balog, Pushmeet
 Kohli, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Advancing mathematics research with AI-driven formal proof search, 2026.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.22763.
Haiming Wang, Mert Unsal, Xiaohan Lin, Mantas Baksys, Junqi Liu, Marco Dos Santos, Flood Sung, Marina
 Vinyes, Zhenzhe Ying, Zekai Zhu, Jianqiao Lu, Hugues de Saxcé, et al. Kimina-Prover preview: Towards large
  formal reasoning models with reinforcement learning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.11354.

Zichen Wang, Wanli Ma, Zhenyu Ming, Gong Zhang, Kun Yuan, and Zaiwen Wen. M2f: Automated
  formalization of mathematical literature at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.17016, 2026.
Yuhuai Wu, Albert Q. Jiang, Wenda Li, Markus N. Rabe, Charles Staats, Mateja Jamnik, and Christian
  Szegedy. Autoformalization with large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems (NeurIPS), 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.12615.


                                                    20
Huajian Xin, Z. Z. Ren, Junxiao Song, Zhihong Shao, Wanjia Zhao, Haocheng Wang, Bo Liu, Liyue Zhang,
 Xuan Lu, Qiushi Du, Wenjun Gao, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhibin Gou, Z. F. Wu, Fuli Luo, and
 Chong Ruan. DeepSeek-Prover-V1.5: Harnessing proof assistant feedback for reinforcement learning and
 monte-carlo tree search, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.08152.
Kaiyu Yang, Aidan M. Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chalamala, Peiyang Song, Shixing Yu, Saad Godil, Ryan J.
 Prenger, and Anima Anandkumar. LeanDojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented language models.
 In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2306.15626.
Huaiyuan Ying, Zijian Wu, Yihan Geng, Jiayu Wang, Dahua Lin, and Kai Chen. Lean workbook: A
 large-scale lean problem set formalized from natural language math problems. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03847.
Shangtong Zhang. Towards formalizing reinforcement learning theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.03618, 2025.
Yuanhe Zhang, Ilja Kuzborskij, Jason D. Lee, Chenlei Leng, and Fanghui Liu. DAG-Math: Graph-of-Thought
  Guided Mathematical Reasoning in LLMs. In International Conference on Learning Representations
 (ICLR), 2026a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.19842.

Yuanhe Zhang, Jason D Lee, and Fanghui Liu. AI4SLT: Empirical Processes in Lean 4 for Formal Statistical
  Learning Theory. In Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning, 2026b. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=dfqmQ9WhCP.
Daniel Zheng, Ingrid von Glehn, Yori Zwols, Iuliya Beloshapka, Lars Buesing, Daniel M Roy, Martin
 Wattenberg, Bogdan Georgiev, Tatiana Schmidt, Andrew Cowie, et al. AI Co-Mathematician: Accelerating
 Mathematicians with Agentic AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.06651, 2026.
Thomas Zhu, Pietro Monticone, Jeremy Avigad, and Sean Welleck. LeanArchitect: Automating blueprint
 generation for humans and AI, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.22554.




                                                   21
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                                  1
  1.1 Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
  1.2 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    4

2 Harness Infrastructure                                                                                        5
  2.1 The Blueprint as the System of Record . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       5
  2.2 Contract-Scoped Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5
      2.2.1 Blueprinter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         6
      2.2.2 Target-Reviewer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           6
      2.2.3 Per-node Worker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         7
      2.2.4 Refiner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8

3 System Orchestration                                                                                          9
  3.1 Stage 1 – Cold Start and Target Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        9
  3.2 Stage 2 – DAG-orchestrated Loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         9
  3.3 Sustaining hours-long runs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9

4 Experiments                                                                                                   11
  4.1 Two research papers for evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
  4.2 Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
  4.3 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
  4.4 Case study: Erdős–Graham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
  4.5 Case study: #1196 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
  4.6 Case study: #164 and #1217 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
  4.7 Ablation: which design choices matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
  4.8 Baseline: Aristotle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
  4.9 Failure case: the unit-distance disproof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

5 Conclusion                                                                                                    17

A Agent Knowledge-Store Layouts                                                                                 23




                                                       22
A     Agent Knowledge-Store Layouts
Each agent runs in an isolated git worktree whose knowledge store is fixed before launch; it reads nothing
outside it. Figs. 6 to 9 give the four layouts, and the file roles are as follows.

Runtime. AGENTS.md is each agent’s charter: its purpose, hard boundaries, inputs, and ordered work-
flow. .codex/config.toml fixes the model, the read-only sandbox, and the exact MCP tools the agent
may call; rules/default.rules (shared verbatim) forbids git , gh , and network commands; and
 hooks/ralph_wiggum_stop.py is the stop hook that blocks exit until delivery.yml records a merged
PR, polling CI and re-injecting failed-job logs (the Worker’s variant also accepts an issue as terminal). The
Target-Reviewer is single-shot and carries no hook.

Inputs and state. docs/inputs.yml lists the run’s file paths and owner / repo / branch ; it carries
 proof_file , the raw source proof, only for the Blueprinter and Refiner. docs/delivery.yml is the
terminal-delivery record the stop hook validates. Each agent maintains a tiny state.md with summaries per
phase and per delivery path. Statuses are classified into none , in-progress , pass , fail , complete .
The recovery rules after an auto-compaction are explicit and ordered: if delivery is complete , exit; if exactly
one row is in-progress , resume it; if a phase is fail , jump to issue delivery; if the last execution phase
is pass , jump to PR delivery; otherwise start the earliest none phase. State never overrides the agent’s
 AGENTS.md , the phase contracts, or the Lean diagnostics. The combination guarantees that no compaction
re-runs a phase that already passed, and no compaction skips a phase that already failed.

Contracts. contracts/blueprint-format.md is the @[blueprint] formatting contract the CI enforces
(a placeholder-only variant for the Blueprinter, a complete-proof variant for the Worker and Refiner);
 contracts/latex-quality.md sets the prose rules with an agent-specific honesty-about-source clause. The
Worker alone also carries contracts/edit-constraints.md , which partitions the file into frozen and
editable line spans enforced by the apply-patch server, and contracts/local-refinement.md , which
governs the local helper-lemma DAG it may grow before its target.

Execution phases. docs/exec-phases/ holds one ordered TASK.md per phase: understand /
 grounding / draft for the Blueprinter, a single audit phase for the Target-Reviewer,
 misformalization / numeric / polish / formalization for the Worker (Fig. 3), and scope /
 refine for the Refiner, whose scope phase classifies each illness area against proof_file as drift or
source gap.

Delivery and references. docs/deliver/pr.md and issue.md are the PR and issue templates; the
Target-Reviewer files only issues, the Worker may do either, and the Blueprinter and Refiner
only open PRs. grounding/SKILL.md and its worked examples drive just-in-time Mathlib retrieval; the
remaining references/ are read-on-demand know-how, including the Blueprinter’s decomposition.md
(the node-decomposition rubric) and reframing.md , the Worker’s formalization-style.md ,
 lean-lsp-tools.md , proof-refactoring.md , and performance-optimization.md , and the shared
 numeric-tools.md , compute.md , and pdf-reading.md .




                                                      23
  Blueprinter/
     AGENTS.md
     .codex/
        config.toml
        rules/default.rules
        hooks/ralph_wiggum_stop.py
     docs/
        inputs.yml
        state.md
        delivery.yml
        contracts/
           blueprint-format.md
           latex-quality.md
        deliver/
           pr.md
        exec-phases/
           understand/TASK.md
           grounding/TASK.md
           draft/TASK.md
        references/
           decomposition.md
           reframing.md
           discovery-example.md
           api-example.md
           pdf-reading.md

                          Figure 6: Knowledge store of the Blueprinter.




  Target-Reviewer/
     AGENTS.md
     .codex/
        config.toml
        rules/default.rules
     docs/
        inputs.yml
        deliver/
           issue.md
        exec-phase/
           TASK.md
        grounding/
           SKILL.md
           example/api-example.md

Figure 7: Knowledge store of the Target-Reviewer. It carries no proof_file and no PR delivery path:
it audits and files issues only.




                                                24
  Worker/
     AGENTS.md
     .codex/
        config.toml
        rules/default.rules
        hooks/ralph_wiggum_stop.py
     docs/
        inputs.yml
        state.md
        delivery.yml
        contracts/
           blueprint-format.md
           edit-constraints.md
           local-refinement.md
           latex-quality.md
        deliver/
           issue.md
           pr.md
        exec-phases/
           misformalization/TASK.md
           numeric/TASK.md
           polish/TASK.md
           formalization/TASK.md
        grounding/
           SKILL.md
           examples/api-example.md
           examples/discovery-example.md
        references/
           formalization-style.md
           lean-lsp-tools.md
           proof-refactoring.md
           performance-optimization.md
           numeric-tools.md
           compute.md

Figure 8: Knowledge store of the per-node Worker.      The four exec-phases mirror Fig. 3;
 edit-constraints.md and local-refinement.md instruct the mechanically enforced editable region.




                                              25
  Refiner/
     AGENTS.md
     .codex/
        config.toml
        rules/default.rules
        hooks/ralph_wiggum_stop.py
     docs/
        inputs.yml
        state.md
        delivery.yml
        contracts/
           blueprint-format.md
           latex-quality.md
        deliver/
           pr.md
        exec-phases/
           scope/TASK.md
           refine/TASK.md
        grounding/
           SKILL.md
           examples/api-example.md
           examples/discovery-example.md
        references/
           compute.md
           numeric-tools.md
           pdf-reading.md

Figure 9: Knowledge store of the Refiner. Its docs/inputs.yml carries a proof_file (the source proof)
and an issues_file ; its two exec-phases are scope (locate the illness area) and refine .




                                                 26
