                                             When Does Overlap Help? OSU-Mem and a Cell-Conditional
                                                  Analysis of Trajectory Memory for LLM Agents
                                                                          Mellow Baixuan Chen1 and Xiangguo Sun†2
                                             1
                                                 Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, USA
                                                                       2
                                                                         Southeast University, Nanjing, China




arXiv:2606.28376v1 [cs.IR] 19 Jun 2026
                                                                 †
                                                                     Corresponding author: Xiangguo Sun (hsiang-kuo.sun@seu.edu.cn).

                                                                                                Abstract
                                                     Long-horizon large language model (LLM) agents accumulate interaction trajectories that quickly
                                                 exceed any practical prompt budget, and existing memory methods either truncate aggressively and lose
                                                 non-local evidence or retain boilerplate that degrades decision quality. We ask a mechanism question
                                                 rather than claiming a better general-purpose memory system: when does organizing trajectory mem-
                                                 ory into overlapping semantic units (OSUs)—groups of related steps in which one step may belong to
                                                 several units—help retrieval over flat or disjoint alternatives? We instantiate this in OSU-Mem, which
                                                 retrieves from an overlapping OSU pool via budgeted coarse-to-fine expansion, and show its benefit is
                                                 conditional: overlapping memory helps when the evidence steps a query needs share tool calls or entities,
                                                 but hurts when those steps are fully heterogeneous and share neither. On a synthetic benchmark where
                                                 evidence carries such shared structure by construction, OSU-Mem improves over the strongest baseline
                                                 as the theory predicts; yet on a concatenated, constructed unaugmented τ -bench setting its aggregate
                                                 advantage over flat retrieval vanishes. Splitting queries by whether their evidence shares tools and enti-
                                                 ties shows this near-tie to be an artifact of mixing query types rather than a property of either method,
                                                 and ToolBench, a controlled probe built to carry shared structure by design, corroborates the same
                                                 mechanism via an overlap-vs.-disjoint construction contrast (under a coverage-guided variant), isolating
                                                 the construction principle rather than validating the full default system. Because the relevant sharing
                                                 is cheaply estimable from metadata, the analysis yields a metadata-based heuristic for predicting when
                                                 overlap is likely to improve retrieval. We deliberately isolate the retrieval layer, assessed by retrieval
                                                 quality and an LLM-mediated evidence-selection stage. Code available at here.


                                         1       Introduction
                                         LLM agents deployed in web- and tool-augmented environments routinely accumulate trajectories of dozens
                                         to hundreds of interaction steps [Kang et al., 2026, Ye et al., 2026]. Treating the full trajectory as prompt
                                         context is quickly infeasible, while compression-based approaches, from fixed-window truncation to learned
                                         periodic summarization [Lu et al., 2025], risk discarding details that may become relevant later. The tension
                                         is real: aggressive compression forgets what a future query needs, while conservative retention floods the
                                         prompt with boilerplate that degrades decision quality.
                                             Two properties of agent trajectories make existing approaches brittle. First, relevance is non-local, since
                                         evidence steps needed at decision time may be far apart in trajectory time. Second, trajectories contain
                                         overlapping semantic threads such as evidence about an entity, progress toward a subgoal, or a recurring
                                         tool-use motif, where a single step can participate in multiple threads simultaneously. Methods that assume
                                         temporal locality miss non-local evidence, and methods that enforce disjoint partitions confine multi-purpose
                                         steps to a single bucket and cannot reach them from other angles.
                                             We instantiate these properties in OSU-Mem, which treats the interaction history itself as long-term
                                         memory and organizes it into overlapping semantic units (OSUs). Each OSU groups semantically related
                                         steps, and OSUs may overlap so that a step participates in multiple threads. On top of this flat OSU


                                                                                                     1
pool, OSU-Mem performs budgeted query-adaptive coarse-to-fine expansion: retrieve a small set of coarse
OSU representations, then selectively expand the most query-relevant ones into member steps until the
budget is exhausted. We isolate the memory retrieval layer as our object of study, proposing OSU-Mem and
characterizing a conditional mechanism for when its overlap construction helps, rather than claiming it as a
universal, general-purpose agent-memory system; closed-loop agent task interaction is out of scope.

A note on headline framing. On a constructed, concatenated unaugmented τ -bench setting, aggre-
gated across all queries, OSU-Mem is not better than Flat Vector (per-cell and aggregate figures in Sec-
tion 6.2). Taken at face value, this aggregate would suggest OSU-Mem does not help on real trajectories.
Our central argument is that this aggregate is a cell-mixture artifact. Throughout, we label each query by
whether its ground-truth evidence steps pairwise share a tool signature (T+ if so, T− if not) and an entity
(E+ if so, E− if not), which partitions queries into four cells (T+E+, T+E−, T−E+, T−E−) defined formally
in Definition 2. The evidence distribution of raw τ -bench is dominated by the T−E− cell (evidence sharing
neither tool nor entity), where overlap construction is actively harmful, which masks a large and significant
advantage on the T+E+ cell (evidence sharing both). Throughout the paper we report both the aggregate
and the cell-conditioned breakdown, and our claims are explicitly conditional on cell structure rather than
universal. Our evaluation targets evidence retrieval quality and LLM-mediated evidence selection.

Contributions. We frame OSU-Mem as a probe for a mechanism question—when does overlapping trajec-
tory memory help retrieval? —rather than as a general-purpose memory system, and our contributions are
correspondingly conditional.

   • We propose OSU-Mem and use a mechanism-driven synthetic benchmark, in which evidence shares
     an entity by construction (E+ for 100% of queries; pairwise tool-signature sharing holds for 39.3%,
     so the strict T+E+ fraction is 39.3%), as a controlled testbed: under these conditions OSU-Mem
     improves Recall by +39.9% and Hit@2 (the fraction of queries that retrieve at least two evidence steps)
     by +61.5% relative to the strongest baseline at B=256, confirming the mechanism in the regime the
     theory predicts (Section 6).
   • On trajectories derived from τ -bench (Section 6), a 2×2 evidence-structure cross-tabulation (cross-tab)
     localizes where overlap helps: OSU-Mem outperforms Flat Vector on the T+E+ sub-population (stably
     across budgets) and is dominated on the T−E− sub-population (increasingly so at larger budgets). The
     raw-cache aggregate near-tie is thus a consequence of cell mixture, not a property of either method. A
     controlled multi-burst augmentation that lifts all queries into T+E+ recovers the synthetic ordering—a
     prediction made from the cross-tab before the augmentation was run—and an LLM-mediated evidence-
     selection stage (Section 6.6) finds the T+E+ advantage surviving an LLM filtering step.
   • On ToolBench (Section 6) we construct a controlled mechanism probe that is structurally T+E+ by
     design: planted evidence steps are drawn from a single source trajectory and therefore pairwise share a
     tool signature (via the <fname>_for_<api> convention) and argument entities. Overlap construction
     beats disjoint construction with a monotonic dose-response in the coverage bonus, and disjoint assign-
     ment strips a fraction of evidence steps of every retrieval handle while overlap retains all of them. We
     treat ToolBench as a high-power measurement of the effect given the favorable cell, not as evidence of
     deployment utility on natural ToolBench agents.

   • We argue and empirically support a unified mechanism: the two datasets give complementary
     evidence—τ -bench supplying the cross-cell heterogeneity and ToolBench isolating the favorable cell—
     for the same cell-conditional effect across two evidence distributions and two retrieval algorithms.
     We further identify a cross-source metadata contamination deployment pitfall (fixed by one-line
     namespace prefixing—a practical lesson for anyone concatenating trajectories from multiple sources)
     and derive a predictive rule, a metadata-based estimate of when overlap helps retrieval, from the
     τ -bench cross-tab, whose budget-dependent thresholds are given in Appendix I.




                                                     2
2     Related Work
Memory for long-horizon LLM agents. Operating-system-inspired virtual-context systems page in-
teraction history in and out of the prompt [Packer et al., 2024]. A-MEM organizes long-term memory via
dynamically linked notes with memory evolution [Xu et al., 2025], HiAgent manages in-trial working memory
through subgoal-based hierarchical chunking [Hu et al., 2025], and Zep models memory as a temporal knowl-
edge graph [Rasmussen et al., 2025]. More recent work improves efficiency through semantic compression
and multi-view indexing [Liu et al., 2026] or learns explicit memory operations via reinforcement learning
[Yan et al., 2026]. These systems establish the value of structured memory beyond naive replay, but typically
organize memory into non-overlapping units or retrieve at fixed granularity, which limits reuse when one step
is relevant under multiple semantic views.
    Experiential and reflective memory. Reflexion [Shinn et al., 2023], ExpeL [Zhao et al., 2024], and
Voyager [Wang et al., 2023] treat trajectories as learning signals via verbal self-reflection, extracted insights,
or executable skill libraries. Their retrieval mechanisms are comparatively simple (prompt-append, task-level
semantic similarity, embedding lookup) and lack budget-aware granularity control. OSU-Mem addresses a
different layer, namely how to organize and index raw trajectory steps for budgeted retrieval under non-local
relevance.
    Multi-granularity and overlapping indexing in Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG).
Hierarchical retrieval via recursive clustering [Sarthi et al., 2024] and tree-structured navigation [Chen et al.,
2023] have been explored in long-document RAG, and coarse-to-fine selection is a standard RAG theme [Gao
et al., 2024]. Practical RAG systems also support limited forms of overlap (parent-child chunks, sentence
windows) [Gao et al., 2024]. Our contribution is specifically at the intersection of budgeted retrieval from
agent trajectories where semantic threads overlap and the same step must remain accessible under multiple
contexts, with an explicit cell-level characterization of when overlap pays off.
    Scope of baselines. Because OSU-Mem is a contribution at the retrieval layer, our comparisons focus on
retrieval-into-budget methods that expose a compatible fixed-budget interface (retrieve(query, B) → context):
Flat Vector, Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR), Tree Abstraction (RAPTOR-style recursive clustering
with a coarse-to-fine budget expansion), Disjoint Hierarchy, and Coverage baselines. Full agent-memory
systems such as MemGPT [Packer et al., 2024], A-MEM [Xu et al., 2025], HiAgent [Hu et al., 2025], and Zep
[Rasmussen et al., 2025] operate at a different layer: their methodological content is the paging (MemGPT),
note-linking (A-MEM), subgoal organization (HiAgent), or temporal-graph (Zep) logic that surrounds re-
trieval, not the budgeted retrieval step itself. A head-to-head comparison would therefore either strip them
to a retrieval core—discarding the very machinery that defines them—or wrap their upstream logic around
OSU-Mem’s output, and neither isolates the retrieval mechanism this paper studies. We accordingly limit
claims to the retrieval layer and leave a fair, fully controlled comparison against full memory systems to
future work, which we discuss in Section 7.


3     OSU-Mem: Method
Figure 1 gives a conceptual overview of the full pipeline; the remainder of this section formalizes each stage.

3.1    Problem Formulation
At decision time t, an agent has accumulated a trajectory Ht = (s1 , . . . , st ) of steps, each with an embedding
hi and a token cost ci . A memory system receives a query
                                                       P embedding qt and a strict token budget B, and
must return a set of retrieved items M(qt ) ⊆ Ht with i∈M ci ≤ B.

3.2    Step Representation
In the synthetic benchmark (Section 5.1), no text canonicalization or real tokenization is performed. Each
step is assigned a 64-dimensional embedding from weighted mixtures of deterministic basis vectors: event-
related steps use event (.55), entity (.20), tool (.15), and subgoal (.10) factors with noise σ=.55, while
background steps omit the event factor and use entity (.35), tool (.35), and subgoal (.30) with σ=.45. Query
embeddings emphasize the event basis with weights .70/.15/.10/.05 and lower noise σ=.25. Token costs are


                                                        3
Figure 1: Conceptual overview of OSU-Mem. (A) The trajectory Ht = (s1 , . . . , st ) is processed through four
semantic views (entity, tool, subgoal, similarity). (B) The views form an overlapping OSU pool where one
step (e.g., s1 ) may join several OSUs (cap Mmax ); each OSU stores a centroid zk . (C) The query qt scores
centroids and selects a top-K, which are expanded into steps and packed into budget B (with duplicate-step
skipping) to form the memory context. Insets recall the T+E+ and centroid-dilution mechanisms analyzed
in Section 4.

drawn from N (15, 32 ) clipped at 5. This gives full control over the similarity landscape and isolates the
retrieval mechanism from encoder confounds.
    In both τ -bench and ToolBench real-trajectory evaluations, steps are encoded with a frozen all-MiniLM-L6-v2
Sentence-BERT (SBERT) encoder (384-d, ℓ2 -normalized) and token costs are estimated as max(5, min(40, ⌊|text|/4⌋)).

3.3    Overlapping Semantic Unit Construction
An OSU uk ⊆ {1, . . . , t} is a subset of step indices grouped by a shared semantic view. Unlike disjoint
segmentation, OSU-Mem allows uj ∩ uk ̸= ∅, so that the same step can belong to multiple OSUs. We
construct OSUs from four views computed from step annotations:

Entity view. For each entity string appearing in step annotations, an OSU is constructed containing all
steps that mention that entity. Entity strings are extracted from tool-call argument dictionaries (string
values of length 2 to 80 and numeric values). To prevent degenerate single-topic OSUs on long tra-
jectories, each entity-keyed group is split whenever consecutive occurrences are separated by more than
∆ent = max(60, 8∆gap ) steps, and each resulting segment is capped at Smax = 20 steps. Entity keys with
fewer than fmin = 2 associated steps are pruned since they provide no retrieval advantage over Flat Vector.
The large temporal-gap threshold reflects the observation that entities (account numbers, destination names)
tend to persist across long segments of agent interaction.

Tool view. For each non-boilerplate tool signature, an OSU groups all steps invoking that tool. Temporal-
gap splitting uses a tighter threshold ∆tool = max(12, 2∆gap ) because a long gap between two uses of the
same tool is usually a semantic boundary. The same size cap Smax and minimum-size filter fmin apply.

Subgoal view. For each subgoal segment (identified from explicit labels or user-turn boundaries), a subgoal
OSU is formed. The splitting threshold is the most aggressive: ∆sg = max(8, ∆gap ), since subgoals are the
shortest semantic unit.

Similarity view. Community merging on the step-embedding k-nearest-neighbor (k-NN) graph forms
similarity OSUs that do not require explicit annotations. This view serves as a fallback for steps that lack
entity or tool annotations.


                                                      4
3.4    Membership Management and View Priority
Because the four views may independently assign a step to multiple OSUs, a global membership cap Mmax =
5 limits the number of OSUs any single step may belong to. The value Mmax = 5 corresponds to one
membership slot per view plus one slack slot; ablation shows no further gain beyond this value (Appendix B.2).
When the cap is exceeded, memberships are pruned according to a fixed view-priority rule:

                                     entity > tool > similarity > subgoal.

Entity is prioritized because entity annotations are the most semantically stable cross-step identifiers in agent
trajectories (account numbers, application programming interface (API) endpoints, file names persist across
long segments). The τ -bench cell analysis (Section 6.2) subsequently confirms that entity-keyed OSUs carry
the strongest T+E+ signal. The distinction between Mmax = 1 (disjoint) and Mmax ≥ 2 (overlap) is central
to our method: in disjoint mode, each step has exactly one retrieval handle, while overlap provides multiple
independent retrieval pathways. This distinction is analyzed formally in Section 4.

3.5    OSU Centroid and Representation
Each OSU uk is assigned a centroid embedding zk defined as the ℓ2 -normalized mean of its member step
embeddings:
                                         h̄k            1 X
                                  zk =         , h̄k =           hi .                              (1)
                                       ∥h̄k ∥2         |uk | i∈u
                                                                       k

The centroid serves as the coarse-stage representation: a query’s similarity to zk determines whether OSU
uk is expanded during retrieval. OSUs from different views may exhibit containment relationships (e.g., an
entity OSU nested within a broader subgoal OSU); we do not model them as explicit parent-child structures
and rely on shared step membership to preserve accessibility.

3.6    Budgeted Query-Adaptive Expansion
Given query qt and budget B, OSU-Mem (Algorithm 1) scores all OSUs by z⊤      k qt , selects the top-K (adaptively
sized as K = min(|{uk }|, max(8, |{uk }|/10, B/30)), i.e., roughly 10% of the OSU pool with a floor of 8 and
a budget-proportional term), and then performs cost-normalized greedy expansion. Rather than processing
OSUs in a fixed score-descending order, each iteration selects the remaining top-K OSU that maximizes
(rk + λnov · νk )/(ĉk + ϵ), where rk = z⊤  k qt is the relevance score, νk is a blended novelty score of the
OSU’s candidates against the already-selected set (Appendix A), ĉk is the total token cost of the OSU’s
top-C candidates (with C = 8), and λnov = .3. The novelty term is budget-gated : it activates only when
B ≥ Bnov = 192, because at very small budgets the selection pool is too small for novelty scoring to
provide useful signal. When the selected OSU is expanded, its member steps are added to the output set
in descending step-query similarity until the budget is reached. A duplicate-step check ensures that overlap
among OSUs does not waste budget on redundant retrievals: if step i has already been selected via an earlier
OSU, it is skipped at zero cost. The resulting context is mixed-granularity: coarse OSU summaries provide
broad cues, while expanded member steps provide precise evidence. Selected steps are packed in descending
step–query similarity order before OSU summaries; under this default policy, summaries account for < 1%
of packed tokens, so the retrieval benefit derives from improved step selection via OSU-guided routing rather
than from summaries.

3.7    Hyperparameters
All OSU-Mem hyperparameters, their default values, and the rationale for each choice are listed in Ap-
pendix A (Table 8). All values are fixed across the three benchmarks (synthetic, τ -bench, ToolBench); none
was tuned per-benchmark. The single per-benchmark deviation is the retrieval algorithm: the synthetic and
τ -bench benchmarks use the default coarse-to-fine algorithm (Algorithm 1), while the ToolBench benchmark
uses a coverage-guided greedy variant because SBERT-encoded ToolBench has entangled OSU centroids on
which coarse routing underperforms (Section 6.1).


                                                        5
 Algorithm 1: OSU-Mem retrieval under a strict token budget.
   Input: trajectory steps {si }, query embedding qt , token budget B, OSU pool {uk } with centroids {zk }
   Output: S
                             ⊤
 1 Score each OSU: σk ← zk qt , sort descending;
 2 Select top-K OSUs adaptively (fraction of |{uk }|, clamped);
 3 Initialize selected set S ← ∅, consumed budget b ← 0, available ← top-K OSU set;
 4 while available ̸= ∅ and b < B do
 5     foreach OSU uk in available do
 6          Compute relevance rk ← z⊤    k qt ;P
 7          Compute candidate cost ĉk ← i∈top-C ci ;                          // C=8 candidates per OSU
 8          if B ≥ Bnov then
 9               Compute blended novelty νk of uk ’s candidates against S;
10          else
11               νk ← 0;
12          end
13          scorek ← (rk + λnov · νk )/(ĉk + ϵ);
14     end
15     k∗ ← arg maxk scorek ; remove k∗ from available;
16     Rank members i ∈ uk∗ by h⊤     i qt ;
17     foreach candidate step i do
18          if i ∈
                 / S and b + ci ≤ B then
19               S ← S ∪ {i}, b ← b + ci ;
20          end
21     end
22 end
23 return S;                                              // OSU summaries appended with remaining budget



   None of these defaults was tuned on the τ -bench T+E+ cell. We fixed them on the synthetic bench-
mark before any real-trajectory analysis, to prevent the cell-conditional claim from being an artifact of
hyperparameter overfitting to τ -bench’s T+E+ sub-population.


4     Theoretical Analysis
In this section, we formalize three properties of overlapping OSU construction that underpin the empir-
ical findings in Section 6. We first show that overlap increases retrieval reachability relative to disjoint
assignment—strictly so under an independence model, and non-strictly without it (Proposition 1)—then
characterize the amplified benefit under the T+E+ evidence-structure condition (Proposition 2), and finally
analyze the centroid-dilution cost that explains the T−E− disadvantage at large budgets (Proposition 3).

4.1    Retrieval Reachability under Overlap
Definition 1 (Retrieval reachability). Given a query q, a step si is retrievable if there exists an OSU uk such
that i ∈ uk and uk is selected at the coarse stage (i.e., z⊤
                                                           k q ≥ τ for some selection threshold τ , or equivalently
uk ranks in the top-K). We denote the retrieval reachability of si as Preach (si | q) = P (∃ uk ∋ i : uk selected).
Proposition 1 (Overlap increases reachability; stylized selection model). Let V = {v1 , . . . , vV } denote the
                                                                                                    (v)
set of semantic views. For a step si with non-trivial annotations in views Vi ⊆ V, let pv (q) = P (uk selected |
      (v)
i ∈ uk ) denote the probability that the OSU containing si under view v is selected at the coarse stage, where
we model view-level selections as independent events. Under disjoint assignment (Mmax = 1), step si is
assigned to exactly one view v ∗ ∈ Vi by the priority rule, yielding
                                              disj
                                             Preach (si | q) = pv∗ (q).                                        (2)




                                                         6
Under overlap (Mmax ≥ |Vi |), step si belongs to one OSU per applicable view, yielding
                                                          Y
                                      over
                                                                                                                  (3)
                                                                      
                                    Preach (si | q) = 1 −   1 − pv (q) .
                                                              v∈Vi

                                                                                over               disj
When |Vi | ≥ 2, at least two views have pv (q) > 0, and pv∗ (q) < 1, we have Preach  (si | q) > Preach  (si | q). (The
condition pv∗ < 1 is non-restrictive in practice since coarse top-K selection with K ≪ |{uk }| never guarantees
selection of any individual OSU.) The strict inequality relies on the independence model of Equation 3;
                                                                            over       disj
without independence, a weaker union bound still yields the non-strict Preach     ≥ Preach   (see the note following
the proof ).
                                                                               (v ∗ )
Proof. Under disjoint assignment, si participates in exactly one OSU uk , so it is reachable only if that
                                   disj
single OSU is selected, giving Preach   = pv∗ . Under overlap, si participates in |Vi | OSUs (one per  Q view), and
reachability requires at least one to be selected. By the independence assumption, Preach  over
                                                                                                = 1− v∈Vi (1−pv ).
                  disj
Now, Preach
        over
                       = 1− v (1−pv )−pv∗ . Note that 1− v (1−pv ) ≥ 1−(1−pv∗ )(1−pv′ ) = pv∗ +pv′ −pv∗ pv′
                             Q                                Q
              −Preach
for any v ′ ̸= v ∗ with pv′ > 0. Since pv′ − pv∗ pv′ = pv′ (1 − pv∗ ) > 0, the strict inequality follows.

Connection to experiments. On ToolBench, under disjoint construction (Mmax =1), 13.2% of evidence
steps belong to no OSU because view-priority pruning forces each step into exactly one view, and the
minimum-size filter then deletes views with fewer than two members. These evicted evidence steps have
  disj
Preach = 0. Under overlap (Mmax =5), 0% of evidence is evicted—directly instantiating the strict inequality
in Proposition 1.

Note on the independence assumption. The independence model in Equation 3 is an approximation.
In practice, all views’ OSUs compete for the same top-K pool, creating negative correlation: when one
view’s OSU ranks highly, it displaces others (including sibling-view OSUs of the same step). Additionally,
switching from Mmax =1 to Mmax =5 increases the total OSU count, which may change each OSU’s absolute
selection probability even though K adapts proportionally. Both effects cause the independence formula
to overestimate the magnitude of the reachability gain. The direction of the gain, however, is robust: a
                                                                           disj
weaker, assumption-free union bound gives Preach
                                               over
                                                    ≥ maxv pv ≥ pv∗ = Preach    , which preserves the non-strict
inequality without any independence assumption. The strict inequality additionally requires that at least
one non-priority view has pv > 0 and pv∗ < 1; under the independence model these conditions are sufficient,
and even without independence they suffice unless the view-selection events are pathologically coupled (e.g.,
perfectly negatively correlated such that uv′ is never selected when uv∗ is not). In the competitive top-K
setting, negative correlation is the norm but perfect coupling is not, so the strict inequality holds in practice
even though its formal guarantee relies on the independence model.

4.2     Amplified Benefit under T+E+ Evidence Structure
We now formalize why the overlap advantage is amplified when evidence steps share tool signatures and
entities (the T+E+ condition).
Definition 2 (T+E+ evidence structure). Given a query q with ground-truth evidence set Eq = {se1 , . . . , sen },
we say Eq satisfies the T+E+ condition if (i) there exist distinct sei , sej ∈ Eq sharing at least one tool signa-
ture (the T+ condition), and (ii) there exist distinct sek , sel ∈ Eq sharing at least one entity string (the E+
condition). The pairs (sei , sej ) and (sek , sel ) need not be the same.
    The remaining three cells of the 2×2 cross-tabulation are defined analogously: T+E− denotes evidence
satisfying T+ but not E+ (tool sharing without entity sharing), T−E+ denotes evidence satisfying E+ but
not T+ (entity sharing without tool sharing), and T−E− denotes evidence satisfying neither condition (fully
heterogeneous evidence with no pairwise tool or entity sharing).
Proposition 2 (T+E+ amplifies overlap recall). Let Eq satisfy the T+E+ condition with n = |Eq | evidence
steps. Define the cluster recall of an OSU as CR(uk ) = |uk ∩ Eq |/n. Under the T+E+ condition, and
assuming the evidence steps with shared annotations fall within the temporal-gap splitting thresholds (∆ent ,


                                                          7
∆tool ) so that sharing implies co-membership in the same view-keyed OSU, there exist at least one entity-
keyed OSU u(ent) with |u(ent) ∩ Eq | ≥ 2 (from the shared entity) and at least one tool-keyed OSU u(tool)
with |u(tool) ∩ Eq | ≥ 2 (from the shared tool). These two OSUs may bind different subsets of evidence. Let
E (ent) = u(ent) ∩ Eq and E (tool) = u(tool) ∩ Eq . Fix the entity OSU u(ent) and consider the evidence reachable
through it under both regimes:
     Under overlap (Mmax ≥ 2), the evidence steps in u(ent) also retain their tool-view memberships, so u(tool)
coexists in the index. A single coarse-stage selection of u(ent) reaches E (ent) ; additionally, u(tool) provides a
second coarse-stage entry point reaching E (tool) . The evidence reachable through at least one of these two
pathways is
                                                         |E (ent) ∪ E (tool) |  2
                                        CRover
                                            combined =                         ≥ .                              (4)
                                                                  n             n
     Under disjoint (Mmax = 1) with entity > tool priority, assuming all evidence steps carry at least one entity
annotation (which holds in practice since entities are extracted from tool-call argument dictionaries), every
evidence step is assigned to its entity-keyed OSU, provided that its entity group contains at least fmin = 2
members in the trajectory (singleton entity groups are pruned; however, T+E+ guarantees at least one entity
group with ≥ 2 evidence members, so u(ent) survives). Consequently, tool-keyed OSUs lose their evidence
members. Selecting the same u(ent) at the coarse stage reaches only E (ent) :

                                                                  |E (ent) |
                                             CRdisj (u(ent) ) =              .                                   (5)
                                                                      n
When E (tool) ̸⊆ E (ent) , i.e., the tool-view OSU binds evidence steps with entities distinct from those in u(ent) ,
                                disj (ent)
we have CRover
             combined > CR          (u     ).

Scope of comparison. Proposition 2 compares evidence reachable through a fixed entity OSU u(ent)
under both regimes, plus the additional tool-view pathway available only under overlap. This is a per-coarse-
selection comparison. In full top-K retrieval, disjoint mode can also select multiple entity-keyed OSUs whose
union may cover more evidence; however, it cannot access tool-view OSUs at all, since entity > tool priority
strips all evidence from them. The qualitative insight, that overlap provides a cross-view retrieval pathway
unavailable under disjoint, holds regardless of K.

Proof. Under T+E+, at least one pair of evidence steps shares an entity and at least one pair shares a tool
(Definition 2). Entity sharing guarantees |u(ent) ∩Eq | ≥ 2, and tool sharing guarantees |u(tool) ∩Eq | ≥ 2, giving
the lower bound in Equation 4. Under disjoint with entity > tool priority, each evidence step possessing an
entity annotation is assigned to an entity-keyed OSU and removed from all tool-keyed OSUs. Selecting u(ent)
therefore reaches exactly E (ent) . Under overlap, the same entity OSU still reaches E (ent) , but evidence steps
in u(ent) also belong to u(tool) , which additionally reaches E (tool) . When E (tool) includes steps with entities
distinct from those in u(ent) , these steps are scattered across other entity-keyed OSUs under disjoint but are
united under the tool-view OSU under overlap, making the union strictly larger.

Connection to experiments. The ToolBench evidence-OSU statistics (Section 6.1) confirm this quan-
titatively: on ToolBench, under overlap each evidence step belongs to 2.16 OSUs on average (median 2),
whereas under disjoint the average drops to .87 (median 1), a 2.49× increase. The additional tool-view
and entity-view OSU memberships under overlap provide independent retrieval handles that bind different
subsets of the evidence cluster, enabling coarse selection from multiple angles.

4.3     Centroid Dilution and the T−E− Disadvantage
The overlap construction is not uniformly beneficial. Under the T−E− condition, where evidence steps lack
shared annotations with one another, evidence does not cluster within any single OSU. The coarse-to-fine
routing then adds an indirection layer (centroid matching) that is less precise than Flat Vector’s direct
step-level cosine ranking.




                                                          8
Proposition 3 (Centroid dilution under T−E−). Consider an OSU uk with |uk | = m member steps, of
which me are evidence steps and m−me are non-evidence steps. Let h̄e and h̄¬e denote the mean embeddings
of the evidence and non-evidence members, respectively. The centroid-query alignment is
                                           1
                                 z⊤              me h̄⊤                 ⊤
                                                                                                             (6)
                                                                            
                                  kq =                e q + (m − me ) h̄¬e q .
                                         m∥h̄k ∥

When evidence steps are semantically distinct from non-evidence members (h̄⊤          ⊤
                                                                              e q ≫ h̄¬e q), the centroid-query
alignment tends to decrease as the ratio me /m decreases. Under the T−E− condition, no shared annotation
binds evidence steps into the same OSU, so me /m tends to be small for any single OSU. This reduces the
coarse-stage score σk = z⊤
                         k q, making the OSU less likely to be selected in the top-K.

Proof. Direct from Equation 1: z⊤  k q = h̄k q/∥h̄k ∥, where h̄k = (me h̄e + (m − me )h̄¬e )/m. Expanding gives
                                           ⊤

Equation 6. The numerator me h̄e q + (m − me ) h̄⊤
                                    ⊤
                                                        ¬e q is m times a convex combination of h̄e q and h̄¬e q
                                                                                                   ⊤        ⊤

with weights me /m and (m − me )/m. As the evidence fraction me /m decreases, this convex combination
shifts toward h̄⊤
                ¬e q. The denominator ∥h̄k ∥ also varies with me /m and is not generally monotone (it depends
on the angle between h̄e and h̄¬e ), so the overall effect on z⊤    k q need not be strictly monotone in me /m
for intermediate values. However, in the limit me /m → 0, the centroid aligns with the non-evidence mean
(zk → h̄¬e /∥h̄¬e ∥), and the coarse-stage score falls below what Flat Vector achieves by directly computing
h⊤i q for each evidence step individually. The practical takeaway is that OSUs with a small evidence fraction
tend to receive low coarse-stage scores, though the precise dilution trajectory depends on the geometric
relationship between evidence and non-evidence embeddings.

Budget interaction. The T−E− disadvantage grows with budget B because at large budgets, Flat Vector
has enough retrieval slots to cover most evidence through direct cosine ranking (all evidence with h⊤
                                                                                                    i q above
a natural threshold is retrieved), while OSU-Mem’s diluted centroids may misdirect the coarse-stage budget
toward low-evidence OSUs. At small budgets, the forced selection among very few slots makes any structured
index (including diluted OSUs) potentially beneficial simply by providing any non-trivial ordering. This
explains the empirical pattern in Table 5: the T−E− gap is +.8 percentage points (pp) at B=64 (negligible),
−2.3 pp at B=128, −12.9 pp at B=256, and −36.4 pp at B=512 (strongly negative).

4.4    Summary
The three propositions together predict a bimodal performance pattern that is consistent with what the
experiments observe: overlap helps on T+E+ evidence (Propositions 1 and 2) and hurts on T−E− evidence
at moderate-to-large budgets (Proposition 3), with the crossover budget depending on the evidence-to-noise
ratio in the OSU pool.


5     Experimental Settings
5.1    Datasets
We evaluate OSU-Mem on three benchmarks spanning a controlled synthetic environment and two real-
trajectory sources. Table 1 summarizes their key statistics.

Synthetic benchmark. We generate 200 episodes (197 with valid evaluation queries, 907 total queries)
with 150 to 296 steps each. Step embeddings are 64-dimensional basis-vector constructions. Event-related
steps use weights event (.55), entity (.20), tool (.15), subgoal (.10) with Gaussian noise σ=.55; non-event
background steps omit the event factor and use entity (.35), tool (.35), subgoal (.30) with σ=.45. Query
embeddings emphasize the event factor with weights event (.70), entity (.15), tool (.10), subgoal (.05) and
lower noise σ=.25. Token costs are drawn from N (15, 32 ) clipped at 5. This benchmark provides full control
over the similarity landscape and the evidence structure. Because all evidence steps for a query are drawn
from a single shared semantic event, they carry the same entity and subgoal annotations and the same
dominant event embedding factor: the E+ condition (shared entity) and shared-subgoal condition hold for


                                                       9
100% of queries by construction. Tool sharing is weaker by design—about 20% of event steps draw a random
tool and each tool signature appends a random argument-template suffix—so evidence steps pairwise share
an identical tool signature for 39.3% of queries (and share the same tool action, ignoring the argument
template, for 83.4%). The synthetic benchmark is therefore an E+-by-construction regime with partial T+
sharing rather than a uniformly T+E+ one; it isolates a shared-structure retrieval regime in which the
entity/subgoal annotations and dominant event signal are guaranteed by construction, while tool sharing
is present only probabilistically. We retain it as the controlled testbed in which the cross-view binding
mechanism is isolated from encoder confounds.

τ -bench. Raw τ -bench [Yao et al., 2025] trajectories have median length 29 steps, too short to exercise
budgeted retrieval at meaningful scale, since B=256 trivially admits the entire trajectory. Concatenation
is therefore a necessity imposed by the trajectory length available in τ -bench rather than a design choice.
We concatenate trajectories into groups with total length in [150, 300] steps (125 concatenated episodes, 328
evaluation queries, concatenated trajectory length 256 to 311). Each concatenated episode has one focal
source whose instruction becomes the query, and focal evidence steps are the focal source’s ground-truth
actions (re-offset to the concatenated coordinate system), all temporally distant from the query time. Entity
strings and tool signatures are namespace-prefixed per source episode to prevent cross-source string collisions,
a deployment pitfall we document in Appendix C. An initial implementation without namespace prefixing
reversed the overlap-vs.-disjoint ordering because generic strings such as "user" and "search" bridged
unrelated tasks. After prefixing, the cross-source sharing rate drops to the level observed within genuine
same-source pairs, and the cross-tab analysis in Section 6.2 is a clean within-source measurement. Focal
query embeddings are replaced with an ℓ2 -normalized noisy mean (σ=.25) of focal evidence embeddings,
because the original τ -bench queries are user-turn instructions already consumed earlier in the trajectory
and lack a natural standalone embedding. This realignment is applied identically to all methods and does
not give OSU-Mem preferential access; however, it may inflate absolute recall for any cosine-retrieval method.
Our primary mitigation is the ToolBench experiment (Section 6.1), where queries are the original natural-
language queries embedded verbatim, and the overlap-vs.-disjoint gap reproduces with the same sign and
comparable magnitude. This concatenation pipeline introduces a known limitation (Section 7, Limitation v).
Because both the concatenation and the noisy-mean query construction depart from natural usage, we
treat the τ -bench results as a constructed retrieval probe, not an end-to-end natural-query benchmark; the
natural-language-query evidence comes from ToolBench, whose queries are embedded verbatim (Section 6.1).

ToolBench. We use ToolBench [Qin et al., 2024] to build a controlled mechanism probe rather than a
natural agent-memory benchmark: the construction deliberately restricts the evidence distribution to the
favorable T+E+ cell so that the overlap mechanism can be measured in isolation. Individual ToolBench
trajectories are short (3 to 5 tool-calling steps) and cannot exercise budgeted retrieval directly. For each of
200 episodes we (1) select a target trajectory from the G1/G2 splits (single-tool and multi-tool categories,
respectively, as defined in the original ToolBench dataset) and designate 3 of its steps as evidence, (2)
draw a ≈500-step background of 75% confounders (steps from top-30 query-embedding nearest-neighbor
trajectories) plus 25% unrelated steps, and (3) place the 3 evidence steps at three evenly-spaced positions.
We designate evidence size 3 as the primary setting because it is the smallest nontrivial planted-evidence
cluster that supports pairwise tool/entity sharing beyond a single pair. We report sensitivity over evidence
sizes {2, 3, 4} in Appendix G, where the overlap advantage remains directionally consistent. Results are
averaged over 3 seeds (42, 123, 456). This planted-retrieval construction is structurally T+E+ by design:
the 3 planted evidence steps always come from the same target trajectory; ToolBench function names follow
the convention <fname>_for_<api>, so all evidence steps pairwise share a single tool signature (T+); and
steps from the same trajectory call the same API with related argument dictionaries, producing high entity
sharing (E+). Because the favorable cell is imposed by construction, this experiment measures the overlap
mechanism under a known-favorable structure; it is not evidence of deployment utility on natural ToolBench
agents, whose evidence distribution we do not control. Full construction details appear in Appendix G.1.




                                                      10
                     Table 1: Summary statistics of the three evaluation benchmarks.
                                    Synthetic                  τ -bench              ToolBench
       Episodes                        197                        125               200 × 3 seeds
       Queries                         907                        328               200 × 3 seeds
       Steps per episode             150–296                    256–311                  ≈500
       Embedding dim                    64                  384 (SBERT)             384 (SBERT)
       Evidence per query          2.5 (mean)                3.50 (mean)              3 (planted)
       T+E+ fraction        39% (E+ 100% by constr.)             17.1%          ≈100% (by construction)
       Budgets tested          {64, 128, 256, 512}        {64, 128, 256, 512}    {200, 400, 800, 1600}


5.2    Implementation Details
For the synthetic benchmark, all embeddings, OSU construction, and retrieval are computed in the 64-d basis-
vector space. For both trajectory-derived benchmarks, steps are encoded with a frozen all-MiniLM-L6-v2
SBERT encoder (384-d, ℓ2 -normalized). OSU construction uses the hyperparameters in Table 8, fixed across
all three benchmarks. The default retrieval algorithm is coarse-to-fine (Algorithm 1) for synthetic and τ -
bench. For ToolBench, pilot measurements show that sibling-view OSU centroids have mutual cosine > .6
on average and coarse-routing recall falls below .17, consistent with all-MiniLM-L6-v2 entangling entity-
level, tool-level, and semantic variation into a single dense vector. We therefore evaluate ToolBench under
a coverage-guided greedy retrieval variant: at each step the selected OSU is the one whose member step
maximizes si + β · [new OSU], where si is step-query cosine similarity and β is a coverage bonus rewarding
steps from previously-unused OSUs. Both overlap and disjoint indexes are scored by the identical retrieval
procedure, and only the OSU-pool construction differs.

5.3    Baselines and Evaluation Metrics
Baselines. We compare OSU-Mem against both simple and structured retrieval-into-budget methods. No
Long-Term (LT) Memory returns an empty context. Budget-Truncated Replay returns the most
recent B tokens of steps. Sliding Window uses a B-sized rolling recent window. Periodic Summary
combines a recent window with periodic LLM-style summary of older chunks. Flat Vector returns the
top-cosine steps by h⊤i q. Flat + MMR applies λ=.7 diversity-penalized top-cosine. Coverage-Aware
adds a β bonus for covering new subgoals at the step level. Disjoint Hierarchy uses disjoint subgoal
partitions with top-cosine within selected partitions. Tree Abstraction performs RAPTOR-style recursive
summarization with a coarse-to-fine budget expansion. All baselines use the same token-cost estimation and
packing policy.
   To ensure fair comparison, all methods operate under the same token budget B and use the same step
embeddings. The ToolBench experiment additionally compares OSU-Mem (overlap, M =5) against OSU-
Mem (disjoint, M =1) under coverage-guided retrieval to isolate the construction principle.

Evaluation metrics. We report two primary retrieval-quality metrics. Hit@2 is the fraction of queries for
which at least two evidence steps are retrieved. We adopt Hit@2 as the primary criterion because our queries
have multi-step ground-truth evidence (mean 3.5 on τ -bench, 3 on ToolBench): Hit@1 is satisfied by retriev-
ing a single evidence step and so does not measure whether enough of the cross-bound evidence is recovered
to support a decision, whereas Hit@2 directly probes the multi-handle retrieval that the overlap mechanism is
meant to provide. We report Recall alongside it as the finer-grained continuous measure; downstream answer
accuracy is out of scope under our retrieval-layer focus (Section 7, Limitation iv). Recall is the fraction
of evidence steps retrieved, averaged across queries. Paired sign-flip permutation tests (nperm =10,000) are
used for all significance claims. For ToolBench, per-seed permutation p-values are Fisher-combined across
seeds. We designate B=256 as the primary budget for τ -bench and B=400 for ToolBench.




                                                     11
Table 2: Synthetic benchmark: evidence retrieval at B=128 and B=256 (primary budgets). OSU-Mem
achieves the highest Hit@2 and Recall at both budgets. 197 episodes, 907 queries. Full 4-budget version in
Appendix B.2.
                           Method                      B=128            B=256
                                                   Hit@2   Recall   Hit@2    Recall
                           Budget-Trunc Replay      .000    .004     .000     .149
                           Sliding Window           .000    .000     .000     .136
                           Periodic Summary         .000    .041     .013     .093
                           Flat Vector              .016    .088     .045     .156
                           Flat + MMR               .022    .085     .052     .158
                           Coverage-Aware           .014    .086     .049     .157
                           Disjoint Hierarchy       .014    .084     .044     .150
                           Tree Abstraction         .012    .093     .044     .157
                           OSU-Mem                 .027     .130     .084    .221
                            (disjoint)             .008     .075     .034    .138


6     Results and Analysis
Two contrasts: construction principle vs. full algorithm. We separate two things OSU-Mem bundles.
The construction principle is whether a step may join multiple OSUs (Mmax ≥ 2, overlap) or exactly one
(Mmax =1, disjoint); the retrieval algorithm is the procedure that consumes the resulting index (coarse-
to-fine, Algorithm 1, or the coverage-guided greedy variant). The OSU-Mem-vs.-Flat Vector comparison
evaluates the full system and cannot attribute a gain to either half; the overlap-vs.-disjoint comparison fixes
the algorithm and varies only construction, isolating the construction principle. Our central mechanism
claim—that cross-view binding determines when overlap helps—is about the construction principle, and
the overlap-vs.-disjoint contrasts (the τ -bench cross-tab’s last column and the ToolBench β sweep) are the
comparisons that test it.

6.1    Overall Results
Synthetic benchmark. At B=256, OSU-Mem achieves Recall = .221 and Hit@2 = .084 vs. .158 and
.052 for the strongest baseline Flat + MMR (Table 2), which corresponds to relative improvements of
+39.9% Recall and +61.5% Hit@2. Paired sign-flip permutation tests (10,000 permutations, n=197) confirm
p ≤ .002 (two-sided) for both metrics against every retrieval baseline, and full significance details appear
in Appendix B.4. OSU-Mem runs at 8.3 ms amortized latency with 209 KB storage, smaller and faster
than Tree Abstraction (57.4 ms, 363 KB) at the 64-d regime (Appendix B.3); under 384-d SBERT used for
both real-trajectory benchmarks, OSU-Mem has the highest retrieve-only latency at ≈2.6 ms and the largest
storage footprint, though its amortized cost remains below Tree Abstraction’s (Appendix E, Limitation iii).
Figure 2 further breaks down recall by temporal distance, showing that OSU-Mem’s advantage holds for
both near and far evidence, confirming that the gain stems from non-local semantic structure rather than
recency bias.

τ -bench (augmented cache). To demonstrate OSU-Mem’s strength under the T+E+ condition at scale,
we apply a controlled multi-burst augmentation (Stage D, Appendix D) that lifts 100% of queries into
T+E+. On the augmented cache, OSU-Mem achieves the highest Hit@2 at every budget, with +14.1 pp
over Flat Vector at B=256 (episode-level permutation p=.001), as illustrated by the budget-vs.-metric curves
in Figure 3. Full multi-budget results and paired permutation tests appear in Appendix D. The detailed
argument that Stage D is not selectively friendly to OSU-Mem is given in Section 6.3.

ToolBench. Because ToolBench’s planted evidence is dense in the SBERT space, Flat Vector is a very
strong baseline (nearly saturated: recall rises from .686 at B=200 to .917 at B=1600, 3-seed averaged), and
the overlap variant matches Flat Vector within ±1 Recall pp. The primary statistical signal is therefore


                                                      12
Figure 2: Synthetic benchmark: near (≤ 50 steps from query) vs. far (> 50 steps) evidence recall at B=256.
Budget-Truncated Replay retrieves only near evidence (far recall = 0), illustrating recency bias. Flat Vector
and Tree Abstraction show balanced near/far recall but at a lower level. OSU-Mem achieves the highest
recall in both regions, with a slight advantage on far evidence (Near = .196, Far = .218), confirming that its
advantage is driven by non-local semantic structure rather than recency.


Table 3: ToolBench planted-retrieval at β=.12, averaged over 3 seeds × 200 episodes. Coverage-guided
retrieval with overlap (Mmax =5) vs. disjoint (Mmax =1). Both variants are within ±1 Recall pp of Flat
Vector, and the structural signal is overlap > disjoint.
  Method                           B=200               B=400                B=800              B=1600
                              Hit@2      Recall    Hit@2     Recall    Hit@2     Recall    Hit@2      Recall
  Flat Vector                   .427      .686      .583      .792      .698      .863       .808      .917
  Flat + MMR                    .228      .567      .420      .704      .560      .797       .733      .885
  Disjoint Hierarchy            .057      .311      .098      .381      .153      .482       .243      .594
  Cov (overlap, M =5)          .430      .687      .588      .794      .702      .861       .792      .909
  Cov (disjoint, M =1)          .368     .659      .540       .757     .665       .840       .753      .894
  ∆ overlap−disjoint           +.062     +.027     +.048     +.037     +.037     +.021      +.038     +.016


the overlap-vs.-disjoint contrast, which isolates the T+E+ cell mechanism under a retrieval algorithm that
fully exercises OSU structure. For transparency we note that OSU-Mem’s default coarse-to-fine algorithm
performs poorly here (coarse-routing recall < .17; Section 5.2), because all-MiniLM-L6-v2 entangles entity-,
tool-, and semantic variation into mutually similar sibling centroids; this is why ToolBench uses the coverage-
guided greedy variant, and it underscores that ToolBench supports the overlap construction principle and
not the full default OSU-Mem method. Table 3 reports overlap vs. disjoint under coverage retrieval at β=.12.
Overlap beats disjoint at every budget, with Hit@2 gaps of +6.2, +4.8, +3.7, +3.8 pp and Recall gaps of
+2.7, +3.7, +2.1, +1.6 pp at B ∈ {200, 400, 800, 1600} respectively. The Hit@2 gap is largest at B=200
where budget pressure is tightest, and Recall gaps narrow toward higher budgets as disjoint approaches
saturation.

Primary configuration. We report β=.12 and evidence-size 3 as the primary ToolBench configuration.
β=.12 is the midpoint of the swept range {.04, .08, .12, .16, .20}—a conservative choice that leaves dose-
response headroom on both sides rather than the maximum-effect endpoint—and evidence-size 3 is the
smallest value at which pairwise tool- and entity-sharing can hold beyond a single pair (evidence-size 2 has
only one pair). The full β and evidence-size sweep, including the per-size recall gaps, appears in Appendix G;
the overlap advantage is directionally preserved across all three evidence sizes.




                                                      13
Table 4: τ -bench 2×2 cross-tabulation at B=256: unaugmented cache, 328 queries. Paired sign-flip permu-
tation (10,000 permutations) on per-query differences. Stars: . p<.10, ∗ p<.05, ∗∗ p<.01, ∗∗∗ p<.001.
    Cell                  n    OSU−Flat ∆Hit@2        OSU−Flat ∆Recall        overlap−disjoint ∆Hit@2
                                            ∗                      ∗
    T+E+ (both share)     56          +.179                  +.080                      +.089
    T+E− (tool only)      96           −.031                 −.047.                     +.073
    T−E+ (entity only)    44           +.159                 +.000                      −.068
    T−E− (neither)       132          −.129∗∗               −.157∗∗∗                    −.083∗
    Aggregate            328           −.010                  −.063                     −.006


Direct confirmation from evidence-OSU statistics. Averaged over 3 seeds, each with 200 episodes
and 3 evidence steps per episode (600 evidence steps per seed, 1800 total), under overlap construction
(Mmax =5) each evidence step belongs to 2.16 OSUs on average (median 2), whereas under disjoint construc-
tion (Mmax =1), the average drops to .87 (median 1). Average disjoint membership below one has a direct
mechanistic interpretation: 13.2% of evidence steps belong to no disjoint OSU, because view-priority pruning
at Mmax =1 forces each step into exactly one view and the minimum-size filter then deletes views with fewer
than two members. Under overlap, 0% of evidence is evicted. This provides a controlled analogue
of the τ -bench T+E+ cell mechanism: steps carrying evidence for multiple views lose their alternate
retrieval handles in disjoint mode and gain them back in overlap mode. We read this overlap-vs.-disjoint gap
as an upper bound on the pure construction-principle effect: part of the disjoint disadvantage comes from
the fmin =2 minimum-size filter rather than from the absence of overlap alone.
    The three benchmarks provide complementary evidence at different levels of control: the synthetic bench-
mark validates the method in a fully controlled similarity landscape, the τ -bench cross-tab identifies the
cell-conditional effect on the τ -bench-derived trajectories, and ToolBench confirms the overlap-construction
mechanism on an independent data source with structural T+E+ verification. We develop this joint inter-
pretation in Section 7.

6.2    Evidence-Structure Cross-Tab Analysis
We ask a more precise question than whether OSU-Mem works on real data: on which type of real query
does it work, and why? For each of the 328 queries in the unaugmented τ -bench cache we compute pairwise
sharing of ground-truth evidence steps along three views: entity, tool, and subgoal. Only 14.3% of queries
have non-zero sharing across all three views, a regime the synthetic benchmark instantiates by construction
for 39.3% of queries (entity and subgoal sharing hold for 100%, but tool-signature sharing only for 39.3%).
Entity sharing has median 0, tool sharing has median 0, and only subgoal sharing is substantive (median
.47), because focal evidence usually lies within a single user-turn segment. The two views that OSU-Mem’s
multi-view constructor most depends on for binding scattered evidence into a single retrieval handle (entity
and tool) have almost nothing to bind on the majority of real τ -bench queries.
    We cross-tabulate the 328 queries by whether evidence steps share at least one tool signature (T±) and
at least one entity (E±). Table 4 reports the per-cell OSU-Mem−Flat Vector gap at B=256. The pattern
is clearly bimodal. On T+E+ (n=56, 17%) OSU-Mem beats Flat Vector by +17.9 Hit@2 pp (p=.022),
and on T−E− (n=132, 40%) it is dominated by −12.9 Hit@2 pp (p=.007) and −15.7 Recall pp (p<.001).
The aggregate near-tie of OSU-Mem with Flat Vector on the full cache is therefore a consequence of cell
mixture rather than a property of either method. This bimodal pattern is consistent with the prediction
of Propositions 1–3: overlap increases reachability on T+E+ evidence while centroid dilution degrades
performance on T−E− evidence.

6.3    Multi-Budget Stability and Interaction Tests
Multi-budget stability of the T+E+ advantage. Re-running the cross-tab at all four budgets (Table 5)
shows a stable T+E+ advantage—+.161, +.232, +.179, +.161 Hit@2 pp at B ∈ {64, 128, 256, 512}, each
significant at p < .05—alongside a T−E− disadvantage that grows monotonically with budget, from +.008
at B=64 to −.364 at B=512 (p < .001). Because all four budgets score the same 56 T+E+ queries, this


                                                     14
Table 5: τ -bench: OSU-Mem−Flat Vector Hit@2 across all four budgets by 2×2 cell. The T+E+ advantage
is stable across budgets, and the T−E− disadvantage grows monotonically with budget. Stars as in Table 4.
                           Cell               B=64     B=128      B=256      B=512
                                                   ∗         ∗∗         ∗
                           T+E+ (n=56)       +.161     +.232      +.179      +.161∗
                           T+E− (n=96)       +.094.    +.125.      −.031    −.146∗∗
                           T−E+ (n=44)       +.045      +.114      +.159     +.227∗
                           T−E− (n=132)      +.008      −.023     −.129∗∗   −.364∗∗∗


is stability of sign and effect size rather than independent replication; with n=56, the claim rests on this
stability together with the independent ToolBench corroboration (Section 6.1) rather than on any single per-
budget p-value. Under a deliberately weaker query construction (a single random evidence step plus noise),
the sign holds and ≈80% of the B=256 magnitude survives (+.179 → +.143), but single-cell significance
softens to marginal (p: .022 → .094). A natural mechanistic reading is that at small budgets structured
selection must make hard choices and OSU-Mem’s multi-handle index helps any cross-view-bound query,
whereas at large budgets Flat Vector can recover most evidence by cosine alone and OSU-Mem’s structural
overhead on unbound evidence becomes pure cost.

Method × cell interaction test. The previous tables report per-cell marginal effects. The statistically
correct tool for our core heterogeneous-treatment claim is the method × cell interaction test: under the
null that the OSU−Flat gap is identical across the four cells, what is the probability of observing a spread
as large as we do? We compute this via a paired sign-flip permutation on the per-query (OSU−Flat)
differences after mean-centering within each cell, so that the test isolates between-cell variance in the effect.
The interaction is strongly significant at our primary budget B=256 (Hit@2 p=.002, Recall p=.021), marginal
at B=128 (p=.081 Hit@2), and null at B=64 and B=512 (p=.308 and p=.558 Hit@2). At the extremes this
is expected. At B=64 all four cells show positive effects (range +.008 to +.161), so the between-cell variance
in the OSU−Flat gap is small relative to within-cell noise, and at B=512 the T+E+ and T−E+ cells both
show large positive effects while T+E− and T−E− both show negatives, again reducing the specific T+E+-
vs.-others contrast that our permutation permutes. The interaction test therefore pinpoints B=256 as the
primary budget at which the cell-conditional claim is the most clearly isolated.

Cross-view binding: T+E+ is the strongest but not the only positive-binding cell. The T−E+
cell (entity-only sharing, n=44) shows a monotonically growing Hit@2 advantage of +.045, +.114, +.159,
+.227∗ across B ∈ {64, 128, 256, 512}, significant at B=512 and directionally aligned with T+E+ at every
budget. The T+E− cell (tool-only sharing) is positive at small budgets and turns negative at large ones.
The broader reading is therefore “OSU-Mem helps when at least one pairwise-sharing view (entity or tool)
binds evidence” rather than the stricter “only when both bind.” T+E+ is the strongest signal because both
views reinforce, and T−E+ is the next most distinct case because entity sharing alone gives the entity-view
OSU a handle that Flat Vector lacks. This matters for the predictive rule (Section 7): a rule based on the
tool-sharing marginal πT+ alone under-counts regimes where OSU-Mem helps, and we report an alternative
“any-binding” marginal in Appendix I.

Refined mechanism and regime-lift probe. Taken together, the cell analysis yields a refined claim:
OSU-Mem’s overlap and multi-view design pay off specifically when evidence is bound together by shared tool
signatures or shared entities. To verify at scale (and avoid the n=56 T+E+ power limit), we perform a
controlled multi-burst augmentation. Each focal evidence step is replicated as 3 scattered copies inheriting
the anchor’s entity, tool, and subgoal annotations. This lifts 100% of queries into T+E+ (up from 17.1%).
The T+E+ structure here is a mechanical consequence of metadata inheritance with small embedding noise
rather than a tuned parameter, and the predicted OSU-vs.-Flat effect is derived from the T+E+ cross-tab
row before Stage D is implemented. Crucially, Stage D benefits any cosine-retrieval method, not OSU-Mem
selectively: Flat Vector, Flat + MMR, and Coverage-Aware all improve substantially on the augmented
cache (e.g., Flat Vector Hit@2 at B=256 rises from .045 to .328 query-level). What survives is the relative
OSU−Flat gap (+.107 Hit@2 at B=256), of the same order as the unaugmented T+E+-cell gap (+.179);


                                                       15
this rules out the reading that the T+E+ effect is incidental to τ -bench’s mixture and would vanish under a
controlled lift. The per-method improvement breakdown is in Appendix D. On the augmented cache, OSU-
Mem achieves Hit@2 .435 vs. Flat .328 at B=256 (∆=+.107 query-level; episode-level permutation ∆=+.141,
p=.001), outperforming Flat at every budget. Full multi-budget tests, augmented-cache ablations, and a
separable finding at B=64 (2.0 to 2.4× Hit@2 over flat baselines at matched Recall) appear in Appendix D.
SBERT efficiency numbers (where OSU-Mem’s 6× dimensional cost changes its ordering with flat baselines)
appear in Appendix E.




Figure 3: τ -bench multi-burst-augmented cache (125 episodes, 328 queries): Hit@2 (left) and Recall (right)
vs. token budget, episode-level averaging. OSU-Mem (solid blue) achieves the highest Hit@2 at every budget.
All retrieval methods improve substantially under augmentation relative to the unaugmented cache (e.g., Flat
Vector Hit@2 rises from .045 to .320 at B=256, both episode-level), confirming that Stage D is not selectively
friendly to OSU-Mem. The persistent gap between OSU-Mem and Flat Vector at every budget is the relative
advantage that the cross-tab’s T+E+ cell analysis predicts.


6.4    Ablation Studies
Effect of overlap and multi-view construction (synthetic). At B=256, removing overlap (→ disjoint
OSUs) drops Hit@2 from .084 to .034 (−59.6%) and Recall from .221 to .138 (−37.4%), which is the largest
single-factor ablation effect on this benchmark. Removing multi-view construction (sim-only OSUs) drops
to Hit@2 .014 and Recall .110, below all competitive retrieval baselines, which confirms that the union of
entity, tool, subgoal, and similarity views is critical. The novelty penalty has a small effect that is not
statistically significant (p=.307 for Recall, p=.876 for Hit@2 at B=256). The novelty term is part of the
default OSU-Mem method but is budget-gated (active only when B ≥ 192), and its measured contribution
is dominated by the overlap and multi-view construction effects. An Mmax sweep saturates at Mmax =5 (one
slot per view plus one slack slot). Full ablation flag combinations appear in Appendix B.2.

Ablation on τ -bench augmented cache. Consistent with the synthetic findings, disjoint OSU-Mem
achieves Hit@2 .387 vs. overlap’s .435 at B=256 (query-level); the paired episode-level permutation test
confirms significance (p=.012, Appendix Table 12). Similarity-only OSUs drop to .285. The overlap-vs.-
disjoint gap activates at B ≥ 128 and the effect sizes against hierarchical baselines (Disjoint Hierarchy, Tree
Abstraction) grow monotonically with budget, reaching +.28 and +.37 Hit@2 pp at B=512. OSU-Mem
+ GF (ground-truth filtering) matches the default OSU-Mem at B ≤ 256 and gains only +.004 Hit@2 at
B=512, indicating that on the augmented cache the coarse stage already selects the correct OSUs with high
probability, leaving little room for oracle guidance. Full augmented-cache results appear in Appendix D.




                                                      16
Table 6: ToolBench: overlap−disjoint Recall gap (pp) across β and B, averaged over 3 seeds × 200 episodes.
Monotonic dose-response in β at every budget. Stars: ∗ p<.05, ∗∗ p<.01, ∗∗∗ p<.001 Fisher-combined across
seeds. Hit@2 version in Appendix G.
                                β     B=200      B=400     B=800     B=1600
                                                     ∗∗
                                .04     +.5     +1.2        +.3       +.2
                                .08    +1.3∗    +2.6∗∗∗     +.8       +.9
                                .12   +2.7∗∗∗   +3.7∗∗∗    +2.1∗∗    +1.6∗
                                .16   +4.2∗∗∗   +4.7∗∗∗    +4.0∗∗∗   +2.6∗∗∗
                                .20   +5.1∗∗∗   +6.4∗∗∗    +5.4∗∗∗   +4.2∗∗∗


6.5    Dose-Response in the Coverage Bonus
The decisive check for ToolBench is whether the overlap advantage shows a dose-response in β. If the effect
is driven by OSU structure, the gap should grow as the retrieval algorithm’s reliance on that structure grows.
Table 6 reports the full β sweep on evidence recall (the metric with per-seed Fisher-combined permutation
tests). The gap grows monotonically with β at every budget, as visualized in Figure 4. At B=400, it grows
from +1.2 pp at β=.04 to +6.4 pp at β=.20. Hit@2 shows the same pattern with larger absolute effects,
reaching +10.8 pp at β=.20 (Appendix G). Directional consistency across β × B × seed cells is 57/60 = 95%,
with Fisher-combined p < .001 at B=200 and B=400 and p < .05 at every budget for β ≥ .12. Both the
monotonic-in-β dose-response and the structural T+E+ argument substantially reduce the
plausibility of alternative explanations (incidental differences in retrieval pool composition, SBERT
embedding artifacts, ToolBench-specific artifacts). Overlap provides a specific additional retrieval pathway
whose value scales with how much the retrieval algorithm rewards OSU coverage.




Figure 4: ToolBench dose-response: overlap−disjoint Recall gap (pp) as a function of coverage bonus β, at
four budgets. Each point averages 3 seeds × 200 episodes. Filled markers indicate Fisher-combined p < .05;
open markers indicate p ≥ .05. The monotonic increase at every budget confirms that the overlap advantage
scales with how much the retrieval algorithm rewards OSU coverage, consistent with the structural T+E+
mechanism rather than an incidental artifact. Shaded bands show the per-seed range.

    A secondary negative result is informative: a cohesion-style greedy variant that penalizes similarity to
already-selected steps (−α · maxj∈S cos(hi , hj )) does not produce an overlap advantage at any α or budget
(Appendix G.5). This indicates that the T+E+ mechanism depends on the retrieval algorithm actively
rewarding OSU coverage rather than on merely discouraging within-pool redundancy.




                                                     17
Table 7: LLM-mediated evidence selection on τ -bench unaugmented cache, B=256, GPT-4o-mini, 3 seeds,
paired permutation by query (after seed averaging), 20,000 permutations. Bracketed ranges are 95% confi-
dence intervals (CIs). Stars: ∗ p<.05. No-memory floor at hard recall .003 confirms the LLM uses retrieved
context.
                         Hard recall (mean)                          ∆ OSU−Flat (95% CI)
  Cell            n      OSU      Flat      None                    Soft                       Hard
  T+E+           107     .230     .166       .008           +.005 [−.017, +.027]     +.064∗ [+.008, +.121]
  T+E−           131     .169     .146       .000           +.019 [−.001, +.039]     +.023 [−.030, +.075]
  T−E+            44     .252     .213       .008           +.016 [−.018, +.051]     +.039 [−.039, +.123]
  T−E−           132     .074     .066       .000           +.000 [−.016, +.017]     +.008 [−.026, +.041]
  Aggregate      414     .164     .133       .003                  +.009                      +.031


6.6      LLM-Mediated Evidence Selection
As an additional check, we ask whether the cross-tab’s retrieval quality differences are preserved when the
retrieved context is consumed by an LLM. For each of 414 queries on the unaugmented cache (cell distribution
25.8/31.6/10.6/31.9% T+E+/T+E-/T-E+/T-E-, which differs from the n=328 cross-tab in Section 6.2
because the LLM experiment uses a broader inclusion rule that relaxes the focal-source filter, detailed in
Appendix F), we run OSU-Mem, Flat Vector, and no-memory at B=256, feed the retrieved context with the
user instruction to GPT-4o-mini (T =0), ask for exactly three short descriptions of the most relevant past
events, SBERT-re-encode the listed events, and score against ground-truth evidence embeddings via soft
recall (mean max cosine) and hard recall (fraction with max cosine > .5). Three seeds (Python random
state; retrieval and OSU construction are fully deterministic, so residual per-seed variance arises from non-
determinism in the OpenAI inference backend at T =0), paired permutation after per-query averaging (the
initial pooled-seed test was anti-conservative since T =0 makes seeds near-duplicates, see Appendix F).

Findings. The T+E+ advantage survives the LLM stage: +6.4 pp hard recall (p=.025), the only cell
individually significant after correction (per-cell CIs in Table 7), while T−E− is null (phard =.65) exactly
as the cross-tab predicts. Two bounds apply: this is an evidence-selection check, not a full task evaluation
(the LLM produces no tool calls and takes no actions), and it shares the SBERT encoder—and hence
some variance—with the cross-tab of Section 6.2, so it is a consistency check rather than independent
corroboration. The pooled-vs.-corrected comparison, the near-circularity discussion, and the soft-vs.-hard
mechanism interpretation are in Appendix F.


7     Discussion
Two datasets, complementary roles. The τ -bench cell analysis and the ToolBench β sweep are not two
interchangeable corroborations of the same claim; they play asymmetric, complementary roles. τ -bench is a
naturally mixed distribution and serves to measure the heterogeneity of the effect across cells (via the cross-
tab), including the cells where overlap hurts. ToolBench artificially restricts the distribution to the favorable
cell and serves to isolate the mechanism under a known-favorable structure on an independent source. They
differ in three ways, each of which is informative. (1) Evidence distribution and role. τ -bench has a
naturally mixed distribution (17% T+E+, 40% T−E−, 43% mixed) and is the only analysis that measures
cross-cell heterogeneity; ToolBench is structurally T+E+ by construction and isolates the favorable-cell
mechanism. (2) Retrieval algorithm. τ -bench uses the full OSU-Mem coarse-to-fine procedure, and
ToolBench uses the coverage-guided greedy variant. Agreement across algorithms shifts credit from the
retrieval procedure onto the construction principle. (3) Null comparison. τ -bench’s T+E+ internal
overlap-vs.-disjoint gap is +8.9 Hit@2 pp at B=256, and ToolBench’s overlap-vs.-disjoint gap is +3.7 to
+6.2 Hit@2 pp across all four tested budgets (at β=.12). The magnitudes agree to within a factor of


                                                       18
two. A sub-population effect measured on τ -bench alone could reflect incidental properties of a single data
source; ToolBench guards against this by reproducing the same mechanism signature on an independent
source with code-level structural verification of cell assignment. Conversely, ToolBench alone cannot speak
to heterogeneity across cells, and τ -bench’s per-cell cross-tab is the only analysis that measures this. The
two datasets together are stronger than either alone.

A predictive rule for when overlap helps (derived). The joint cell analysis yields a quantitative
heuristic whose thresholds are derived directly from the τ -bench cross-tab; the full linear predictor, break-
even points, and budget table appear in Appendix I. We stress that the rule predicts a retrieval-quality
outcome (the aggregate Hit@2 gap over a query population), not end-to-end agent task success, which we
do not measure (Limitation iv); it is therefore a hypothesis about where overlap is worth applying, to be
confirmed in closed-loop evaluation. Let πT+ denote the expected fraction of queries with at least one pairwise
tool-sharing edge among expected evidence. This can be approximated from the agent framework’s tool-call
logs without running retrieval, by using the fraction of recent episodes that invoke the same tool signature at
least twice as a proxy for expected evidence-step tool sharing; when tool-call logs are unavailable, an entity-
sharing rate estimated from named entity recognition (NER) over recent trajectories can substitute. The
qualitative rule is simple: OSU-Mem is likely net-positive on aggregate retrieval Hit@2 when πT+ is high and
likely net-negative when it is low, with a held-out calibration recommended in the intermediate band. Two
qualitative dependencies matter when applying the rule. First, the break-even threshold rises with budget:
at small budgets any cross-view binding helps, whereas at large budgets the T−E− disadvantage grows and
demands a higher πT+ to remain net-positive. Second, aggregate Recall requires a stricter threshold than
Hit@2, because the T−E− Recall disadvantage is the larger of the two. We also recommend source-level
namespace prefixing as a standard precondition whenever trajectories from multiple sources are concatenated,
to avoid the cross-source metadata contamination pitfall (Appendix C).

How much structure does the aggregate near-tie hide? The cross-tab lets us quantify it directly.
Routing each query to its better method on its evidence cell—OSU-Mem for the favorable cells (T+E+,
T−E+) and Flat Vector otherwise—turns the aggregate Hit@2 near-tie into ≈ + 5.2 pp over Flat Vector
and lifts aggregate Recall from −6.3 to ≈ + 1.4 pp. This is the cell-mixture artifact, this paper’s central
claim, made quantitative: the aggregate null conceals ∼5 Hit@2 pp of recoverable structure. The figure is
an oracle-routed upper bound. This is an in-sample oracle ceiling, not an evaluated or deployable routing
method. The per-cell arithmetic, the label-free (metadata-based) policy that approximates it at decision
time, and the future-work routing are in Appendix I.

Limitations. (i) OSU-Mem depends on embedding quality, and our τ -bench pipeline replaces focal query
embeddings with noisy means of evidence; ToolBench’s use of verbatim natural-language queries (Section 6.1)
is our strongest evidence that it is not the dominant driver of the T+E+ advantage. (ii) In production, OSU
construction relies on extraction heuristics (NER, pattern matching, intent-shift detection) whose errors are
not captured by our benchmarks. (iii) Efficiency claims do not transfer unchanged from 64-d to 384-d
embeddings. On SBERT, OSU-Mem has the highest retrieve-only latency and the largest storage footprint
(≈2.6 ms retrieve-only; small relative to typical LLM-call latency, but whether this overhead is acceptable
should be validated in the target agent loop, see Appendix E). (iv) We validate retrieval quality and an
LLM-mediated evidence-selection step (Section 6.6), but not full multi-step task success in an interactive en-
vironment with an action loop and reward. Because the recall-to-task-success relationship is task-dependent
[Petroni et al., 2021], the full task-level impact requires benchmark-specific end-to-end evaluation, which we
leave to future work. (v) No public benchmark known to us simultaneously has long trajectories (≥ 150 steps)
and a naturally T+E+ evidence distribution in a single unaugmented dataset. τ -bench gives the length but
not the cell concentration, and ToolBench gives the cell concentration but requires planted-retrieval to reach
comparable lengths. Building such a benchmark is an actionable direction for future work.




                                                      19
8    Conclusion
OSU-Mem is a trajectory memory framework for long-horizon agents that organizes interaction histories
into overlapping semantic units and retrieves via budgeted, query-adaptive coarse-to-fine expansion. On
two trajectory-derived benchmarks—constructed retrieval settings based on τ -bench and ToolBench—we
characterize the precise condition under which the method helps. In a synthetic setting that is E+ by
construction (entity-shared for 100% of queries; tool-signature-shared, hence strictly T+E+, for 39.3%), it
improves recall by +39.9% and Hit@2 by +61.5% over the strongest baseline, confirming the mechanism in the
regime the theory predicts. The synthetic and τ -bench experiments support the full OSU-Mem coarse-to-fine
pipeline, while the ToolBench experiment supports the overlap construction principle under a coverage-guided
greedy variant. OSU-Mem is strong and significant on T+E+ evidence (where steps share tool signatures
and entities across pairs) and weak on fully heterogeneous evidence, with favorable-cell prevalence estimable
from low-cost metadata proxies. τ -bench measures the per-cell effect on naturally mixed evidence via cross-
tab, and ToolBench measures it on a distribution structurally restricted to the favorable cell by construction.
The mechanism signatures agree across two datasets, two retrieval algorithms, and two ways of instantiating
the T+E+ condition. We note that the τ -bench evaluation relies on a constructed query-evidence alignment
(Section 5.1) rather than natural user queries, and that neither benchmark constitutes a closed-loop agent
task evaluation (Section 7, Limitation iv). We view OSU-Mem as a design point whose conditional value
is now characterized on trajectory-derived retrieval settings, rather than generically claimed on deployment
distributions.


References
Howard Chen, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Jason Weston, and Asli Celikyilmaz. Walking down the memory maze:
  Beyond context limit through interactive reading, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05029.
Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, Meng Wang,
  and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.10997.
Mengkang Hu, Tianxing Chen, Qiguang Chen, Yao Mu, Wenqi Shao, and Ping Luo. HiAgent: Hierarchical
 working memory management for solving long-horizon agent tasks with large language model. In Wanxiang
 Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar, editors, Proceedings of the 63rd
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 32779–
 32798, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-251-0.
 doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.1575. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.1575/.
Minki Kang, Wei-Ning Chen, Dongge Han, Huseyin A. Inan, Lukas Wutschitz, Yanzhi Chen, Robert Sim,
 and Saravan Rajmohan. Acon: Optimizing context compression for long-horizon llm agents, 2026. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.00615.

Jiaqi Liu, Yaofeng Su, Peng Xia, Siwei Han, Zeyu Zheng, Cihang Xie, Mingyu Ding, and Huaxiu Yao.
  Simplemem: Efficient lifelong memory for llm agents, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.02553.
Miao Lu, Weiwei Sun, Weihua Du, Zhan Ling, Xuesong Yao, Kang Liu, and Jiecao Chen. Scaling llm multi-
 turn rl with end-to-end summarization-based context management, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
 2510.06727.
Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez.
  Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08560.
Fabio Petroni, Aleksandra Piktus, Angela Fan, Patrick Lewis, Majid Yazdani, Nicola De Cao, James Thorne,
  Yacine Jernite, Vladimir Karpukhin, Jean Maillard, Vassilis Plachouras, Tim Rocktäschel, and Sebas-
  tian Riedel. KILT: a benchmark for knowledge intensive language tasks. In Kristina Toutanova, Anna
  Rumshisky, Luke Zettlemoyer, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Iz Beltagy, Steven Bethard, Ryan Cotterell, Tanmoy



                                                      20
  Chakraborty, and Yichao Zhou, editors, Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chap-
  ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 2523–2544,
  Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.200.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.200/.
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang,
  Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark Gerstein, dahai li,
  Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world
  apis. In B. Kim, Y. Yue, S. Chaudhuri, K. Fragkiadaki, M. Khan, and Y. Sun, editors, International Confer-
 ence on Learning Representations, volume 2024, pages 9695–9717, 2024. URL https://proceedings.iclr.
  cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/28e50ee5b72e90b50e7196fde8ea260e-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Preston Rasmussen, Pavlo Paliychuk, Travis Beauvais, Jack Ryan, and Daniel Chalef. Zep: A temporal
  knowledge graph architecture for agent memory, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.13956.
Parth Sarthi, Salman Abdullah, Aditi Tuli, Shubh Khanna, Anna Goldie, and Christopher D Manning.
  RAPTOR: Recursive abstractive processing for tree-organized retrieval. In The Twelfth International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=GN921JHCRw.

Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: lan-
 guage agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko,
 M. Hardt, and S. Levine, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36,
 pages 8634–8652. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
 paper/2023/file/1b44b878bb782e6954cd888628510e90-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima
 Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models, 2023. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2305.16291.
Wujiang Xu, Zujie Liang, Kai Mei, Hang Gao, Juntao Tan, and Yongfeng Zhang. A-mem: Agentic memory
 for LLM agents. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
 doi: 2502.12110. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FiM0M8gcct.
Sikuan Yan, Xiufeng Yang, Zuchao Huang, Ercong Nie, Zifeng Ding, Zonggen Li, Xiaowen Ma, Jinhe Bi,
  Kristian Kersting, Jeff Z. Pan, Hinrich Schütze, Volker Tresp, and Yunpu Ma. Memory-r1: Enhancing
  large language model agents to manage and utilize memories via reinforcement learning, 2026. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.19828.

Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan.             τ -bench:   A bench-
  mark for Tool-Agent-User interaction in real-world domains.   In Y. Yue, A. Garg, N. Peng,
  F. Sha, and R. Yu, editors, International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2025,
  pages 9965–10017, 2025.    URL https://proceedings.iclr.cc/paper_files/paper/2025/file/
  1b126cc38b8638e07bef37e7b2bb72bf-Paper-Conference.pdf.

Rui Ye, Zhongwang Zhang, Kuan Li, Huifeng Yin, Zhengwei Tao, Yida Zhao, Liangcai Su, Liwen Zhang,
 Zile Qiao, Xinyu Wang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Jingren Zhou, Siheng Chen, and Yong Jiang. Agentfold:
 Long-horizon web agents with proactive context folding. In The Fourteenth International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2026. doi: 2510.24699. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=IuZoTgsUws.
Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel: Llm agents
 are experiential learners. AAAI’24/IAAI’24/EAAI’24. AAAI Press, 2024. ISBN 978-1-57735-887-9. doi:
 10.1609/aaai.v38i17.29936. URL https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v38i17.29936.




                                                    21
A     Extended Method Details
Hyperparameter defaults. Table 8 lists all OSU-Mem hyperparameters, their default values, and the
rationale for each choice. All values are fixed across the three benchmarks (synthetic, τ -bench, ToolBench);
none was tuned per-benchmark, and in particular none was tuned on the τ -bench T+E+ cell (see Section 3.7).


      Table 8: OSU-Mem hyperparameter defaults. All values are fixed across the three benchmarks.
        Name               Default                             Rationale
        ∆gap               8                                   Base temporal-gap splitting threshold
                                                               (step-index window). The three view-specific
                                                               thresholds below are derived from this value.
        ∆ent               max(60, 8∆gap ) = 64                Entities persist across long segments (account
                                                               numbers, destinations), so we do not want to
                                                               split entity OSUs at short temporal gaps.
        ∆tool              max(12, 2∆gap ) = 16                Tool-signature recurrences are more localized,
                                                               and a long gap between two uses of the same
                                                               tool is usually a semantic boundary.
        ∆sg                max(8, ∆gap ) = 8                   Subgoals are the shortest semantic unit and
                                                               split most aggressively.
        Smax               20                                  Upper bound on OSU size, preventing
                                                               degenerate all-steps OSUs on long trajectories.
        fmin               2                                   Minimum OSU size. OSUs with a single
                                                               member are pruned (they have no retrieval
                                                               advantage over Flat Vector).
        Mmax               5                                   Cap on OSU memberships per step. 5 = (1
                                                               entity + 1 tool + 1 subgoal + 1 similarity + 1
                                                               slack). Ablation shows saturation at Mmax =5.
        Kcoarse            min(|{uk }|,                        Adaptive: scan roughly 10% of the OSU pool at
                           max(8, |{uk }|/10, B/30))           the coarse stage, with a floor of 8 and a
                                                               budget-proportional term B/30 that ensures
                                                               enough OSUs are scored when the pool is small
                                                               but the budget is large.
        β (coverage        .12                                 ToolBench-specific, chosen as the midpoint of
        bonus)                                                 the {.04, . . . , .20} sweep and reported as the
                                                               primary β in tables. Full β sweep in Table 6.
        λnov (novelty      .3                                  Scales the blended novelty contribution in the
        scale)                                                 cost-normalized OSU scoring formula. Part of
                                                               the default method, active only when B ≥ Bnov .
                                                               Low-sensitivity parameter.
        Bnov (novelty      192                                 Budget threshold below which novelty scoring is
        budget gate)                                           disabled. At small budgets the candidate pool
                                                               is too small for novelty to provide useful signal.
        α (novelty blend   .4                                  Interpolates embedding novelty and structural
        weight)                                                (entity or tool) novelty within the blended
                                                               novelty term. Part of the default method
                                                               (budget-gated). Low-sensitivity parameter
                                                               (ablation shows ±.2 moves Hit@2 by <.01).
        Rebuild period     full-batch                          OSU pool is rebuilt on every episode start.
        R                                                      Online incremental rebuild is a future-work
                                                               item.
        View priority      entity > tool > similarity >        When Mmax is exceeded, memberships in
                           subgoal                             lower-priority views are pruned. Entity is
                                                               prioritized because entity annotations are the
                                                               most semantically stable cross-step identifiers.
                                                               τ -bench’s cell analysis subsequently confirms
                                                               the entity-first choice.




                                                          22
Novelty term (default, budget-gated). The default OSU-Mem retrieval includes a budget-gated novelty-
aware OSU scoring that penalises redundancy against already-selected steps. For each candidate step i in
an expanding OSU, novelty is scored against the selected set S as

                  EmbNov(i; S) = 1 − max cos(hi , hj ),
                                         j∈S
                                                                                    
               StructNov(i; S) = min 1, .6|Ent(i) \ Ent(S)| + .4⊮[Tool(i) ∈
                                                                          / Tool(S)] ,
                       Nov(i; S) = (1 − α)EmbNov + αStructNov,

with α = .4. In the default method, the per-candidate novelty scores are averaged across an OSU’s candidates
and combined with relevance at the OSU level via the cost-normalized scoring formula (rk + λnov · νk )/(ĉk + ϵ)
with λnov = .3. The novelty term is budget-gated: it activates only when B ≥ Bnov = 192. Its measured
effect is small and statistically insignificant on every benchmark we tested (synthetic pRecall =.307,
pHit@2 =.876, τ -bench augmented similarly, see Appendix B.2 and Appendix D). The dominant retrieval
benefit derives from the overlap and multi-view construction rather than from the novelty term. We retain
the ablation variant “OSU-Mem (no novelty)” in our tables so that readers can verify this null finding.

Deterministic packing and complexity. Selected steps are packed in descending step–query similarity
order before OSU summaries (summary-first packing is a robustness check, see Appendix B.2). OSU rebuild
period R trades update fidelity against overhead. Online retrieval is dominated by a linear scan over OSU
centroids (O(|OSUs|)) plus bounded candidate scoring, and an approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) index
over centroids would make the coarse stage sublinear.

Production deployment considerations. The current benchmarks use synthetic or pipeline-provided
entity and subgoal annotations. A production deployment would replace them with NER (or pattern match-
ing for URLs and filenames), tool-signature normalization, and an online intent-shift detector for subgoal
boundaries.


B     Synthetic Benchmark: Extended Details
B.1     Baselines
No LT Memory (empty context), Budget-Truncated Replay (most recent B tokens of steps), Sliding
Window (B-sized rolling recent window), Periodic Summary (recent window plus periodic LLM-style sum-
mary of older chunks), Flat Vector (top-cosine steps), Flat + MMR (λ=.7 diversity-penalized top-cosine),
Coverage-Aware (step-level plus β bonus for covering new subgoals), Disjoint Hierarchy (disjoint sub-
goal partitions with top-cosine within selected partitions), and Tree Abstraction (recursive summarization
à la RAPTOR [Sarthi et al., 2024]). All baselines use the same token-cost estimation and packing policy.

B.2     Full Main Results Table (All 4 Budgets)
Table 9 gives the full 4-budget main-results table whose B=128 and B=256 columns are reproduced in the
main text Table 2.

B.3     Efficiency and Footprint (64-d Regime)
At B=256, OSU-Mem runs at 8.3 ms amortized per query (= retrieve plus amortized build cost) with
209 KB total storage including the OSU index. Tree Abstraction runs at 57.4 ms with 363 KB, so OSU-Mem
is Pareto-dominant over Tree Abstraction on this benchmark. Flat Vector is faster (.9 ms) but without
structured selection. These numbers are specific to the synthetic benchmark’s 64-d basis-vector embeddings.
Under 384-d SBERT the per-operation cost and per-step storage increase by 6× and the ordering shifts
(Appendix E).




                                                      23
Table 9: Full synthetic benchmark results at all four budgets (197 episodes, 907 queries). Best in each
column bold. GF = ground-truth filtering, i.e., OSU-Mem with oracle-guided OSU selection.
    Method                             B=64                 B=128                   B=256                   B=512

                               Hit@2       Recall      Hit@2       Recall       Hit@2      Recall        Hit@2   Recall

    No LT Memory                .000          .000      .000        .000         .000        .000        .000     .000
    Budget-Trunc Replay         .000          .004      .000        .004         .000        .149        .008     .321
    Sliding Window              .000          .000      .000        .000         .000        .136        .005     .314
    Periodic Summary            .000          .003      .000        .041         .013        .093        .073     .221
    Flat Vector                 .005          .051      .016        .088         .045        .156        .147     .284
    Flat + MMR                  .005          .045      .022        .085         .052        .158        .152     .288
    Coverage-Aware              .006          .044      .014        .086         .049        .157        .147     .289
    Disjoint Hierarchy          .004          .047      .014        .084         .044        .150        .145     .282
    Tree Abstraction            .002          .055      .012        .093         .044        .157        .123     .275

    OSU-Mem                     .010       .076        .027        .130          .084        .221        .222    .364
    OSU-Mem + GF                .010       .077        .029        .130          .088        .222        .225    .367
    OSU-Mem (disjoint)          .003       .047        .008        .075          .034        .138        .134    .277
    OSU-Mem (sim only)          .002       .037        .008        .065          .014        .110        .083    .214
    OSU-Mem (no novelty)        .010       .076        .027        .130          .083        .217        .209    .361




B.4     Paired Significance Tests (Synthetic, B=256)
Paired sign-flip permutation tests (nperm =10,000, n=197 episodes) confirm OSU-Mem’s gains over all re-
trieval baselines:

Table 10: Synthetic benchmark, paired sign-flip permutation tests at B=256 (nperm =10,000, n=197 episodes):
OSU-Mem vs. each baseline.
                    Metric   Comparison                                     ∆     p (2-sided)       n
                    Recall   OSU-Mem vs. Flat Vector                    +.0649      < .001      197
                    Hit@2    OSU-Mem vs. Flat Vector                    +.0389      < .001      197
                    Recall   OSU-Mem vs. Flat + MMR                     +.0635      < .001      197
                    Hit@2    OSU-Mem vs. Flat + MMR                     +.0324       .001†      197
                    Recall   OSU-Mem vs. Tree Abstraction               +.0645      < .001      197
                    Hit@2    OSU-Mem vs. Tree Abstraction               +.0403      < .001      197
                    Recall   OSU-Mem vs. Coverage-Aware                 +.0645      < .001      197
                    Hit@2    OSU-Mem vs. Coverage-Aware                 +.0347      < .001      197
                    Recall   OSU-Mem vs. Disjoint Hierarchy             +.0712      < .001      197
                    Hit@2    OSU-Mem vs. Disjoint Hierarchy             +.0397      < .001      197
                    Recall   OSU-Mem vs. OSU-Mem (disjoint)             +.0826      < .001      197
                    Hit@2    OSU-Mem vs. OSU-Mem (disjoint)             +.0502      < .001      197
                    Recall   OSU-Mem vs. OSU-Mem (no novelty)           +.0040       .307       197
                    Hit@2    OSU-Mem vs. OSU-Mem (no novelty)           +.0008       .876       197
                    † Exact value .0011; rounded to three decimal places for consistency. All baseline

                      comparisons satisfy p ≤ .002.




C      τ -bench: Construction Pipeline and Deployment Pitfall
The τ -bench evaluation pipeline consists of three stages labeled B through D (Stage A, corresponding to raw
data download, is omitted as it involves no methodological choices).

Stage B: Build. Raw τ -bench historical trajectories are loaded from disk, ground-truth actions are
matched to step indices via greedy name plus keyword-argument equality, and each trajectory is converted
to a list of step records encoded with all-MiniLM-L6-v2 (384-d, ℓ2 -normalized). Entity annotations come
from tool-call argument strings (string values of length 2 to 80 and numeric values treated as entities), tool
signatures are tool function names, and subgoal ids increment at each user turn. Episodes with < 2 matched
ground-truth actions or < 8 retained steps are dropped.


                                                          24
Stage C: Concatenation. Raw episodes are shuffled with seed 42 and packed into groups whose total
trajectory length lies in [150, 300]. Each group has one focal source, and other sources contribute steps as
distractor content. Step indices and subgoal ids are re-offset to a single coordinate system. The focal query
time is the final concatenated step index, so every focal evidence step is temporally distant. Focal query
embeddings are replaced with an ℓ2 -normalized noisy mean (σ=.25) of focal evidence embeddings to enforce
query-evidence alignment.

Cross-source metadata contamination pitfall. Without source-level namespace prefixing, Stage C
concatenation can induce a cross-source metadata contamination artifact. Generic strings, such as entity
"user" and tool name "search", recur across multiple unrelated source episodes within the same concate-
nated trajectory. Because the entity-view and tool-view OSU constructors group steps by string equality,
these repeated metadata values can merge steps from unrelated tasks into a single OSU that spans task
boundaries. In overlap mode, the resulting contamination can propagate across multiple polluted OSUs,
causing greedy expansion to spend budget on cross-task distractor steps. In disjoint mode, each step is
assigned to a single OSU, which confines the damage and can produce an artificial advantage for disjoint
membership. To prevent this artifact, Stage C applies source-level namespace prefixing during concatenation:
every entity string and tool signature is prefixed with a tag identifying its source episode’s position in the
group (for example, "user" in the third source becomes "src3:user"). This guarantees that entity-view and
tool-view OSUs do not bridge unrelated source episodes. We recommend namespace prefixing as a standard
precondition for multi-view overlapping memory in any deployment that combines trajectories from multiple
sources.

Resulting cache. Stage C produces the unaugmented cache: 125 concatenated episodes, trajectory length
256 to 311 (median 294), and 328 evaluation queries (mean 2.6 per episode). Mean evidence-to-query distance
is 123 steps, with 73% of evidence positions more than 50 steps from the query time.

Evidence-structure marginals. For each of the 328 queries we compute the pairwise sharing rate of
ground-truth evidence steps along three views: entity (any shared entity string), tool (identical tool sig-
nature), and subgoal (identical subgoal id). Entity sharing has mean 15.0% and median 0, with 69.5% of
queries having zero entity sharing across all pairs. Tool sharing has mean 13.9% and median 0, with 53.7% of
queries having zero tool sharing. Only subgoal sharing is substantive (mean 55.7%, median 46.7%), because
focal evidence usually lies within a single user-turn segment. Only 14.3% of queries (47/328) have non-zero
sharing across all three views simultaneously, which the synthetic benchmark instantiates for 39.3% of queries
(entity and subgoal sharing hold for 100% by construction, tool-signature sharing for 39.3%).


D     τ -bench: Multi-Burst-Augmented Cache
D.1     Stage D: Multi-Burst Augmentation
Real τ -bench focal evidence is dominated by the T−E− cell of the cross-tab. Stage D constructs a controlled
mechanism probe. For each focal evidence step we generate 3 scattered copies within the focal segment
(inter-burst gap ≥ 18 steps) whose embeddings are the anchor embedding plus Gaussian noise (σ=.10, then
ℓ2 -renormalized) and which inherit the anchor’s entity, tool, and subgoal annotations. Each copy is added as
additional evidence for the same query. We verify directly that this lifts 100% of queries into T+E+ (mean
entity sharing rises from 15.0% to 32.2%, mean tool sharing from 13.9% to 32.3%, and 0% of queries have
zero sharing in any view). Stage D is not a method-friendly augmentation. Its predicted effect on retrieval
is derived from the cross-tab on the unaugmented cache (main text Section 6.2), which is performed before
any Stage D data enters evaluation. The augmented cache is used to verify that prediction at scale and to
perform multi-budget significance tests that would be underpowered on the n=56 T+E+ sub-cell alone.

D.2     Main Results on the Augmented Cache
Table 11 reports the full method table on the multi-burst-augmented cache (125 episodes, 328 queries).


                                                     25
Table 11: τ -bench multi-burst-augmented cache results at all four budgets (query-level averaging; episode-
level values in Figure 3). OSU-Mem achieves the highest Hit@2 at every budget. Quantitatively consistent
with the T+E+ row of the unaugmented-cache cross-tab (main-text Table 4), as a prediction of the cell
analysis rather than an independent claim.
  Method                              B=64                 B=128                 B=256                 B=512

                              Hit@2      Recall        Hit@2     Recall      Hit@2     Recall      Hit@2     Recall

  Budget-Trunc Replay          .003          .035      .005       .049       .081       .091       .163       .178
  Sliding Window               .000          .026      .000       .044       .079       .090       .161       .177
  Periodic Summary             .003          .034      .026       .053       .188       .127       .347       .219
  Flat Vector                  .051          .076      .141       .122       .328       .203       .574       .318
  Flat + MMR                   .037          .079      .172       .134       .347       .201       .646       .335
  Coverage-Aware               .032          .076      .171       .136       .333       .201       .673       .366
  Disjoint Hierarchy           .099          .080      .181       .123       .281       .180       .465       .271
  Tree Abstraction             .081          .086      .130       .123       .193       .133       .316       .203

  OSU-Mem                      .125          .085      .250      .145        .435       .241       .676       .384
  OSU-Mem + GF                 .125          .085      .250      .145        .435       .241       .680       .386
  OSU-Mem (disjoint)           .109          .061      .150      .093        .387       .209       .520       .288
  OSU-Mem (sim only)           .063          .045      .145      .086        .285       .157       .466       .243
  OSU-Mem (no novelty)         .125          .085      .250      .145        .419       .233       .680       .386




D.3     Multi-Budget Paired Permutation Tests
Table 12 reports paired sign-flip permutation tests (nperm =10,000, n=125 episodes) for Hit@2 at all four
budgets on the augmented cache.


          Table 12: Hit@2 effect sizes with p-values on the τ -bench multi-burst-augmented cache.
  Comparison                            B=64                   B=128                 B=256                B=512
  OSU-Mem vs. Flat Vector          +.071 (p=.004∗∗ )     +.104 (p=.002∗∗ )    +.141 (p=.001∗∗∗ )   +.107 (p<.001∗∗∗ )
  OSU-Mem vs. Flat + MMR           +.064 (p=.010∗∗ )     +.087 (p=.014∗ )     +.135 (p<.001∗∗∗ )    +.063 (p=.085)
  OSU-Mem vs. Coverage-Aware       +.068 (p=.009∗∗ )     +.079 (p=.016∗ )     +.122 (p=.001∗∗ )    +.092 (p=.004∗∗ )
  OSU-Mem vs. Disjoint Hierarchy   +.062 (p=.030∗ )     +.106 (p=.002∗∗ )     +.201 (p<.001∗∗∗ )   +.276 (p<.001∗∗∗ )
  OSU-Mem vs. Tree Abstraction      +.022 (p=.460)      +.097 (p=.009∗∗ )     +.236 (p<.001∗∗∗ )   +.368 (p<.001∗∗∗ )
  OSU-Mem vs. (disjoint)            +.018 (p=.351)      +.088 (p<.001∗∗∗ )     +.087 (p=.012∗ )    +.122 (p=.002∗∗ )


    Three patterns deserve emphasis. (i) Effect sizes against hierarchical baselines (Disjoint Hierarchy, Tree
Abstraction) grow monotonically with budget, reaching +.28 and +.37 Hit@2 pp at B=512. (ii) Effect sizes
against flat baselines (Flat + MMR, Flat Vector) peak at B=256 and soften at B=512, because flat retrieval
obtains enough slots at large budgets to accidentally cover multiple evidence bursts. (iii) Overlap’s Hit@2
benefit (OSU-Mem vs. OSU-Mem-disjoint) requires B ≥ 128 to activate, even though the Recall benefit
is present from B=64. At B=64 only ≈4 steps fit in the budget, which is insufficient headroom for the
multi-handle mechanism to gather ≥ 2 distinct evidence bursts from different OSUs, though it still improves
expected Recall via OSU ordering.

D.4     A Novel Finding at B=64: Recall-Hit@2 Divergence
One pattern visible in the augmented-cache multi-budget table does not appear on synthetic. At B=64,
OSU-Mem’s Recall is statistically indistinguishable from every flat baseline (p ∈ {.874, .330, .431} against
Flat Vector, Flat + MMR, Coverage-Aware), yet its Hit@2 is 2.0 to 2.4× higher (.125 vs. .051, .037, .032,
all p < .01). At B=64 budget suffices for ≈4 retrieved steps. Flat retrieval packs the 4 cosine-top steps,
which under the σ=.10 burst augmentation cluster inside a single evidence burst. High intra-burst cosine
similarity means all 4 slots become near-duplicates. OSU-Mem’s OSU boundaries force greedy expansion to
select across OSUs, recovering distinct evidence pieces at the cost of some within-burst redundancy, so Recall
matches flat while Hit@2 doubles. This is the clearest manifestation of the multi-evidence-pairing mechanism
that motivated Hit@2 as a primary metric. The effect persists (with smaller magnitude, .109) under disjoint



                                                         26
OSU membership, which suggests that OSU-based structured selection itself, rather than overlap specifically,
is the mechanism responsible. Multi-view overlap contributes the additional +.016 margin.


E     τ -bench: Efficiency under SBERT Encoding
The synthetic benchmark’s efficiency claim, that OSU-Mem Pareto-dominates Tree Abstraction on latency
and storage, does not transfer unchanged to 384-d SBERT. The 6× dimensionality increase changes per-
operation cosine cost and per-step embedding storage proportionally, which is enough to reverse the ordering
between methods.

          Table 13: τ -bench augmented-cache latency and storage at B=256 under 384-d SBERT.
              Method               Retrieve (ms)   Amortized (ms)   Storage (KB)   Index+Meta (KB)
              Flat Vector               .45             .45             926               0
              Flat + MMR                .44              .44            926               0
              Coverage-Aware            .48              .48            926               0
              Disjoint Hierarchy        .48             1.81           1274              348
              Tree Abstraction          .46             6.28           1151              225
              OSU-Mem                  2.64             4.84           1497              571
              OSU-Mem (disjoint)        .60             2.87           1158              232


    To summarize precisely: on 64-d synthetic embeddings, OSU-Mem Pareto-dominates Tree Abstraction
on quality, latency, and storage, while on 384-d SBERT, OSU-Mem has the highest retrieve-only latency
(≈2.6 ms vs. ≤.5 ms for flat methods) and the largest storage (1497 KB), though its amortized cost (4.84 ms)
is lower than Tree Abstraction’s (6.28 ms) owing to Tree Abstraction’s expensive recursive build. At ≈2.6 ms
retrieve-only latency, the absolute overhead is small relative to typical LLM-call latency (hundreds to thou-
sands of ms for backbone generation per action), but the acceptable latency budget is agent- and deployment-
dependent and should be validated in the target action loop; the relative cost ordering is additionally encoder-
dimension-dependent. For encoders substantially wider than 384-d, an ANN index over OSU centroids
becomes important.


F     LLM-Mediated Evidence Selection: Extended Discussion
This section provides extended discussion of the LLM-mediated evidence selection experiment in main-text
Section 6.6, including the corrected statistical analysis, the near-circularity caveat, the soft-vs.-hard mecha-
nism interpretation, and the rationale for not running multi-step rollouts.

Cell distribution differs from the cross-tab. Main-text Section 6.2 reports n=328 queries with cell
distribution 17.1/29.3/13.4/40.2% T+E+/T+E-/T-E+/T-E-, while Section 6.6 reports n=414 with distri-
bution 25.8/31.6/10.6/31.9%. The difference is the inclusion criterion. The cross-tab analysis was performed
on the focal-source filtered query subset (each query has a specific focal source whose actions form the ground
truth), while the LLM-mediated experiment uses a broader inclusion rule (any query with ≥ 2 evidence steps
and time index ≥ 2, irrespective of focal-source filtering). We verified directly that no cell contains queries
with fewer than 2 evidence steps, and the T−E− cell, in particular, is structurally pure (132/132 queries have
≥ 2 evidence steps), so its statistical null in the corrected analysis is not a fallback-classification artifact.

Statistical analysis: per-query averaging instead of per-seed pooling. For the LLM-mediated
experiment, significance is evaluated at the query level rather than by treating seed-level repetitions as
independent observations. At temperature 0, with deterministic retrieval and frozen Python random sources
that do not propagate to the OpenAI API, the three seeds are highly correlated near-duplicate observations.
We verify this directly: per-query within-seed standard deviation is 13% to 17% of per-query across-query
standard deviation for OSU-Mem and Flat Vector, confirming that seeds add little independent variance.
Treating the three per-seed paired differences for each query as independent would therefore overstate the


                                                       27
effective sample size. We instead average the per-query soft and hard recalls across seeds first, then run
a paired sign-flip permutation test on the resulting n=107/131/44/132 paired differences, one per query.
Under this query-level test, the headline T+E+ hard-recall result remains significant (+.064 pp, p=.025,
95% CI [+.008, +.121]), while the T+E− soft-recall result is borderline (p=.062) and is not treated as a
separate finding.

Near-circularity from a shared SBERT encoder. A structural caveat that limits how much indepen-
dent evidence this experiment provides is that the same all-MiniLM-L6-v2 encoder is used in three places. (i)
The retrieval index encodes the trajectory steps. (ii) The ground-truth evidence representation is the corre-
sponding pre-computed step embeddings. (iii) The LLM’s listed events are re-encoded with the same SBERT
to compute soft and hard recall against the ground-truth representation. Combined with a temperature-0
prompt that asks for a “concrete factual summary of something that happened or was stated in the history,”
the LLM is structurally pushed toward extractive paraphrase of the retrieved content, and the SBERT-vs.-
SBERT scoring is most sensitive to whether the ground-truth content was in the retrieved context, which
closely corresponds to the quantity that retrieval recall measures. The hard-recall signal therefore shares its
dominant variance source with the Section 6.2 retrieval analysis. This experiment should be read as a check
that the cross-tab’s T+E+ advantage is preserved when an LLM filtering stage is inserted between retrieval
and scoring, rather than as an independent corroboration of the cross-tab on a different signal source.

Soft vs. hard split as a mechanism interpretation. On T+E+, the soft recall gap is null (∆=+.005,
p=.64) while the hard recall gap is the only individually-significant finding (∆=+.064, p=.025). One reading
is that soft recall captures “any retrieved evidence whose semantic neighborhood the LLM is willing to
summarize.” Both retrievers reach comparable mean max-similarity, because the LLM at temperature 0
extracts content from whatever appears in its context. Hard recall, with its .5 threshold, captures ground-
truth evidence steps that the LLM identifies precisely enough to clear that threshold, and overlap construction
adds value by giving the LLM the same evidence under multiple semantic views (entity, tool) so that one of
the LLM’s three listings can align closely with one of them.

The hard-recall threshold of .5. The threshold is chosen as a midpoint between SBERT cosine similar-
ities of unrelated text pairs (≈ .1 to .2) and the value at which two paraphrases of the same content reliably
exceed (≈ .7). It corresponds to the condition that the LLM’s listed event is closer in semantic content to a
specific ground-truth evidence step than to most other content in the trajectory. The single-threshold choice
is a researcher degree of freedom, and we address it with three observations. (a) The T+E+ effect we report
is specifically a hard-recall effect. The two metrics have a per-query Pearson correlation of .63 on T+E+
and agree in sign on 75% of per-query OSU−Flat differences. (b) The .5 threshold is pre-registered in the
evaluation script before any analysis. (c) The full per-query {soft recall, hard recall at .5} pairs across three
seeds are stored in a released JSON artifact, allowing alternative thresholds to be evaluated by re-running
the scoring step with a one-line modification.

Why we did not run multi-step rollouts. A natural extension is full multi-step agent task success on
an interactive environment. We did not run that experiment, and the LLM-mediated selection experiment
we did run is not a substitute for it. The publicly-released τ -bench cache provides historical trajectories with
the focal-source query placed at the end of the concatenated trajectory. There is no future action to predict
and no environment to step. A genuine end-to-end evaluation would require: (i) the τ -bench environment
harness, (ii) an agent loop where the LLM produces tool calls, (iii) queries placed mid-trajectory, and (iv)
a sufficiently large sample. Building this is a substantive follow-up effort. We identify full closed-loop
evaluation as future work (Section 7, Limitation (iv)); the present experiment is an evidence-selection check,
not a substitute for it.




                                                       28
G      ToolBench: Construction and Sensitivity Analyses
G.1     Benchmark Construction Details
Loading and parsing. Raw ToolBench trajectories are loaded from the G1 (single-tool) and G2 (multi-
tool) answer directories. Each trajectory is parsed for its query, the longest assistant message chain, and the
sequence of assistant function calls. For each call we extract the function name (becomes the step “action”),
the arguments dict, and the preceding assistant content (becomes part of the step “content”). Entities are
the string values of length 2 to 80 and numeric values in the argument dict (nested one level deep). The tool
signature is name.split(’_for_’)[-1] if ’_for_’ is present, else name.split(’_’)[0]. Subgoal id is the
per-call index within the trajectory. Step token cost is max(5, min(40, |content|/4)).

Planted-retrieval episode construction. Let nev denote the evidence size and ρconf the confounder
ratio. For each of 200 episodes: (1) sample a target trajectory from all loaded trajectories with ≥ nev
steps, (2) designate nev =3 steps as evidence, (3) compute the target’s query-embedding nearest neighbors in
the trajectory-level query embedding space (top-30), (4) draw confounder steps from the nearest neighbors’
trajectories until ρconf =.75 of the background is filled, and unrelated steps from random non-neighbor tra-
jectories until the background reaches ≈500 steps, (5) shuffle the background and insert the 3 evidence steps
at nev evenly-spaced positions, and (6) set the query time to the final step index. All 200 episodes per seed
use the same random generator seeded by the seed value, and results are averaged over seeds 42, 123, 456.

G.2     Evidence-Size Sensitivity
We test evidence sizes {2, 3, 4} across 3 seeds × 200 episodes at β=.12. Evidence size 3 is the primary
configuration for the structural reason stated in the main text: it is the smallest nontrivial planted-evidence
cluster in which all three pairwise relations among evidence steps can exhibit tool/entity sharing. The
sensitivity sweep shows that the overlap advantage is directionally preserved across evidence sizes {2, 3, 4};
evidence size 3 also happens to be the most stable setting by per-seed directional consistency and B=400
significance.


    Table 14: Evidence-size sensitivity of the ToolBench overlap-vs.-disjoint Recall gap (β=.12, 3 seeds).
                                                        nev =2       nev =3        nev =4
                    Sig. tests (p < .05), 12 cells       4/12         9/12          9/12
                    All 12 directionally positive     No (10/12)   Yes (12/12)   No (11/12)
                    B=400 all seeds p < .01               No           Yes           No
                    Avg recall gap at B=400 (pp)        +3.2           +3.7        +3.2



G.3     Hit@2 Version of the β Sweep
Table 15 is the Hit@2 counterpart of main-text Table 6. Both show the same monotonic dose-response in β,
with Hit@2 displaying larger absolute effects.


          Table 15: ToolBench overlap−disjoint Hit@2 gap (pp) across β and B, 3-seed averaged.
                                  β     B=200        B=400   B=800    B=1600
                                  .04    +1.2         +.7    +1.0      +.5
                                  .08    +2.7        +2.7    +2.0      +2.2
                                  .12    +6.2        +4.8    +3.7      +3.8
                                  .16    +8.3        +8.0    +6.7      +6.8
                                  .20    +9.7        +10.8   +10.8     +9.3




                                                        29
G.4     Per-Seed Breakdown at β=.12
Table 16 gives the per-seed Recall-gap breakdown at β=.12 that is Fisher-combined in the main text. Per-
seed directional consistency across all 5β × 4B = 20 cells is 18/20 (seed 42), 19/20 (seed 123), and 20/20
(seed 456), with pooled 57/60 = 95%.


Table 16: Per-seed overlap−disjoint Recall gap (pp) at β=.12, single-seed permutation tests.              Seeds
{42, 123, 456}, 200 episodes each. Stars: ∗ p<.05, ∗∗ p<.01, ∗∗∗ p<.001.
                               Seed       B=200      B=400       B=800    B=1600
                                                ∗           ∗∗
                               42          +2.2     +2.8          +1.3    +2.5∗∗
                               123         +2.3∗    +3.5∗∗∗      +2.3∗∗    +1.2
                               456        +3.7∗∗∗   +4.7∗∗∗      +2.7∗     +1.0
                               Mean        +2.7      +3.7        +2.1      +1.6
                               Fisher p    < .001    < .001      < .01     < .05



G.5     Negative Result: Cohesion-Style α Variant
A secondary retrieval variant, a cohesion-style greedy procedure that adds −α · maxj∈S cos(hi , hj ) to the
selection score, does not exhibit an overlap advantage on ToolBench. Sweeping α ∈ {0, .005, .01, .02, .04},
the overlap-vs.-disjoint Hit@2 gap is approximately zero at every α and budget. This negative result is
informative: the T+E+ mechanism depends on the retrieval algorithm actively rewarding OSU coverage
rather than on merely discouraging within-pool redundancy.


H     Combined Summary of Trajectory-Derived Findings
The two-dataset trajectory-derived validation supports seven conclusions. (1) A deployment pitfall is iden-
tified and fixed on τ -bench (cross-source metadata contamination, addressed via namespace prefixing). (2)
Cell structure is the primary determinant of whether OSU-Mem helps on both datasets. The τ -bench cross-
tab identifies T+E+ as the regime of significant win and T−E− as the regime of significant loss, and the
ToolBench structural T+E+ construction provides a controlled corroboration of the T+E+ mechanism. (3)
Favorable-cell prevalence is cheaply estimable from metadata proxies, and ToolBench’s code-level structural
verification of T+E+ is the strongest cell-assignment validation we can provide. (4) The τ -bench multi-burst
augmentation is a predicted regime-lift experiment (rather than an augmentation selected post-hoc for favor-
able outcomes), and the ToolBench structurally-T+E+ result corroborates the underlying prediction without
any burst injection. (5) The mechanism is the construction principle rather than the retrieval algorithm.
The same effect appears under two different retrieval algorithms (coarse-to-fine on τ -bench, coverage-guided
greedy on ToolBench). (6) Multi-budget permutation tests expose budget-dependent nuances (overlap’s
Hit@2 benefit requires B ≥ 128, and effect sizes against hierarchical baselines grow monotonically while
effect sizes against flat baselines peak at B=256). (7) A separable structured-selection mechanism at the
tightest budget (τ -bench B=64): OSU-Mem’s Recall is statistically indistinguishable from flat baselines while
its Hit@2 is 2 to 2.4× higher, driven by OSU-based structured selection rather than by overlap specifically.
     Four caveats. (i) OSU-Mem’s aggregate near-tie with strong baselines on the unaugmented τ -bench cache
is genuine and reflects cell mixture. The predicted cell distribution from metadata (Section 7 predictive
rule) indicates which regime applies and hence whether OSU-Mem or a flat baseline is expected to retrieve
better. (ii) ToolBench’s aggregate OSU-vs.-Flat comparison is effectively a tie because ToolBench’s planted-
retrieval distribution gives Flat Vector nearly saturated recall. The primary signal is the overlap-vs.-disjoint
contrast. (iii) Under SBERT 384-d, OSU-Mem retains the highest retrieve-only latency and the largest
storage footprint, though its amortized cost remains below Tree Abstraction’s; efficiency claims from the
64-d synthetic benchmark do not transfer unchanged. (iv) The n=56 T+E+ cell of τ -bench has per-budget
p ∈ {.013, .003, .022, .024}. Stability across budgets is stronger evidence than any individual cell p-value, and
ToolBench’s orders-of-magnitude larger sample provides higher-powered corroboration of the same effect.


                                                       30
I    Predictive Rule: Derivation from the τ -bench Cross-Tab
We derive the main-text predictive-rule thresholds directly from the τ -bench cross-tab data. The derivation
is standalone, uses only the per-cell effect sizes and the empirical cell distribution, and produces a closed-form
linear predictor for the aggregate gap as a function of the query population’s expected cell distribution.

                (B)
Setup. Let ∆c denote the observed OSU-Mem−Flat Vector gap on cell c ∈ {T+E+, T+E-, T-E+, T-E-}
at budget B, measured on τ -bench’s unaugmented cache. Let fc denote the fraction of queries in cell c in a
target deployment. The aggregate gap over that deployment, assuming the per-cell effects transfer, is
                                             X              X
                                ∆(B)
                                  agg (f ) =    fc ∆(B)
                                                    c ,        fc = 1.                                  (7)
                                                  c                 c

At B=256, the τ -bench cross-tab gives (cf. main-text Table 4): ∆T+E+ =+.179, ∆T+E- =−.031, ∆T-E+ =+.159,
∆T-E- =−.129 (Hit@2), and +.080, −.047, +.000, −.157 (Recall). With τ -bench’s own cell distribution
                                                 (256)
f = (.171, .293, .134, .402), this reconstructs ∆agg = −.009 Hit@2 and −.063 Recall, matching the observed
aggregate near-tie to three decimal places.

One-parameter family. To obtain a predictive rule parameterized by a single observable, we fix the condi-
tional distribution of ¬T+E+ cells at the τ -bench empirical proportions (.353, .162, .485) for (T+E-, T-E+, T-E-)
and vary p = fT+E+ . This gives a one-parameter family

                                                                                                             (8)
                                                                              
                             f (p) = p, .353(1−p), .162(1−p), .485(1−p) ,

and the aggregate gap becomes exactly linear in p:

                                       ∆(256)
                                        agg (p) Hit@2 = +.226 p − .048,                                        (9)
                                       ∆(256)
                                        agg (p) Recall = +.173 p − .093.                                     (10)

The break-even points are p∗ = .211 (21%) for Hit@2 and p∗ = .536 (54%) for Recall. With a ±.02 safety
margin on the aggregate Hit@2 gap around break-even, Hit@2 is likely net-positive (≥ +.02) for p ≥ .299
and likely net-negative (≤ −.02) for p ≤ .123.

Tool-sharing marginal form. Since tool-sharing is easier to estimate from metadata than joint tool-plus-
entity sharing, we re-express the rule in terms of πT+ = fT+E+ + fT+E- . Under the same parameterization,
πT+ (p) = p + .353(1−p), so the Hit@2 break-even p∗ =.211 maps to πT+∗
                                                                          = .490 (49%). The safety bands
become πT+ ≥ .547 (net-positive) and πT+ ≤ .432 (net-negative). Recall break-even is at πT+ ≈ .700 (70%).

Any-binding marginal form (recommended when T−E+ is non-negligible). The tool-sharing
marginal πT+ implicitly treats T−E+ as a non-positive cell, yet the τ -bench cross-tab shows that T−E+ has
a directional positive Hit@2 effect growing from +4.5 pp to +22.7 pp across budgets. If a target deployment
has a non-negligible fraction of entity-only-sharing queries, the tool-marginal form under-counts the favorable
regime. An alternative “any-binding” marginal is πany+ = fT+E+ + fT+E- + fT-E+ = 1 − fT-E- . Under the
same one-parameter parameterization, πany+ (p) = 1 − .485(1−p), so the Hit@2 break-even at B=256 maps
to πany+
    ∗
          ≈ .62 (62%), with safety bands πany+ ≥ .66 (net-positive) and πany+ ≤ .57 (net-negative).

Budget dependence of the break-even. Because the T−E− disadvantage grows monotonically in B
(main-text Table 5), the break-even threshold rises with budget. Table 17 reports the Hit@2 break-even p∗
at each of the four tested budgets.

Oracle ceiling: sizing the mixture effect. The main-text figure of ≈ + 5.2 Hit@2 pp is an in-sample,
oracle-routed upper bound. At B=256, applying the per-cell gaps of Table 4 to the favorable cells gives
(.179×56 + .159×44)/328 ≈ +5.2 Hit@2 pp over pure Flat Vector (and ≈ + 6.2 pp over pure OSU-Mem,
whose aggregate is −1.0 pp), while aggregate Recall rises from −6.3 pp to ≈ + 1.4 pp. Because it uses


                                                       31
 Table 17: Hit@2 break-even p∗ = P(T+E+) as a function of budget, derived from the τ -bench cross-tab.
             Budget                          B=64        B=128      B=256                B=512
             ∆T+E+ (Hit@2 pp)                +16.1       +23.2      +17.9                +16.1
             ∆T-E- (Hit@2 pp)                 +.8        −2.3       −12.9                −36.4
             p∗ = break-even P(T+E+)          0%†         0%†       21.1%                54.3%
              ∗
             πT+ = break-even P(T+)           0%†         0%†       49.0%                70.4%
             †
                 T−E− effect is non-negative at this budget, so any p>0 gives non-negative aggregate.


ground-truth per-query cell labels it is not held out, and it serves only to size the hidden structure—not
to estimate a deployable gain. A deployable counterpart cannot observe per-query cell labels, since the cell
is defined on ground-truth evidence unknown at decision time; it must operate at population granularity
through the metadata marginals πT+ and πany+ above. A learned per-query cell predictor, and a closed-loop
evaluation of either policy, are left to future work.

Caveats. The derivation assumes (a) per-cell effect sizes transfer between τ -bench and the target deploy-
ment, and (b) the conditional distribution of ¬T+E+ cells in the target deployment matches τ -bench. Both
are strong assumptions that a deployment should validate on a held-out slice of its own data. The main-text
predictive rule should therefore be read as a reasonable starting point for budget estimation rather than a
universally applicable decision rule, but it is a starting point with an explicit mathematical derivation rather
than an arbitrarily chosen threshold.


J    Evidence-Structure Marginal Distributions
Beyond the four-cell cross-tab summary in main-text Section 6.2, we report the full marginal distributions of
the three pairwise-sharing scores on both the unaugmented and the multi-burst-augmented τ -bench caches
(Table 18).


Table 18: Evidence-structure marginals, τ -bench (328 queries). The left block reports the unaugmented
cache and the right block reports the multi-burst-augmented cache.
                                                  Unaugmented cache             Augmented cache
                  View                            mean     median    % zero   mean      median   % zero
                  Entity                          .150      .000      69.5%   .322       .200     .0%
                  Tool                            .139      .000      53.7%   .323       .286     .0%
                  Subgoal                         .557      .467      15.5%   .641       .524     .0%
                  Composite                       .282      .333      4.9%    .429       .452     .0%
                  Derived structure:
                  Mean evidence per query                  3.50                           6.36
                  Mean evidence pairs per query            5.27                          18.07
                  T+E+ fraction                      17.1% (56/328)                  100% (328/328)
                  T+E− fraction                       29.3% (96/328)                      0%
                  T−E+ fraction                       13.4% (44/328)                      0%
                  T−E− fraction                      40.2% (132/328)                      0%


    Two observations deserve emphasis. First, subgoal sharing on the unaugmented cache has mean .557.
Focal evidence usually lies within a single user-turn segment. This means every disjoint baseline that segments
by user-turn boundary has a substantive retrieval handle on a majority of queries, even when entity and tool
sharing are zero. OSU-Mem’s multi-view construction provides additional retrieval handles on T+ and E+
queries that a subgoal-only disjoint segmentation lacks. Second, Stage D augmentation roughly doubles the
mean entity and tool sharing (from ≈ .14 to ≈ .32) while more than tripling the mean number of evidence
pairs (5.27 → 18.07).




                                                           32
