                                                    Cost-Effective Agent Harnesses for Abstract
                                                    Reasoning and Generalization on ARC-AGI-1


                                                             Kabir Moghe                                       Peter Chin
                                                     Department of Computer Science                   Department of Computer Science
                                                           Dartmouth College                                Dartmouth College
                                                    kabir.moghe.26@dartmouth.edu                       peter.chin@dartmouth.edu



                                                                                         Abstract

                                                    Recent progress on ARC-AGI-1 from disclosed architectures has come broadly
                                                    from two regimes: heavy test-time compute over frontier models (evolutionary
                                                    search, exhaustive sampling, extended chain-of-thought), or benchmark-specific




arXiv:2607.06764v1 [cs.AI] 7 Jul 2026
                                                    training in which small models are fine-tuned on ARC data, often with task-
                                                    specialized architectures. We study a third regime: an open-weight model in
                                                    non-thinking mode (DeepSeek V3.2) under a strict budget, with no ARC-specific
                                                    fine-tuning. We study what is recoverable through architecture alone, building
                                                    agentic harnesses that decompose pattern-discovery and program-synthesis stages
                                                    explicitly. First, we introduce an Explorer-Definer Pipeline that separates pattern
                                                    discovery from executable transformation synthesis, implemented as a two-stage
                                                    agent pipeline. Next, we present the Reflective Orchestrator, which augments
                                                    the pipeline with autonomous exploration of new transformations when previous
                                                    hypotheses fail on training pairs. On the ARC-AGI-1 public 400-task evaluation
                                                    set, the pipeline reaches 57.50% pass@2 at $0.25 per task, and the orchestrator
                                                    reaches 67.25% pass@2 at $0.62 per task. Together these architectures lift a
                                                    15.50% one-shot baseline by ∼52 points without benchmark-specific training or
                                                    heavy test-time compute. Furthermore, the orchestrator-driven lift tests a falsifiable
                                                    diagnostic the pipeline produces; unbiased pass@k analysis suggests the pipeline
                                                    is generation-bound, not selection-bound (selection via training-pair accuracy
                                                    captures ∼95% of the candidate ceiling) and predicts that significant improvement
                                                    requires broader generation, not better ranking. The orchestrator implements this
                                                    prediction via adaptive re-exploration and confirms it (unbiased pass@1 lift +9.8
                                                    pp, matching selection-mediated pass@2 lift). An additional pipeline ablation
                                                    identifies its think tool as a significant component, with removal reducing pass@2
                                                    by 5.75 pp.


                                        1    Introduction

                                        In the years since its inception, ARC has become approachable, but at a cost. Strong reported
                                        performance from public work has generally come from one of two regimes. The first relies on
                                        heavy test-time compute over frontier large language models (LLMs): evolutionary search over
                                        candidate solutions, exhaustive program enumeration, or extended chain-of-thought reasoning, with
                                        reported costs ranging from a few dollars to several hundred dollars per task [1–4]. The second
                                        relies on benchmark-specific training: small models trained from scratch or fine-tuned directly on
                                        ARC-distribution data, typically combined with test-time architectures employing fine-tuning on
                                        the target task and aggressive data augmentation [5–7]. Both regimes have successfully advanced
                                        leaderboard numbers, but each trades strong performance for substantial compute spent either on
                                        significant inference per task or on benchmark-specific training.

                                        Preprint.
Contextualizing the “no RL” or fine-tuning condition. The scope distinction relevant to this
paper is between benchmark-specific training, whether supervised, test-time-finetuned, or RL-based,
and general-purpose post-training. The above second-regime systems all fine-tune or train from
scratch on ARC training tasks. The model we use — DeepSeek V3.2 in non-thinking mode — has
undergone general post-training on broad task mixtures, including significant reinforcement learning
components (e.g., RLHF, agentic-capability RL, reasoning-style RL), but has not been specialized
to ARC, with the exception of any public data leakage. We hold that general post-training constant
across every condition in this paper, so the architectural deltas we report are not confounded by it.
We argue that the gap between cheap one-shot LLM calls (∼16% on ARC-AGI-1) and “performant”
leaderboard systems (≥50%) is not solely a function of model capability or compute scale. Instead, a
meaningful share of that gap is recoverable through three distinct architectural levers: within-call
deliberation (a structured chain-of-thought channel), across-call decomposition (separating pattern
exploration from transformation synthesis), and adaptive re-exploration (allowing the synthesis stage
to spawn fresh exploration when its current hypothesis fails, rather than refining based on a fixed
prior exploration artifact). We test this hypothesis by comparing four architectures of increasing
structural sophistication on the ARC-AGI-1 public evaluation set, all run on the same model.
Our central finding has two parts. First, the Explorer-Definer Pipeline reaches 57.50% pass@2 at
$0.25 per task — a 42.00-point lift over the one-shot baseline (15.50%) and a 27.50-point lift over a
structured chain-of-thought baseline (30.00%). Second, the pipeline produces a falsifiable diagnostic:
it is generation-bound, not selection-bound, meaning that the observed constraint on accuracy is
the actual diversity of candidate transformations, not the quality of our selection mechanism. This
diagnostic suggests that breaking through the pipeline’s ceiling requires broader candidate generation
rather than better selection. The Reflective Orchestrator is the architectural test of that insight: it
extends the pipeline’s definer with tooling to (a) spawn focused mid-loop exploration when its current
transformation fails or seems particularly incorrect and (b) to gracefully determine its own loop-exit
criteria. The orchestrator architecture reaches 67.25% pass@2 at $0.62 per task, a +9.75-point
lift over the pipeline (paired bootstrap 95 % CI [+6.50, +13.25]), with a near-identical lift on the
unbiased pass@1 estimator that confirms the gain is generation-side rather than selection-mediated.
The total architectural lift from one-shot baseline to orchestrator is 52 percentage points on the same
model, with no benchmark-specific training or costly, unbounded frontier-model inference.

Public-evaluation caveat. We do not report an official ARC Prize leaderboard score. Official
verified results are evaluated on the semi-private ARC-AGI-1 holdout, whereas this study uses the
public 400-task evaluation set, which is the largest evaluation split available for arbitrary local
architecture experiments [7, 8]. This prevents direct leaderboard comparison and introduces the
possibility that public-set results overestimate semi-private generalization. To mitigate this, every
architecture is evaluated through controlled ablations on the same model and provider, against the
same 400 tasks, with the same scoring and cost-accounting code. External system numbers are
reported only as contextual reference points for the cost–accuracy regime, not as matched baselines.

Contributions.

      1. Two new agentic architectures occupying a sub-$1-per-task region of the ARC-AGI-1
         cost–accuracy frontier. The Explorer-Definer Pipeline (57.50% pass@2 at $0.25 per task)
         decomposes ARC into separate pattern-discovery and program-synthesis stages, mediated
         by compressed natural-language artifacts and verified by training-pair execution. The
         Reflective Orchestrator (67.25% pass@2 at $0.62 per task; +9.75 pp paired) extends the
         pipeline’s definer with a tool to spawn focused mid-loop exploration when its transformation
         hypothesis fails. Both architectures sit in a region of the cost–accuracy plane sparsely
         occupied by disclosed architectures.
      2. A diagnostic-then-test methodology that ties the orchestrator’s design to a falsifiable
         prediction. We maintain the same 400-task public evaluation set, model, grid rendering,
         scoring, and cost accounting across conditions. Holding these elements constant, our
         analysis isolates a likely architectural limitation for the pipeline that appears to bound
         accuracy even with more exhaustive configurations: the unbiased pass@k estimator [9]
         applied to the pipeline’s M =5 candidate sets shows that train-score selection captures
         ∼95% of the achievable candidate ceiling. This diagnostic motivates the idea that pipeline
         accuracy is constrained by candidate generation, not candidate selection. We implement the


                                                  2
         orchestrator as a targeted architectural augmentation on the pipeline to test that prediction.
         Indeed, its near-equal lifts on naive pass@2 (+9.75 pp) and unbiased pass@1 (+9.81 pp)
         confirm gain is generation-side rather than selection-mediated.
      3. Empirical characterization of robustness across architectural lifts. An exhaustive Pareto
         sweep of the pipeline across explorer count, temperature, and definer best-of-sampling
         shows that explorer count is the dominant cost–accuracy lever, best-of-sampling seemingly
         saturates, and intermediate temperature often dominates. Ablations show that disabling
         the definer’s think scratchpad costs −5.75 pp pass@2, while disabling train-feedback
         refinement only yields −0.75 pp. Initial cross-model validation on Qwen3-235B (for a
         matched 99-task subset) across the four architectures follows the same lift trajectory, offering
         evidence that the harness, not the specific model, drives the lift. Trace-level analysis on the
         orchestrator shows ∼75% of unique solves utilize adaptive re-exploration, corroborating the
         design’s central hypothesis.
      4. A methodological discipline for compute-efficiency claims. Token-normalized per-task
         cost reporting, explicit pass@k definitions, bootstrap confidence intervals, and paired-
         bootstrap deltas help make architectural lifts auditable.

Code and reproducibility. All code, prompts, harness implementations, and analysis scripts are
available at https://github.com/kabirmoghe/cost-effective-arc-harnesses.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews prior work, organized
around the mechanisms our architectures use (search vs. training regimes on ARC, sampling-based
self-consistency, verbal-feedback agents, and tool-mediated reasoning). Section 3 details the four
architectures, the evaluation protocol, and the cost-accounting conventions. Section 4 presents
controlled architectural deltas, the N × t × M Pareto surface, the pipeline ablations, the generation-
vs-selection analysis, the pipeline-to-orchestrator M-sweep comparison, cross-model validation on
Qwen3-235B, and cost-context comparisons. Sections 5, 6, and 7 discuss implications, limitations,
and proposed extensions. Appendix A showcases a canonical task for which the benefit of the
orchestrator’s adaptive re-exploration component is apparent.


2     Related Work

2.1   ARC-AGI and cost regimes

The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus [10] was introduced as a deliberate counterpoint to bench-
marks where high performance can be achieved through scale and pattern matching. Each ARC
task is structurally a few-shot learning problem: a small number of input–output grid pairs (∼3 on
average across training and evaluation sets) demonstrate a transformation, and the system must apply
it to a held-out test input. The benchmark resists shortcut solutions through three design choices:
transformations differ across tasks (no transfer between training and evaluation), correctness requires
exact cell-level match, and the search space is open-ended (grids up to 30 × 30 with up to ten colors
yield more candidate outputs than any plausible memorization strategy could cover). ARC-AGI-2 [11]
extends the original benchmark with harder tasks while preserving the same evaluation protocol.
High-performing published systems typically spend substantial compute either during training, during
per-task search, or through large test-time candidate generation; we organize them into two regimes.

Frontier-model test-time search. Berman [1, 2] demonstrates that frontier LLMs can solve ARC
tasks via evolutionary search over candidate solutions. The 2024 system evolves Python transform
functions in generations, scoring each on training-set fitness and revising top performers; it reaches
53.6% on ARC-AGI-1 with Sonnet 3.5 at approximately $29 per task. The 2025 system retains
the evolutionary architecture but evolves natural-language instructions rather than Python, reaching
79.6% on ARC-AGI-1 with Grok-4 at $8.42 per task. Greenblatt’s earlier system [4] similarly relies
on programmatic synthesis with extensive sampling, at an estimated cost on the order of $400 per task.
Pang [3] explicitly targets the cost–accuracy frontier within this regime, using a DreamCoder-inspired
library of reusable concepts to reach 77.1% on ARC-AGI-1 at an estimated $2.56 per task — the
closest published prior work in spirit to this paper, with both framing ARC progress as a Pareto
problem rather than being purely accuracy-driven. However, the two sit on opposite sides of a regime


                                                   3
boundary: while Pang optimizes efficiency within frontier-model evolutionary search, this paper
investigates how far one can move by stepping outside that regime.

Training-time specialization on ARC. A second regime achieves competitive accuracy by training
small models specifically for ARC-style tasks, through some combination of supervised training on
ARC-distribution data, test-time fine-tuning on the specific task at hand, and aggressive test-time
augmentation. The MindsAI [7] and ARChitects [6] competition entries follow this pattern. The
Tiny Recursive Model (TRM) [5] reports 45% on ARC-AGI-1 with only 7M parameters, framed as
evidence that small recursive networks can rival frontier LLMs on abstract reasoning. Subsequent
analysis by Roye-Azar et al. [12] complicates this framing: TRM’s reported accuracy depends
substantially on a 1000-sample test-time augmentation pipeline (responsible for ∼10 absolute points),
on task-specific identifier embeddings without which accuracy collapses to zero, and on training-time
regularization rather than deep iterative inference (single-step prediction captures ∼94% of final
accuracy). Their analysis underscores that compute efficiency cannot be reduced to parameter count:
total inference cost, including test-time augmentation, remains a meaningful axis.
The scope distinction relevant to this paper is between benchmark-specific training and general-
purpose post-training. The systems above all fine-tune or train from scratch on ARC training
tasks, effectively ingesting the benchmark’s distribution into their weights. We explicitly avoid any
benchmark-specific training (whether supervised, test-time-finetuned, or RL-based) such that any
model-level specialization on ARC is limited to generalized model post-training; by holding this
across all conditions, we ensure deltas are entirely architectural.

Position of this work. The cost–accuracy region below $1 per task, on an open-weight model in
non-thinking mode, with no ARC-specific training, is largely unoccupied by disclosed architectures
and reported accuracy above ∼30%. This paper investigates that region directly, with configurations
spanning $0.25 to $0.62 per task. Our claim is not that this regime achieves a new state of the art; it is
that a substantial fraction of ARC-AGI-1 performance is accessible through agent harness engineering
alone.

2.2   Sampling-based selection: self-consistency and best-of-N

Self-consistency [13] samples N chain-of-thought trajectories from a single model and selects the
final answer by majority vote, on the premise that diverse reasoning paths concentrate on the correct
symbolic answer more often than on any single incorrect one. Universal Self-Consistency [14]
generalizes this to free-form outputs where a majority vote is undefined, replacing the vote with an
LLM-mediated consistency judgement.
The pipeline’s exploration stage is the closest structural analog: N PatternExplorer agents inde-
pendently analyze the training pairs through iterative note-taking and ultimately emit free-form
natural-language pattern descriptions. The free-form output form puts this closer to Universal
Self-Consistency than to vote-based aggregation, and the mechanism is also LLM-mediated: the
downstream definer reads all N findings together and weighs them, flexibly attending both to majority
patterns and to dissenting signals. Our setup differs from Universal Self-Consistency in two related
respects. First, the aggregation is implicit and embedded in a downstream task rather than executed as
a standalone selection step: the definer is not selecting one “best” explorer finding, it is synthesizing
a program that all of them inform. Second, the crisp selection criterion — exact train-pair execution
accuracy — is applied later, at the synthesis stage, rather than at the explorer-aggregation step where
Universal Self-Consistency would apply its LLM-mediated consistency judgement.
The downstream synthesis stage differs substantially in its best-of-M sampling by relying on a
deterministic train-pair execution verifier and dedup-by-test-prediction (Section 3.4).

2.3   Verbal feedback and self-refinement

Reflexion [15] introduces verbal reinforcement loops in which an agent reflects on failed attempts and
revises its approach across episodes, treating failure traces as a non-parametric memory. Language
Agent Tree Search [16] extends best-of-N sampling with explicit tree structure over candidate
trajectories. Our pipeline draws on this lineage but differs in one important respect: feedback is
consumed within the same task episode, not across episodes, with the “reward” expressed as structured


                                                    4
failure context (input, expected output, predicted output) derived from train-pair execution. ARC’s
training pairs thus serve as a verifiable per-task feedback signal that the model can perform verbal
credit assignment over, without ever updating weights, as with Reflexion. This is also close in spirit
to Self-Refine [17], adapted to a setting where the correctness signal is exact and program-level rather
than a critic LLM’s judgement.
The Reflective Orchestrator (Section 3.5) extends this lineage further. Where Reflexion-style loops
alternate generation and reflection at the level of complete trajectories, and where the pipeline’s
refinement confines revision to the synthesis stage, the orchestrator extends that stage with an explicit
mid-loop re-exploration tool: when the current transformation hypothesis is failing particularly
poorly on train pairs, the orchestrator can branch out of the synthesis frame entirely and spawn fresh
pattern-discovery agents conditioned on a structured failure summary. The distinguishing claim
is that revision must reach back into the upstream stage (exploration) to escape wrong-abstraction
failures because refining within a wrong frame produces the “analysis paralysis” traces our pipeline
data exhibit. In this paper, the branch decision (refine, spawn, or commit) is model-mediated within
its agentic loop rather than driven by an explicit confidence estimator or learned branch policy.

2.4   Tool-mediated reasoning and the think scratchpad

A separate line of work treats explicit, model-controlled scratchpads as architectural components
rather than purely prompt-induced. The think tool [18] is framed as a private deliberation channel
for agents that must analyze tool outputs, follow long tool-call chains, and make sequential decisions
where mistakes are costly — distinct from extended-thinking modes that operate before the response
begins. The pipeline’s PatternExplorer and TransformationDefiner agents both expose a think tool
of this form; we report a controlled removal of the definer’s think tool in Section 4.5 that quantifies
how much the channel contributes to pipeline accuracy.

2.5   Neural-guided program synthesis for ARC

DreamCoder [19] treats ARC as a program-induction problem in a domain-specific language, with
neural guidance over enumerative search. LARC [20] provides natural-language descriptions of ARC
tasks, exploring whether linguistic decomposition aids program synthesis. Our pipeline sits between
these traditions: the transformation definer emits a Python function (program synthesis), but the
function is generated by a general-purpose LLM rather than searched over a hand-designed DSL,
and an upstream exploration phase produces natural-language pattern descriptions that condition the
synthesis (linguistic decomposition).

2.6   Test-time compute scaling

Snell et al. [21] characterize the trade-off between model size and test-time sampling, finding that for
many tasks, increasing test-time compute on a smaller model outperforms using a larger model with
single-pass inference. Process reward models [22] provide a complementary framing: rather than
scoring final outputs, scoring intermediate reasoning steps can enable more targeted allocation of
compute. This paper can be read as an architectural complement to both lines: rather than sampling
more from a single call or scoring intermediate tokens, the pipeline allocates compute to structurally
distinct phases (parallel exploration, focused synthesis, deterministic execution), with verification
against training pairs serving as an end-to-end reward signal. The generation-bound diagnostic in
Section 4 sharpens this connection: within our regime, returns from additional definer samples appear
to diminish, so from a compute perspective, the productive lever is upstream candidate diversity
(explorer count N ) rather than downstream selection fidelity (definer count M ).


3     Methods

We evaluate four architectures on the ARC-AGI-1 public evaluation set: a one-shot baseline, a
structured chain-of-thought baseline, the Explorer-Definer Pipeline, and the Reflective Orchestrator.
Each architecture receives the same input — a set of training input–output grid pairs (xi , yi )ki=1 and
a test input xtest — and must produce the corresponding test output ŷtest . The pipeline is reported at
one canonical operating point (N =5, t=0.5, M =5) and additionally swept across an N × t × M


                                                   5
grid for Pareto analysis. The orchestrator is reported at the same canonical operating configuration
and additionally swept across M ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} for pipeline-to-orchestrator comparison.

3.1   Evaluation protocol

Dataset. ARC-AGI-1 public evaluation set, n = 400 tasks. The public set is used because the
official semi-private leaderboard service is not available for arbitrary local experiments (see Section 6).

Scoring. File-level exact match on the test output grid (every cell must match). pass@1 counts a
task as solved if the architecture’s single submitted output is correct; pass@2 counts it as solved if
at least one of two submitted outputs is correct. For pipeline and orchestrator conditions, pass@2
outputs are the top-2 candidates after dedup-by-test-prediction (Section 3.4).

Model and provider. DeepSeek V3.2 served via AtlasCloud FP8 endpoints. V3.2 supports a
thinking-mode toggle; we run it with thinking disabled, holding the model’s internal reasoning
behavior constant across all architectures. Provider fallback is disabled. Informal probes across
providers and quantizations showed insignificant performance impact.

Sampling. The one-shot and CoT baselines use temperature 0. The pipeline’s canonical configu-
ration uses explorer temperature t = 0.5 and definer temperature 0; the N × t × M sweep varies
t ∈ {0.0, 0.5, 1.0} across explorer agents while holding the definer at temperature 0 throughout. The
orchestrator uses the same explorer cell (initial fleet of N =5 explorers at t=0.5) and its mid-loop
spawn tool issues K=2 focused explorers at t=0.5 per call.

Subsampling within sweeps. The 45 pipeline configurations reported in Section 4.4 are generated
from 18 individual runs. The (N, t) axes both require independent runs (nine in total, one per cell of
N ∈ {1, 2, 5} × t ∈ {0.0, 0.5, 1.0}) because both parameters shape the explorer fleet’s behavior and
cannot be recovered post-hoc. The M axis is subsample-able: definer agents within a single (N, t)
cell are independent samples from the same distribution, so a single best-of-M =5 definer pool yields
the full M ∈ {1, . . . , 5} curve for that cell by taking the first k candidates for pass@k. The full sweep
is thus nine explorer-cell runs plus nine matched definer-pool runs, one definer pool per explorer cell.
The orchestrator’s M -sweep follows the same subsampling protocol within its single (N =5, t=0.5)
explorer cell. This protocol both reduces compute and controls for explorer-side run-to-run variance
across the M curves: for fixed (N, t), every M value traces the same set of explorer findings rather
than independently drawn ones.

Cost accounting. Per-task dollar cost is computed from raw input/output token counts at AtlasCloud
FP8 list rates ($0.30/M prompt, $0.38/M completion). Costs are reported as the cost of the architecture
(every explorer call, definer call, retry, and spawn), not the cheapest available deployment; batch-
inference discounts, alternative quantization, or self-hosting could reduce absolute costs without
changing the relative ordering. Parallelism affects wall-clock but not dollar cost.

Execution sandbox. Definer-generated Python is executed in a restricted subprocess with a 10-
second per-call timeout, a small allowed-import list (numpy, standard library), and no network access.
Runtime errors and timeouts are caught and recorded as a failed candidate (training-pair accuracy
zero); they do not abort the per-task pipeline.

pass@k estimator. For diagnostic purposes (Section 4.7), we report both naive pass@k (the
empirical fraction of tasks for which the top-k selected candidates contain a correct one) and the
unbiased Codex estimator [9]:
                                                        n−c
                                                            
                                                         k
                                     pass@k = 1 − n ,
                                        d
                                                             k

where n is the number of candidates generated for a task, c is the number of correct candidates among
them, and k is the number of attempts allowed. The unbiased estimator characterizes what fraction of
tasks any k randomly chosen candidates would solve; the gap between it and naive pass@k isolates
the contribution of the selection policy.


                                                    6
Uncertainty. Bootstrap 95 % confidence intervals on accuracy are computed by resampling the
400-task per-task binary correctness vector 10,000 times. Paired architectural deltas are reported with
matched-task paired-bootstrap CIs; significance is marked at the 95 % level.

3.2     Structured one-shot baseline

Our “one-shot” (in the sense of requiring output in a single pass) baseline establishes a lower bound by
making a single LLM call per task with no explicit reasoning scaffolding. Training pairs are serialized
into the prompt as ASCII grids with row and column coordinate headers (the same rendering used
by CoT and pipeline/orchestrator agents), and the model is instructed to return the predicted output
grid via a structured JSON response containing a single output field as a 2D list of integers. No
intermediate artifacts, tool calls, or self-correction opportunities are provided.
This baseline serves two purposes. First, it provides a floor against which chain-of-thought and
agentic overhead can be justified. Second, it quantifies how much ARC performance is already latent
in the pretrained model’s weights without architectural intervention (a coarse control for benchmark
exposure during training).

3.3     Chain-of-thought baseline

The CoT baseline extends the one-shot architecture with a single structural modification: the JSON
response schema gains a reasoning field placed before the output field, and the system prompt
instructs the model to use it. The reasoning field contains free-flowing natural-language analysis of
the observed patterns before the model commits to the output grid.

{
    "reasoning": "<analysis of patterns>",
    "output": [[...], [...], ...]
}

The ordering constraint is the operative mechanism: requiring externalized reasoning before grid
generation forces dedicated token budget for pattern analysis rather than jumping straight to an output
grid. This is functionally analogous to chain-of-thought prompting [23] but structurally enforced
through the output schema. It is distinct from native reasoning channels (e.g., DeepSeek-R1’s
<think> block, OpenAI o1-series internal tokens), which provide a separate hidden budget that
the model has typically been post-trained via RL to use for deliberation. Our setting excludes such
mechanisms.
This condition differs from the one-shot condition in exactly two respects: the CoT prompting layer
and the reasoning field added to the (otherwise shared) JSON output schema. Model, grid serial-
ization, task framing, JSON output enforcement, and inference parameters are held identical. This
isolates the contribution of structurally enforced externalized reasoning under single-call inference.

3.4     Explorer-Definer Pipeline

The Explorer-Definer Pipeline is the first of our two agentic architectures. It decomposes ARC task-
solving into two sequential phases — pattern exploration and transformation definition — mediated
by compressed natural-language artifacts.

3.4.1    Phase 1: parallel exploration
A fleet of N PatternExplorer agents independently analyzes the training pairs. Each explorer receives
the full set of training pairs and is equipped with two tools:

         • think(thought): a scratchpad tool that lets the agent record intermediate observations,
           hypotheses, and reasoning traces without committing to any output. think calls are invisible
           to other agents and to downstream stages.
         • note_pattern(pattern): a structured logging tool that records a candidate pattern ob-
           servation with a field for the pattern description and any other notes the agent determines as
           substantive (e.g., grid coordinates or example indices).


                                                    7
                                   Figure 1: PatternExplorer agent.


Explorers are given a generous per-agent token budget (∼100k tokens) and are instructed to be
exhaustive: examine symmetries, color mappings, spatial transformations, object detection, counting
regularities, and any other structural properties of the input–output pairs. At the end of exploration,
each agent is forced to emit a synthesis output containing a structured markdown summary of its
findings, including a high-level rule description, skeleton procedure, observations, and self-confidence
assessment (e.g., “low”).
The N synthesis outputs are compressed into a single artifact of approximately 4k tokens per
explorer, yielding a combined exploration summary of roughly 4N k tokens. This compression step
is significant from cost, context-window, and efficiency standpoints: it distills potentially hundreds of
thousands of tokens of exploratory reasoning into a dense signal that fits within a single downstream
context window without dominating it.

3.4.2   Phase 2: transformation definition
A TransformationDefiner agent receives three inputs: (1) a system prompt specifying the
transformation-definition task, (2) the original training pairs, and (3) the compressed exploration
summaries. The definer is equipped with three tools:

        • think(thought): identical to the explorer think tool, for deliberation over evidence.
        • define_transformation(transformation_summary, reasoning, code): a struc-
          tured output tool with fields for a natural-language description of the transformation, reason-
          ing, and a Python function that implements the transformation as executable code.
        • submit_refined_transformation(what_changed, code): a structured output tool
          for refining a previous transformation, fitted with a field to describe the refinement and a
          field containing the actual refined Python transformation.

The Python transformation function takes an input grid (list of lists of integers) and returns the
predicted output grid. By requiring executable code rather than a direct grid output, the pipeline
enforces algorithmic generalization: the model must express the transformation as a robust program,
not merely pattern-match on the training pairs. Each candidate program is run on every training
input and scored by exact-match accuracy on the corresponding training output; programs that
fail to execute (errors, timeouts) score zero after the definer has had the opportunity to debug
and resubmit. Additionally, transformation-as-code enables producing a heuristic for deterministic
selection, detailed as follows.


                                                    8
          Figure 2: Explorer-Definer Pipeline with a single TransformationDefiner agent.


Selection by dedup-on-test-prediction. Among the M candidates produced for a task, we form
the pass@k submission by (a) ranking on training-set exact-match score, taking inspiration from
Berman’s selection mechanism [1], (b) then deduplicating by the predicted test grid: multiple
definers that emit lexically distinct programs but produce the same test output are merged into a
single candidate, with the highest-ranked retained. Ties on training-set score are broken by agent
index (effectively first-emitted). The top-k surviving candidates are the pass@k submission. This
deduplication step is not cosmetic: definers frequently converge on the same wrong rule (a common
failure mode discussed in Section 4), and treating those convergent failures as a single vote prevents
crowding out a dissenting correct candidate. The mechanism functions as implicit diverse voting.

Train-feedback refinement. When a candidate produces a program that passes at least half but
not all of the training pairs, the definer is re-invoked with a structured failure summary (the failing
input, the expected output, and the program’s actual output) as additional context. The original
Phase 2 definer system prompt makes no mention of refinement, but when refinement begins, an
augmented prompt is placed at the beginning of context outlining refinement behavior. One refinement
pass is allowed per definer. Refinement is skipped if the initial definition reaches 100% training
accuracy. Otherwise, refinement exits when refinement cap is reached, or the per-definer step budget
is exhausted. We determined the 50% training-pair threshold for refinement via probes into the
distribution of training accuracy vs. successful refinement, though this has not been rigorously tuned.
Intuitively, this design takes advantage of the fact that a transformation that performs moderately well
on a task is more likely to be somewhat correct and therefore refinable.

3.5   Reflective Orchestrator

The Reflective Orchestrator is the second of our agentic architectures and the architectural response
to the pipeline’s generation-bound diagnostic (Section 4.7).

Motivation. The pipeline’s definer faces a structural problem visible in trace inspection of its
failures. The definer receives a one-time batch of upstream explorer findings before it begins and has
no mechanism to revisit exploration. When the explorers miss the right abstraction — a recurring
failure mode visible in trace inspection of the pipeline, quantified in Section 4.8 — the definer can
correctly diagnose from train feedback that its current hypothesis is wrong, but it can only refine
within the same wrong frame. Refinement, by design, edits the current program; it cannot reach back
into the upstream stage and request a different conceptual frame. The behavioral consequence is a
recurring trace pattern in which the definer correctly identifies what is failing and then either iterates
on an arithmetic hack that fits training pairs but not the test pair, or stalls (“analysis paralysis”),
producing increasingly elaborate edits that do not converge.
Candidate pattern discovery is the explorer’s intended specialization, not the definer’s, and the
pipeline’s directed handoff prevents the definer from routing back to it. The orchestrator’s design
insight is to avoid failures from flawed upstream inputs by enabling an agent-driven loop: give the
definer a tool to spawn a smaller fleet of fresh, focused exploration mid-loop, so when its current


                                                    9
transformation is failing, it can request new abstractions rather than getting stuck refining an incorrect
one. This spawning mechanism functions as the relief valve for wrong-abstraction failures.

Architecture. A single agentic loop replaces the pipeline’s directed Phase 2 entirely. Phase 1 runs
identically and seeds an initial set of pattern findings, after which an augmented definer-as-orchestrator
agent runs with five tools available throughout:

       • think(thought): private scratchpad, identical to the pipeline definer’s.
       • define_transformation(...): first commit on a transformation; structurally analogous
         to the pipeline’s define_transformation tool.
       • submit_refined_transformation(...): a refined transformation after seeing train
         feedback on a prior define_transformation attempt.
       • explore_new_patterns(guidance): spawn K=2 focused PatternExplorer agents
         conditioned on a structured guidance string from the orchestrator. Their resulting pattern
         documents are appended to the context the orchestrator sees on subsequent steps.
       • done(reason): agent-mediated termination, guided to call when progress stalls.




                    Figure 3: TransformationDefiner as a Reflective Orchestrator.

The orchestrator exits on one of three conditions: (1) a structural exit when train-set accuracy
reaches 100% on a candidate program, (2) an agent-mediated done call, or (3) one of three fuses
(MAX_ITERATIONS=15, MAX_CONSECUTIVE_EXEC_ERRORS=5, MAX_SPAWN_CALLS=3). The branch
decision — continue refining, spawn fresh exploration, or commit and finish — is model-mediated
rather than driven by an explicit confidence estimator, informed at each step by the structured
train-pair diffs from the previous attempt.

The K=2 spawn fan-out. The choice of K=2 explorers per spawn is motivated by two empirical
observations from the pipeline sweep (Section 4.4). First, the largest marginal pass@2 gain along
the explorer-count axis is the step from N =1 to N =2; subsequent additions appear to diminish.
Second, the orchestrator may spawn up to three times within a single task, which compounds quickly:
at K=5 a single spawn would equal the cost of an entire pipeline exploration phase. K=2 sits at
the high-value end of the N curve while keeping per-spawn cost bounded, so spawn behaves as a
targeted re-exploration rather than as a second full pipeline invocation. Additionally, the step budget
per spawn explorer is intentionally smaller than the Phase 1 explorers to encourage targeted iteration.

Negative-leaning guidance. The guidance string the orchestrator passes to spawned explorers is,
by prompt design, primarily negative: confirmed dead-ends, rule families that the orchestrator has
ruled out from its own attempts, and asymmetries in the training pairs that prior hypotheses failed to
account for. This design choice reflects an information-theoretic observation: after seeing its own
attempts fail, the orchestrator’s highest-information signal about the transformation space is which
regions of that space are confirmed empty. Open-ended re-exploration would risk reproducing the


                                                   10
explorers’ original (and known-wrong) trajectory; constraint-shaped exploration redirects attention to
the unexamined regions. Appendix A highlights how this design choice can improve convergence.
The orchestrator’s selection logic is identical to the pipeline’s: orchestrator definers run in parallel,
their candidates are dedup-ranked by training-set score, and pass@k is the top-k surviving candidates
after dedup-by-test-prediction.

3.6   Ablations and sweeps

N × t × M Pareto sweep on the pipeline. We sweep all combinations of N ∈ {1, 2, 5}, explorer
temperature t ∈ {0.0, 0.5, 1.0}, and definer best-of-M with M ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}; 45 configurations
in total, generated via the subsampling protocol described in Section 3.1. This characterizes the
cost–accuracy frontier of the pipeline itself and distinguishes the contributions of exploration breadth
(N ), exploration diversity (t), and selection from a sampled candidate pool (M ).

Pipeline capability ablations. Two architectural features of the canonical pipeline are ablated by
removal: (a) the definer’s think tool (act-only), in which the model must reason within the structured
tool fields rather than via a separate scratchpad; and (b) train-feedback refinement (refinement-off ),
in which the definer commits its first program with no opportunity to refine from train-pair failures.
Refinement-off is recovered from the canonical pipeline run by subsampling first-attempt outputs
(Section 3.1), exploiting the fact that the definer’s original Phase 2 prompt is refinement-unaware,
so first-attempt programs are identically distributed between refinement-on and refinement-off runs;
act-only required a dedicated run.

Pipeline-to-Orchestrator M-sweep. We additionally report the orchestrator across M ∈
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5} via the same definer-subsampling protocol, holding the upstream explorer cell (N =5,
t=0.5) fixed. This isolates the orchestrator’s lift over the pipeline at matched definer budget.


4     Results

4.1   Overview

The canonical Explorer-Definer Pipeline (N =5, t=0.5, M =5) reaches 57.50% pass@2 at $0.25 per
task, and the Reflective Orchestrator (M =5 on the same explorer cell) reaches 67.25% pass@2 at
$0.62 per task. Relative to the one-shot baseline (15.50% at $0.002 per task), the pipeline is a 42.00-
point lift at ∼125× higher per-task cost and the orchestrator is a 51.75-point lift at ∼310×. Relative to
the pipeline, the orchestrator is a +9.75-point pass@2 lift at ∼2.5× cost; the paired bootstrap on this
delta has 100% of replicates positive and excludes zero at the 95 % level. All three architectural levers
— within-call deliberation (CoT), across-call decomposition (pipeline), and adaptive re-exploration
(orchestrator) — contribute statistically significant, paired-bootstrap-confirmed lifts.

4.2   Per-architecture results

Table 1 reports file-level accuracy and per-task cost for the four primary architectures; pipeline
ablations follow separately in Section 4.5.

Table 1: Accuracy and cost across the four primary architectures. DeepSeek V3.2 served via
AtlasCloud FP8, ARC-AGI-1 public evaluation set (n = 400). Single-call baselines at temperature 0;
pipeline and orchestrator use explorer t = 0.5, definer/orchestrator t = 0. Cost at AtlasCloud FP8 list
rates ($0.30/M prompt, $0.38/M completion). Pipeline ablations are reported separately in Table 3.

           Architecture                        Metric    Accuracy       95 % CI        $/task
           Baseline (no-CoT)                  pass@1     15.50 %     [12.00, 19.25]   $0.002
           CoT                                pass@1     30.00 %     [25.50, 34.50]   $0.004
           Pipeline (N =5, t=0.5, M =5)       pass@1     54.75 %     [49.75, 59.50]   $0.25
           Pipeline (N =5, t=0.5, M =5)       pass@2     57.50 %     [52.75, 62.50]   $0.25
           Reflective Orchestrator (M =5)     pass@2     67.25 %     [62.75, 71.75]    $0.62


                                                   11
The structured CoT baseline reaches 30.00% pass@1 (15.50% → 30.00%, essentially a doubling of
the one-shot baseline) at slightly more than double the cost, demonstrating that within-call deliberation
is a real, measurable lever on this model. The pipeline then nearly doubles accuracy again (30.00%
→ 54.75% pass@1, 57.50% pass@2), demonstrating that across-call decomposition is a separate and
larger lever. The orchestrator adds a further +9.75 pp pass@2 over the pipeline at the same explorer
cell, demonstrating that adaptive re-exploration is yet another distinct lever that the pipeline misses.

4.3   Paired architectural comparisons

Table 2 reports matched-task paired-bootstrap deltas for each architectural transition. A starred entry
indicates that the 95 % CI excludes zero.
        Table 2: Paired-bootstrap accuracy deltas (matched-task, 95 % CI; ∗ CI excludes 0).

             Transition                                       ∆ (pp)          95 % CI
                                                                    ∗
             Baseline → CoT                                  +14.50       [+9.75, +19.25]
             CoT → Pipeline (pass@1)                         +24.75∗     [+20.00, +29.50]
             CoT → Pipeline (pass@2)                         +27.50∗     [+23.00, +32.00]
             Pipeline pass@1 → pass@2                        +2.75∗        [+1.25, +4.50]
             Pipeline → Reflective Orchestrator (pass@2)     +9.75∗     [+6.50, +13.25]
             Baseline → Reflective Orchestrator (pass@2)     +51.75∗     [+46.50, +57.00]


Deltas first confirm structured CoT produces a substantial, statistically significant lift on this model:
+14.50 pp over the unscaffolded baseline. Second, the transition from the strongest single-call
architecture (CoT) to the pipeline produces a +27.50 pp pass@2 lift. This is comparable in magnitude
to the total accuracy of the CoT baseline itself and attributable largely to architectural decomposition.
Third, the pipeline-to-orchestrator transition produces a +9.75 pp pass@2 lift whose paired bootstrap
is materially tighter than naive subtraction of the marginal CIs would suggest (half-width ±3.38 pp
paired vs. ±9.25 pp from independent CI half-widths summed), since pairing controls for task-level
difficulty. The CI excludes zero and 100 % of bootstrap replicates have ∆ > 0.

4.4   N × t × M Pareto surface (Pipeline)

Figure 4 plots the 45 pipeline configurations on the cost–pass@2 plane, faceted by explorer tempera-
ture. Three structural facts emerge.




Figure 4: N × t × M Pareto surface for the Explorer-Definer Pipeline. DeepSeek V3.2 served
via AtlasCloud FP8, ARC-AGI-1 public evaluation set (n = 400), refinement enabled. Marker
shade: explorer count N ∈ {1, 2, 5}. Facet: explorer temperature t ∈ {0.0, 0.5, 1.0}. Label: definer
best-of-M samples, M ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5}. The canonical configuration (N =5, t=0.5, M =5) is starred.

Explorer count N is the dominant lever. For each N , accuracy appears to saturate: N =1 never
exceeds 45.5% pass@2 even at M =5; N =2 caps at 52.75%; only N =5 reaches the 57.50% headline.
Moving along the frontier from low to high cost is dominated by increasing N , not M . This pattern


                                                   12
is the surface-level counterpart of the generation-bound diagnostic in Section 4.7: candidate diversity
(driven upstream by N ) buys more accuracy than candidate count (driven downstream by M ).

Best-of-M shows diminishing returns within each N . Holding N and t fixed, marginal pass@2
from each additional definer sample shrinks: the largest gains come from M =1 → M =2, and addi-
tions past M =3 contribute only a few percentage points each. The canonical configuration uses M =5
because it sits on the frontier at the operating cost we target, not because M extrapolates indefinitely.1
The M =1 → M =2 marginal also motivates the orchestrator’s K=2 spawn (Section 3.5).

Intermediate explorer temperature (t=0.5) dominates. At N =5, the t=0.5 configurations
form the Pareto frontier; t=0.0 underperforms (less candidate diversity) and t=1.0 underperforms
(degraded individual-trajectory quality). The effect is consistent though small in absolute magnitude.

4.5   Pipeline ablations: think and refinement

Two capability removals on the canonical pipeline isolate which architectural choices are load-bearing.
Table 3 reports each removal’s effect on pass@2 and cost.
Table 3: Pipeline capability removals. Each row is the canonical pipeline configuration
(N =5, t=0.5, M =5) with exactly one feature disabled. Pass@2 is file-level on the ARC-AGI-
1 public evaluation set (n = 400); 95 % CIs are matched-task paired bootstrap (B=10,000) versus the
canonical pipeline in the same (removal) direction as ∆, ∗ excludes zero. Refinement-off is recovered
by subsampling first-attempt outputs from the canonical run, exploiting the fact that the initial Phase
2 prompt is refinement-unaware; cost is upper-bounded by the canonical run’s $0.25, with the gap
depending on how often refinement triggers per task. Act-only required a dedicated run.

      Removed capability                  pass@2      ∆ vs. canonical          95 % CI               $/task
      (none — Canonical Pipeline)         57.50 %          —                     —                  $0.25
      think tool (act-only)               51.75 %         −5.75∗           [−9.00, −2.50]       $0.17 (−32%)
      Refinement                          56.75 %         −0.75            [−2.00, +0.25]          ≤ $0.25

The two removals isolate very different things. The think scratchpad is a measurable component of
pipeline performance: removing it costs ∼6 percentage points of pass@2, a footprint comparable
in magnitude to halving the explorer fleet (N =5 → N =2) along the Pareto surface, with a paired-
bootstrap CI that excludes zero comfortably. The ablation does not separate whether the contribution
comes from additional deliberation tokens, the structured separation of a private scratchpad from
output channels, or both; we return to this in Section 5. What it does establish is that the structured
tool fields available in the act-only configuration cannot substitute for the scratchpad think provides,
consistent with framings of the think tool as a deliberation channel for agents that must analyze tool
outputs, follow long tool-call chains, and make sequential decisions where mistakes are costly [18].
Refinement, by contrast, contributes a much smaller −0.75 pp on removal, with a paired-bootstrap
CI that straddles zero ([−2.00, +0.25]). The removal-∆ is negative in 95 % of bootstrap replicates
(consistent with refinement helping) but the small magnitude offers directional evidence rather than a
well-resolved effect. Most of refinement’s per-definer benefit is plausibly absorbed by the selection
layer: refinement helps only when it converts a wrong-train candidate into a right-train one, and the
dedup-by-prediction selection already prevents convergent wrong candidates from crowding out a
single correct dissenter.
The two ablations together identify agentic decomposition and the think scratchpad as load-bearing
components of the pipeline; refinement is a small additive boost. Both components were thus
preserved in the orchestrator’s architecture.

4.6   Pipeline vs. orchestrator across M

Figure 5 plots the pipeline and the Reflective Orchestrator across M ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} on the same
explorer cell (N =5, t=0.5). The orchestrator Pareto-dominates the pipeline at every M ≥ 2: at
    1 This configuration was selected by inspecting the Pareto surface on the same 400-task ARC-AGI-1 public evaluation

set used for downstream comparisons. See Section 6, paragraph Configuration selection on the evaluation set, for the
methodological caveat and the mitigating considerations specific to this work.


                                                          13
matched M , accuracy is higher by 5–10 points; at matched cost, the orchestrator delivers comparable
or higher accuracy past the pipeline’s likely M =5 saturation point.




Figure 5: Explorer-Definer Pipeline and Reflective Orchestrator across M ∈ {1, . . . , 5} at fixed
explorer cell (N =5, t=0.5). Hollow markers denote M =1 (no pass@2 available; pass@1 plotted).
The orchestrator Pareto-dominates the pipeline at every M ≥ 2, with the gap widening as M grows.

The shapes of the two curves are informative beyond the headline gap. The pipeline appears to
saturate between M =3 and M =5: each additional definer adds less than a percentage point of
pass@2, consistent with the candidate-distribution bimodality the generation-bound diagnostic
identifies (Section 4.7). The orchestrator’s curve does not saturate over the same range: each
additional orchestrator definer contributes a fresh trajectory through the spawn-augmented action
space, and the resulting candidate pool is more diverse than the pipeline’s at matched M . This is the
surface signature of the orchestrator addressing the bottleneck the pipeline’s diagnostic predicts.

4.7   Generation-bound diagnostic and its architectural test

To characterize whether accuracy gains from M > 1 sampling come from more diverse generation or
from better selection, we apply the unbiased pass@k estimator [9] to the M =5 candidate sets of both
the pipeline and the orchestrator.

Selection captures most of the candidate ceiling. On the pipeline’s M =5 candidate distribution,
unbiased pass@1 is 46.40% (the accuracy a randomly chosen candidate would achieve in expectation),
while naive pass@2 under train-score selection is 57.50%. The pass@M ceiling — the fraction of
tasks for which at least one of five candidates is correct — bounds what any selection policy can
extract from the candidate pool; for the pipeline, selection recovers approximately 95% of that ceiling.
The same diagnostic on the orchestrator returns unbiased pass@1 of 56.21% against naive pass@2 of
67.25%, with selection again recovering ∼95% of the candidate ceiling.

The system is generation-bound, not selection-bound. The per-task distribution of correct-
candidate counts is strongly bimodal under both architectures: tasks tend to be either solved by most
candidates or by none. Selection is already near-optimal; the hard ceiling on pass@2 at current
M is set by the fraction of tasks for which no candidate is correct. Improving headline accuracy
therefore requires broadening the candidate distribution, through better exploration, larger N , or
representational changes that alter the transformation space the synthesis stage searches, rather than
improving selection fidelity among existing candidates.


                                                  14
The orchestrator as the architectural test. The diagnostic above predicts that an architecture
which broadens candidate generation should produce a real lift, while one that improves selection
fidelity should not. The orchestrator implements the former: spawn introduces fresh exploration
trajectories conditioned on the failure modes of prior candidates, producing a meaningfully different
candidate distribution per task. Unbiased pass@1 comparison confirms the prediction: pipeline
unbiased pass@1 is 46.40% and orchestrator unbiased pass@1 is 56.21%, a +9.81 pp lift that
matches the +9.75 pp naive pass@2 lift to within a tenth of a point. This near-equality is the strongest
available signal that the orchestrator’s lift is generation-side: were it selection-mediated, the naive
pass@2 lift would substantially exceed the unbiased pass@1 lift. Hence, the orchestrator’s lift offers
confirmation that adaptive re-exploration is indeed a productive lever.

4.8   Behavioral characterization of the orchestrator

Two trace-level statistics characterize what the orchestrator actually does. First, an exit-mode
distribution over the orchestrator’s 1,983 definer invocations on the headline run: 65.8% terminated
via the structural exit (train-set accuracy reached 100%), 25.8% terminated via MAX_ITERATIONS,
7.3% via an agent-mediated done call, 1.1% via no tool call, and <0.1% via consecutive execution
errors. The MAX_ITERATIONS tail (averaging ∼4.6 attempts and ∼2.2 spawns per definer, all at
train-score zero) is the dominant cost driver and motivates better orchestrator early-exit prompting.
Second, spawn is empirically the dominant mechanism behind the orchestrator’s lift. Of the 45
tasks on which the orchestrator solves and the pipeline does not, 31 (69%) have a winning definer
that called explore_new_patterns. Of the 40 tasks on which the orchestrator solves and all of
baseline, CoT, and pipeline fail, 30 (75%) are spawn-induced. The architecture was designed around
the hypothesis that wrong-abstraction failures are the dominant residual error mode and that spawn
would be the relief valve; the cross-system task analysis confirms it.
Appendix A walks through one such task in detail: a geometric-versus-arithmetic rule trap in which
both rules fit the training pairs perfectly. All pipeline definers commit to the arithmetic rule with no
mechanism to revisit it. Under the orchestrator, a definer channels uncertainty into a focused spawn
and recovers the geometric rule from the returned findings.

4.9   Cross-model generality

The architectural lifts reported above are measured on a single model (DeepSeek V3.2). To test
whether the pattern is V3.2-specific or general, we replicate the four-architecture comparison on
Qwen3-235B-Instruct, a second open-weight model from a different model family (instruct variant;
no thinking toggle). Due to budget constraints and rate-limiting on the Qwen3 provider, we run the
cross-model comparison on a 99-task subset at {N =5, t=0.5, M =3} for both the Explorer-Definer
Pipeline and the Reflective Orchestrator — M =3 is the largest ensemble depth Qwen3 could deliver
under the rate-limit cap, so we match DeepSeek V3.2 to it for parity. The same 99 tasks and the
same M =3 subsampling are applied to V3.2. All other components (harness, scoring, deduplication
protocol, cost accounting) are held identical across models.
Figure 6 plots the result. The architectural progression replicates on Qwen3: every lever produces a
positive lift (baseline 17.17% → CoT 28.28% → pipeline 48.48% → orchestrator 54.55%), with the
same monotone ordering as V3.2 on the same subset (15.15% → 32.32% → 59.60% → 69.70%).

Table 4: Paired-bootstrap deltas on the matched 99-task subset at M =3. Within-model lifts compare
each model’s orchestrator to its own pipeline; cross-model gaps compare Qwen3 to V3.2 at matched
architecture. CIs are 95 % paired bootstrap (B=10,000); ∗ excludes zero.

                        Comparison                  ∆ (pp)         95 % CI
                        Within-model: Pipeline → Reflective Orchestrator
                          DeepSeek V3.2           +10.10∗ [+3.03, +17.17]
                          Qwen3-235B                +6.06      [+0.00, +12.12]
                        Cross-model gap: Qwen3 − V3.2 at matched architecture
                          Pipeline                −11.11∗ [−18.18, −5.05]
                          Reflective Orchestrator −15.15∗ [−23.23, −7.07]


                                                  15
Figure 6: Cross-model Pareto on a matched 99-task subset of ARC-AGI-1. DeepSeek V3.2 (filled
markers) and Qwen3-235B-Instruct (hollow markers) traverse the same four-architecture progression.
Pipeline and orchestrator use M =3 on both models for ensemble-depth parity. Cost axis is log-scale.


Table 4 shows both pipeline → orchestrator lifts are directionally positive and consistent in rough
magnitude with the full-evaluation V3.2 result (+9.75 pp at n = 400, Section 4.3). While the Qwen3
lift CI does touch zero, it reflects the 99-task subset size rather than an architectural difference; the
point estimate is comfortably positive but n=99 is not enough to exclude zero by paired bootstrap.

Interpretation. The cross-model result supports the paper’s central claim that the harness, not the
specific model, drives the lifts reported here. Though headline accuracy numbers are V3.2-specific,
our three-lever architectural framing, the diagnostic-then-test evaluation arc, and the relief-valve
role of spawn appear to generalize. Single-additional-model replication is not a definitive test of
generality, and the n=99 subset prevents tight inference on the Qwen3 orchestrator lift specifically.
Broader cross-family validation remains future work (Section 7).

4.10    Cost–accuracy positioning

Figure 7 places the four primary conditions on the cost–accuracy plane.
Within our evaluation regime, the pipeline at $0.25 per task sits more than an order of magnitude below
the cheapest published custom frontier-model system we have referenced at comparable accuracy
(Pang at ∼$2.56 per task and 77.1% on ARC-AGI-1 [3]), and approximately two orders of magnitude
below Berman’s 2024 evolutionary system at 53.6% and ∼$29 per task [1]. The orchestrator at $0.62
per task extends the frontier upward by nearly ten points without moving out of the sub-$1 regime, and
remains roughly 4× cheaper than Pang and ∼45× cheaper than Berman’s 2024 system at comparable
or higher accuracy. As stated in Section 6, these comparisons are contextual: published systems are
evaluated under slightly different protocols (e.g., reporting semi-private or competition-set results),
so cost contrast should be read as a regime-level observation rather than a head-to-head benchmark.

5      Discussion
5.1    Three architectural levers, sequentially compounding

The clearest signal in our results is that three distinct architectural levers each contribute meaningfully
and compound sequentially when stacked. Adding a structured reasoning channel to a single LLM


                                                    16
Figure 7: Headline cost–accuracy frontier across the four primary architectures. DeepSeek V3.2
served via AtlasCloud FP8, ARC-AGI-1 public evaluation set (n = 400). Cost axis is log-scale;
cost at AtlasCloud FP8 list rates ($0.30/M prompt, $0.38/M completion). Each architectural lever
(within-call CoT deliberation, across-call pipeline decomposition, and adaptive re-exploration in the
orchestrator) corresponds to a monotone move along the frontier.


call (CoT) lifts accuracy by +14.50 pp over an unscaffolded baseline. Adding the Explorer-Definer
Pipeline on top lifts it by a further +27.50 pp pass@2. Adding adaptive re-exploration (the Reflective
Orchestrator) on top of the pipeline lifts it by a further +9.75 pp pass@2. The total architectural lift
on the same model is 52 points, with no benchmark-specific training or heavy test-time compute.
These three lifts are unlikely to be redundant. CoT externalizes within-call reasoning. The pipeline
introduces structural decomposition — different stages, with compressed natural-language artifacts
between them and an executable verifier at the back end — that a single-call architecture cannot
easily replicate. The orchestrator addresses a different failure mode again: not insufficient reasoning
per call (CoT’s lever) and not insufficient structure across calls (pipeline’s lever), but rigidity in
the upstream-downstream boundary. That is, the inability of a synthesis stage to route back to
pattern discovery when its hypothesis is wrong. Each lever is the architectural response to a different
bottleneck.
This is consistent with, but distinct from, the test-time compute scaling literature. Snell et al. [21]
show that sampling more from a smaller model can outperform a single pass from a larger one;
our result is that how additional calls are organized matters as much as their number. Each of our
three architectures spends more model calls than the previous one, but it spends them on structurally
different things: externalized reasoning, role specialization, or adaptive re-exploration, and each is
spent on the bottleneck the previous architecture left in place.

5.2   The think tool is a measurable component

The act-only ablation gives a controlled measurement of an architectural detail that is often an obscure
prompting-layer component. Disabling the definer’s think scratchpad reduces pass@2 from 57.50%
to 51.75% (while reducing cost by 32%); the paired-bootstrap CI on the −5.75 pp delta excludes
zero comfortably. The remaining 51.75% still sits more than 20 pp above the CoT baseline (30.00%)
and more than 35 pp above the unscaffolded baseline (15.50%), so the bulk of the pipeline’s lift
over single-call architectures comes from agentic decomposition, role specialization, and executable
verification rather than from the scratchpad alone. Within the pipeline architecture, though, the think


                                                  17
channel is doing measurable work that the structured tool fields available in the act-only configuration
cannot substitute for.
This ablation does not separate whether think’s contribution comes from additional deliberation
tokens, from the structure of a private scratchpad held separate from the output channels, or from both
at once. A token-budget reading (more deliberation tokens buy better accuracy) is consistent with
what we observe, and is the same lever the CoT baseline exhibits (+14.50 pp over the unscaffolded
baseline at ∼2× cost). What the ablation does establish is that tool-mediated scratchpads are a
meaningful architectural lever on top of agentic decomposition, not a stylistic detail that can be
dropped without consequence.

5.3   A diagnostic that produced a falsifiable prediction and was confirmed

The unbiased pass@k analysis on the pipeline is a methodological centerpiece. It produced the
following falsifiable prediction: because selection already captures ∼95% of the candidate ceiling,
the binding constraint is candidate generation, and any architecture that broadens generation should
produce a real lift, while any architecture that improves selection should not. The orchestrator is the
design that follows the prediction’s logic: it does not improve ranking among existing candidates; it
changes which candidates exist, by allowing the synthesis stage to spawn fresh exploration when its
current trajectory fails. The confirming evidence is the near-equality of the orchestrator’s lift on the
two estimators: +9.75 pp on naive pass@2 (selection-mediated) and +9.81 pp on unbiased pass@1
(selection-free). Were the orchestrator’s lift driven by easier selection on an unchanged candidate
distribution, the unbiased lift would have been substantially smaller than the naive lift. It is not.
This pattern — diagnose the bottleneck, design the architecture to target it, verify with the same
diagnostic from the opposite end — is the discipline we would advocate for compute-efficiency
claims in agentic systems more generally. Headline accuracy lifts are straightforward to produce
by spending more on inference; what is harder is to spend that compute on the right axis. The
diagnostic-then-target loop can signal which axis is “correct” before one spends.

5.4   Spawn as the relief valve

The orchestrator’s architecture was designed around a specific hypothesis: that the pipeline’s residual
error is dominated by wrong-abstraction failures, in which the explorer stage’s initial pattern findings
miss the operative rule, and the definer (constrained to refine on those findings) cannot recover.
The cross-system task analysis (Section 4.8) corroborates the hypothesis: 75% of the tasks the
orchestrator solves and all three baselines fail are tasks on which the winning orchestrator definer
called explore_new_patterns. The canonical example in Appendix A is a concrete instance of
the mechanism: a task on which an arithmetic rule fits the training pairs but fails the test, four of
five orchestrator definers (and all five pipeline definers) lock onto the arithmetic rule, and only the
spawning definer escapes the wrong frame to discover the underlying geometric rule. This is not
a one-off: the trace pattern of multiple definers converging on a wrong rule that fits training pairs,
while one dissenter recovers via mid-loop spawn, recurs across the 30 spawn-induced unique solves
the orchestrator finds.
The dedup-by-test-prediction selection mechanism is also a highly significant component: without
it, the four convergent wrong candidates in the above example would have dominated the pass@2
submission and the spawning definer’s correct candidate would have been crowded out. Selection
here functions as implicit diverse voting, treating n convergent definers as one vote and amplifying the
dissenter — a design choice that pairs naturally with mid-loop spawn, since spawn is an architectural
channel that is intended to transform uncertain definers into potential dissenters via re-exploration.

5.5   Cost–accuracy positioning

The pipeline at $0.25 per task and the orchestrator at $0.62 per task together occupy a region of the
cost–accuracy plane that published systems have largely skipped. At 57.50% pass@2, the pipeline is
comparable in absolute accuracy to Berman’s 2024 evolutionary system (53.6% at ∼$29 per task)
at roughly two orders of magnitude lower cost [1], and is roughly an order of magnitude cheaper
than the closest efficiency-oriented prior work — Pang’s program-synthesis system [3], which holds
the efficiency frontier within the frontier-model search regime at ∼$2.56 per task and 77.1%. The


                                                  18
orchestrator at 67.25% extends the frontier upward by nearly ten points while staying under $1 per
task. We do not approach the absolute accuracy ceiling set by Berman’s 2025 natural-language system
(79.6% at $8.42 per task) [2] or by other competition-grade systems. The contribution is not a new
state of the art in accuracy; it is evidence that a substantial fraction of ARC-AGI-1 performance is
recoverable through architecture alone, on a general-purpose open-weight model, with no benchmark-
specific training or costly compute at inference time. The comparison is regime-level rather than
head-to-head: we emphasize that external systems are evaluated under different protocols, and the
cost contrast should be read as a frontier-position statement rather than a universal benchmark.


6   Limitations

Public evaluation set, not semi-private leaderboard. This study evaluates on the ARC-AGI-1
public 400-task evaluation set because the semi-private leaderboard service is not available for
arbitrary local architecture experiments [7, 8]. We therefore do not report a verified leaderboard
score, and our results should be read as controlled within-model architectural comparisons rather
than verified leaderboard submissions. External system numbers (Berman, Pang, Greenblatt, TRM)
are reported only as contextual reference points for the cost–accuracy regime; matched-protocol
comparison is not possible without semi-private access. A consequence is that public-set results
may overestimate semi-private generalization, particularly if any of the architectures inadvertently
exploit public-set artifacts. The same harnesses, model, prompts, and scoring code are used across all
conditions, so any shared public-set bias is held constant across the within-paper comparisons; our
architectural deltas therefore remain interpretable even if the absolute level shifts.

Configuration selection on the evaluation set. The canonical pipeline configuration
(N =5, t=0.5, M =5) was selected by inspecting the N × t × M Pareto surface (Section 4.4)
on the same 400-task public evaluation set used for downstream comparisons, rather than on a
held-out validation split. A methodologically cleaner protocol would have selected the configuration
on a validation subset and evaluated on the remainder. Three factors mitigate this in our specific
case. First, the sweep surface is smooth: configurations near the canonical perform within a few
percentage points, so the headline numbers do not depend on a sharp selected point. Second, the
architectural deltas (baseline → CoT, CoT → pipeline, pipeline → orchestrator) hold across most of
the surface, so the central claim that architecture drives the lift is not a single-config artifact. Third,
the cross-model replication on Qwen3-235B (Section 4.9) preserves the same architectural ordering
at the same canonical configuration on a different model family, which would not be the expected
outcome if the configuration were overfit to V3.2-specific evaluation-set quirks. Reported paired
bootstrap confidence intervals on this single 400-task set may underestimate true population variance.

Single model family at full scale. Headline results use DeepSeek V3.2 served via AtlasCloud FP8.
The model has undergone general-purpose post-training (Section 2); that training is held constant
across architectures, so it cannot confound the within-model architectural deltas, but it does set
the absolute level. Our initial cross-model validation on Qwen3-235B (Section 4.9) finds that the
four-architecture progression and the pipeline → orchestrator lift both replicate in direction and
rough magnitude; the absolute level is model-specific (Qwen3 trails V3.2 by 11–15 pp at matched
architecture on this subset). The central claim, that architectural decomposition and adaptive re-
exploration recover much of the compute–accuracy gap, would be stronger if it held across additional
model families and at full-evaluation scale; the Qwen3 cross-model subset was constrained by provider
rate limits to 99 tasks, which prevents tight inference on the Qwen3 orchestrator lift specifically.

Run-to-run variance. Accuracy figures are point estimates from single runs. Bootstrap CIs
capture sampling uncertainty over the 400-task set but not execution noise from non-determinism
in the inference stack. Informal cross-ablation comparison suggests a ∼ ±2 pp single-run noise
floor. Explicit characterization with repeated runs of the headline cell remains future work, and
is particularly relevant for the smallest reported deltas (the −0.75 pp refinement ablation and the
+2.75 pp pass@1 → pass@2 bonus). The orchestrator’s adaptive exit conditions also introduce
per-task wall-clock variance absent in the pipeline, though dollar cost is token-based and thus
unaffected.


                                                   19
ARC-AGI-1 only. ARC-AGI-2 tasks are designed to resist single-step pattern matching and stress
multi-step compositional reasoning [11]. Whether the lifts reported here survive on harder material,
or whether they partly reflect a memorization floor shared by all conditions, remains to be settled by
running the same harnesses on ARC-AGI-2.

7   Future Work
The generation-bound diagnostic that motivated the Reflective Orchestrator points to several exten-
sions of the same logic: continue investing upstream in candidate diversity, with the orchestrator’s
spawn mechanism as the starting point rather than the endpoint.

Spawn-off ablation. The cleanest causal isolation of spawn’s contribution is to rerun the orches-
trator with explore_new_patterns disabled and observe the residual lift from the agentic loop
structure alone. The cross-system task analysis (Section 4.8) gives strong correlational evidence that
spawn drives the majority of orchestrator-unique solves, but a dedicated ablation run would convert
that into a paired delta. This was deferred from the present study only for cost reasons.

Spawn fan-out and depth. The orchestrator fixes K=2 explorers per spawn and caps spawn at
three calls per task, both motivated by pipeline-derived heuristics rather than orchestrator-specific
sweeps. A targeted K ×spawn-cap sweep would characterize whether the orchestrator’s own optimum
differs, and whether deeper nested re-exploration (a spawned explorer’s findings triggering a further
or broader spawn) is productive or wasteful.

Learned or signal-driven branch policy. Within the orchestrator architecture, the definer agent’s
branch decision (e.g., continue refining, spawn, or commit) is model-mediated, driven from the
structured train-pair diffs. Though less “agentic,” a learned branch classifier, or a self-certainty signal
derived from Kang et al. [24], could route earlier and more reliably. The orchestrator’s exit-mode
distribution (Section 4.8) shows that the MAX_ITERATIONS tail is the dominant cost driver, so a
sharper branch policy through prompting alone, heuristics, or other means could improve both
accuracy and cost.

Self-certainty-weighted explorer ranking. A complementary upstream lever is to rank explorer
outputs by per-explorer self-certainty before passing them to the synthesis stage, rather than con-
catenating them in agent-index order (effectively with uniform weight). Kang et al. [24] propose
self-certainty: a per-generation confidence estimate computed from token-level logprobs as the aver-
age KL divergence between each token’s output distribution and the uniform vocabulary distribution.
Ranking explorers via Borda voting on those scores would let the definer attend preferentially to
high-confidence pattern documents, on the hypothesis that confident explorers surface more reli-
able abstractions and that boosting their salience reduces the rate at which the definer commits to
low-confidence (and often wrong-frame) hypotheses from the fleet. We treat this as future work for
the practical reason that the endpoint we use does not currently expose token-level logprobs. The
intervention becomes feasible on any logprob-supported provider or model and pairs naturally with
the orchestrator: a more confidently-ranked explorer fleet plausibly reduces the rate of orchestrator
explore_new_patterns calls, shifting cost away from the significant MAX_ITERATIONS tail.

Cross-model panel extension. The Qwen3-235B cross-model run (Section 4.9) is currently con-
strained to a 99-task subset by provider rate limits. Extending it to the full ARC-AGI-1 evaluation set
would tighten the Qwen3 pipeline → orchestrator paired CI, which currently touches zero at n = 99.
Beyond that, a third model family — particularly a non-MoE architecture (e.g., Llama-3.3-70B) or a
smaller-tier instruct model — would test whether the generality observation holds across capability
tiers and architectural classes.

ARC-AGI-2. Running the same harness on ARC-AGI-2 [11] would test whether the lifts survive
on tasks designed to resist single-step pattern matching, and would partially address public-set
contamination concerns by evaluating on fresher material.

Direct-grid vs. code-output ablation. The pipeline’s and the orchestrator’s choice to require
executable Python rather than direct grid prediction is structurally important but has not been ablated.


                                                    20
A controlled comparison with the same explorers, and compressed artifacts but with a synthesis stage
that emits a grid directly would isolate the contribution of executable-code output and the verifier
signal it enables. This was avoided for our scope because direct-grid generation eliminates easily
attainable training set accuracy, which complicates the current selection mechanism implementation.

Hard-tail failure taxonomy. A qualitative classification of the tasks the orchestrator still cannot
solve would sharpen the generation-bound claim further: distinguishing exploration misses that even
spawn cannot recover, from synthesis misses (the right pattern is identified but the orchestrator fails
to program it), would inform promising levers to investigate.

Multi-modal exploration. Providing explorers with rendered images of the grids alongside the
symbolic representation is a plausible upstream lever: visual gestalt features (symmetry, containment,
alignment) may be more readily extracted from pixel-level input than from tokenized arrays. This is
a speculative extension and is not evaluated here.

References
 [1]   Jeremy Berman. Getting 50% (SoTA) on ARC-AGI with GPT-4o. Blog post, Jeremy’s Substack.
       Evolutionary Test-Time Compute; evolves Python transform functions. Accessed 2026-05-19.
       2024. URL: https://jeremyberman.substack.com/p/how-i-got-a-record-536-
       on-arc-agi.
 [2]   Jeremy Berman. How I Got the Highest Score on ARC-AGI Again, Swapping Python for
       English. Blog post, Jeremy’s Substack. Evolutionary Test-Time Compute with natural-language
       instructions; 79.6% on ARC-AGI-1, 29.4% on ARC-AGI-2 with Grok-4. Accessed 2026-05-19.
       2025. URL: https://jeremyberman.substack.com/p/how- i- got- the- highest-
       score-on-arc-agi-again.
 [3]   Eric Pang. Efficient Evolutionary Program Synthesis: How I Broke the Efficiency Frontier
       With a DreamCoder-Inspired Approach. Blog post, CT Pang’s Substack. DreamCoder-inspired
       LLM-assisted program synthesis; 77.1% on ARC-AGI-1, 26.0% on ARC-AGI-2, estimated
       $2.56 per task on ARC-AGI-1. Code: github.com/epang080516/arc_agi. Accessed 2026-05-
       19. 2025. URL: https://ctpang.substack.com/p/arc- agi- 2- sota- efficient-
       evolutionary.
 [4]   Ryan Greenblatt. Getting 50% (SoTA) on ARC-AGI with GPT-4o. Blog post, Redwood Re-
       search. Program synthesis with extensive sampling. Accessed 2026-05-19. 2024. URL: https:
       //redwoodresearch.substack.com/p/getting-50-sota-on-arc-agi-with-gpt.
 [5]   Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau. Less is More: Recursive Reasoning with Tiny Networks. Tiny
       Recursive Model (TRM); 7M parameters, 45% on ARC-AGI-1. 2025. arXiv: 2510.04871
       [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04871.
 [6]   Daniel Franzen, Jan Disselhoff, and David Hartmann. The LLM ARChitects: Solving ARC-
       AGI Is a Matter of Perspective. ARChitects competition entry; depth-first search with fine-
       tuned LLMs and test-time augmentation. 2025. arXiv: 2505.07859 [cs.LG]. URL: https:
       //arxiv.org/abs/2505.07859.
 [7]   François Chollet et al. ARC Prize 2024: Technical Report. 2024. arXiv: 2412.04604 [cs.AI].
       URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.04604.
 [8]   ARC Prize Foundation. ARC Prize Verified Testing Policy. 2025. URL: https://arcprize.
       org/policy (visited on 06/02/2026).
 [9]   Mark Chen et al. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code. Introduces the unbiased
       pass@k estimator. 2021. arXiv: 2107.03374 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
       2107.03374.
[10]   François Chollet. “On the Measure of Intelligence”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547
       (2019). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.01547.
[11]   François Chollet et al. ARC-AGI-2: A New Challenge for Frontier AI Reasoning Systems. 2025.
       arXiv: 2505.11831 [cs.AI]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.11831.
[12]   Antonio Roye-Azar et al. Tiny Recursive Models on ARC-AGI-1: Inductive Biases, Identity
       Conditioning, and Test-Time Compute. 2025. arXiv: 2512.11847 [cs.LG]. URL: https:
       //arxiv.org/abs/2512.11847.



                                                  21
[13] Xuezhi Wang et al. “Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language
     Models”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). 2023. arXiv:
     2203.11171 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11171.
[14] Xinyun Chen et al. Universal Self-Consistency for Large Language Model Generation. 2023.
     arXiv: 2311.17311 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17311.
[15] Noah Shinn et al. “Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning”. In:
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). 2023. URL: https://arxiv.
     org/abs/2303.11366.
[16] Andy Zhou et al. “Language Agent Tree Search Unifies Reasoning, Acting, and Planning in
     Language Models”. In: Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning
     (ICML). 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.04406.
[17] Aman Madaan et al. “Self-Refine: Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback”. In: Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). 2023. arXiv: 2303.17651 [cs.CL]. URL:
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.17651.
[18] Anthropic. The "think" tool: Enabling Claude to stop and think in complex tool use situ-
     ations. Anthropic Engineering Blog. Mar. 2025. URL: https://www.anthropic.com/
     engineering/claude-think-tool (visited on 03/20/2025).
[19] Kevin Ellis et al. “DreamCoder: Bootstrapping Inductive Program Synthesis with Wake-Sleep
     Library Learning”. In: Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on
     Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI). 2021. URL: https://arxiv.
     org/abs/2006.08381.
[20] Sam Acquaviva et al. “Communicating Natural Programs to Humans and Machines”. In:
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2022). URL: https : / /
     arxiv.org/abs/2106.07824.
[21] Charlie Snell et al. Scaling LLM Test-Time Compute Optimally Can Be More Effective than
     Scaling Model Parameters. 2024. arXiv: 2408.03314 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/
     abs/2408.03314.
[22] Hunter Lightman et al. “Let’s Verify Step by Step”. In: International Conference on Learning
     Representations (ICLR). 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.20050.
[23] Jason Wei et al. “Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models”.
     In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). 2022. URL: https :
     //arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903.
[24] Zhewei Kang, Xuandong Zhao, and Dawn Song. “Scalable Best-of-N Selection for Large
     Language Models via Self-Certainty”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
     (NeurIPS). 2025. arXiv: 2502.18581 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.
     18581.


A     Canonical task: 3a301edc

This appendix walks through a single ARC-AGI-1 evaluation task on which the Reflective Orchestra-
tor’s spawn mechanism is decisive. The task is failed by the baseline, by CoT, and by the pipeline;
the orchestrator solves it after one of its five definers called explore_new_patterns. The trace
illustrates the mechanism in concrete terms and exposes a subtler property of the task: the training
pairs do not just underdetermine the correct rule, they are equivalently described by two distinct rule
families, both of which produce identical predictions on all five training outputs.

A.1   The task

The training pairs cannot distinguish the rules. Table 5 evaluates both rules on every training
pair. On all five, the two rules produce identical predictions; their disagreement only manifests on the
test pair.
In the pipeline, no amount of refinement on the arithmetic rule from training feedback alone can
cause preference of another rule, so both reach train = 100% by construction. The disambiguation
requires a prior over rule families: a definer either recognizes the arithmetic formula as an ad-hoc
explanation that needs structural support, or it does not.


                                                  22
 Figure 8: Task 3a301edc, training pairs and test pair (input on top, expected output on bottom).

Table 5: Predicted border thickness under each rule for every pair in task 3a301edc. The two
rules agree on all five training pairs and disagree only on the test pair, where the arithmetic rule
overestimates by a single cell. Gap and color values per row are read off the inputs in Figure 8; the
arithmetic-rule column shows the resulting max(gap, |∆color|) computation.

              Pair         Inner shape         Geometric rule        Arithmetic rule     Actual
              Train 1   4 × 3 (rectangle)    min(4, 3) − 1 = 2       max(2, 1) = 2         2
              Train 2     1 × 1 (single)         side = 1           special-case → 1       1
              Train 3    2 × 2 (square)          side = 2            max(1, 2) = 2         2
              Train 4    3 × 3 (square)          side = 3            max(2, 3) = 3         3
              Train 5     1 × 1 (single)         side = 1           special-case → 1       1
              Test       4 × 4 (square)           side = 4          max(1, 5) = 5          4


A.2   Pipeline behavior: the off-by-one failure

All five pipeline definers on this task reach train = 100% on the arithmetic rule. Their predictions on
the held-out test pair are identical: a new outer border of thickness five, anchored five cells outside
the original outer region in every direction. The expected test output has a border of thickness four.
The pipeline is wrong by a single cell on every side, and identically so across all five definers.
Dedup-by-test-prediction collapses the five convergent definers into a single candidate, so the pass@2
submission contains exactly one distinct candidate (the wrong one) and the task fails. This is the
failure mode the generation-bound diagnostic predicts at the trace level: selection is not the problem
(all five candidates being wrong in the same way is exactly the case in which no selection policy
over the candidate pool can succeed), and the problem is not training-feedback either (all five are
at train = 100%). The problem is that the candidate distribution does not contain the geometric
rule. The pipeline’s directed handoff prevents the definer from returning to exploration once it has
committed to the arithmetic frame.

A.3   Orchestrator behavior: how spawn unlocks the right frame

Four of five orchestrator definers also lock onto the arithmetic rule and reach train = 100% with
it. The fifth definer, after the same initial confidence, becomes structurally suspicious of its own
hypothesis; unlike in the pipeline, it is equipped to call explore_new_patterns, doing so with
primarily negative guidance:
         “The PatternExplorers have conflicting hypotheses. Border color always equals innermost
         region’s color. Border thickness = |outer-inner| fails Examples 1,2. Border thickness = gap
         size: gap is 1 for all examples but thickness varies. Border thickness = border color value:
         fails Example 4 (color=2 but thickness=3). Positive hypotheses to explore: is thickness
         = min(inner_width, inner_height)? Does the algorithm respect the inner region’s
         shape (square vs. rectangular)?”

The definer’s specific arithmetic claims in this guidance are imprecise, since the gap is in fact
2, 2, 1, 2, 1 across the five training pairs rather than 1 throughout, but the structural conclusion holds:


                                                     23
thickness does not track gap in a clean functional way (gap = 2 in Train 1 with thickness 2 but gap
= 2 in Train 2 with thickness 1), so a gap-only formula cannot be the rule. What matters is the
agent’s expressed shift in category: from arithmetic-feature explanations toward shape-based ones.
The single positive hypothesis at the end of the guidance — “Does the algorithm respect the inner
region’s shape (square vs. rectangular)?” — is the critical redirect.
The two spawned focused explorers, conditioned on this guidance, iteratively examine the described
pattern and return findings that converge on the geometric rule. In particular, a returned PatternEx-
plorer states explicitly:

         “If innermost region is square (width = height), border thickness equals width (or height)
         of that square region. If innermost region is rectangular (width ̸= height), border thickness
         equals min(width, height) − 1.”

The orchestrator definer reads this, redefines the transformation from scratch using a shape-conditional
branch, and reaches train = 100% on a categorically different program from the other four definers.
The substantive enabler is not that the spawning definer was more careful in its reasoning (we note
above that its trace contains arithmetic mistakes the other four do not). Rather, the enabler is that
the architecture exposes a tool (explore_new_patterns) that lets one definer redirect the search
toward a different category of explanation, conditioned on a brief structural intuition that the current
category is wrong. The spawn mechanism turns a vague structural suspicion about the arithmetic
formula into a concrete re-exploration with shape-oriented guidance, which is enough for the spawned
explorers to gather evidence and surface the correct rule.

A.4   Why selection picks the winner

All five orchestrator definers reach train = 100%, so the training-set score alone is uninformative.
Without dedup-by-test-prediction, the top-2 pass@2 candidates would be the first two (arithmetic-rule)
definers by agent index and the task would fail. With dedup-by-test-prediction, the four convergent
arithmetic-rule definers merge into a single candidate and the spawning definer’s geometric-rule
prediction becomes a second distinct candidate; both are submitted as pass@2 and the geometric
prediction matches the expected test output exactly.
The mechanism is selection-architectural in a specific sense: dedup-by-test-prediction is the selection
rule that lets a single dissenter outvote a convergent majority. It pairs naturally with mid-loop spawn
because spawn is the mechanism that produces dissenters in the first place. Together they encode the
assumption that on hard ARC tasks where multiple rules fit the training pairs, the productive search
direction is to amplify candidate diversity, not to compound candidate confidence. Task 3a301edc is
one instance of this pattern; the cross-system analysis (Section 4.8) shows that approximately 75% of
orchestrator-unique solves follow the same trace shape.




                                                      24
