                                                                   S OCIAL N ETWORKS OF LLM AGENTS


                                                                      Kaixuan Liu                                       Guojun Xiong∗
                                                             Department of Computer Science                       School of Computer Science
                                                                    Emory University                             Shanghai Jiao Tong University
                                                                   Atlanta, GA 30322                                   Shanghai, China
                                                               kaixuan.liu@emory.edu                               gjxiong@sjtu.edu.cn




arXiv:2607.03695v1 [cs.LG] 4 Jul 2026
                                                                   Weinan Zhang                                        Shengpu Tang
                                                              School of Computer Science                       Department of Computer Science
                                                             Shanghai Jiao Tong University                            Emory University
                                                                   Shanghai, China                                   Atlanta, GA 30322
                                                               wnzhang@sjtu.edu.cn                              shengpu.tang@emory.edu


                                                                                                July 7, 2026

                                                                                               A BSTRACT
                                                    Large language model (LLM) agents are increasingly deployed in interacting populations, raising the
                                                    question of what such populations come to believe collectively. Whether a population aggregates
                                                    genuine knowledge or collapses into a false consensus directly affects how much such systems can
                                                    be trusted. Classical social-network models assume that the network itself determines how beliefs
                                                    combine. This assumption breaks down for LLM agents, whose limited attention takes in only part
                                                    of what they are exposed to, so these models overstate how much information a population actually
                                                    pools and cannot tell genuine consensus from herding. We introduce SNLA, a framework that models
                                                    how much each agent actually influences others, rather than merely how the network connects them.
                                                    This influence depends on each agent’s position in the network and on how sharply attention focuses.
                                                    Theoretically, we show on a tractable proxy that narrow attention causes herding, where the effective
                                                    sample size stays bounded regardless of population size, while wide attention recovers wisdom-of-
                                                    crowds behavior only when the exposure graph is undirected and degree-regular. Empirically, a
                                                    controlled testbed validates these predictions directly, and the herding–wisdom transition reproduces
                                                    on operator-controlled variants of three multi-agent LLM benchmarks.

                                        1       Introduction
                                        Large language model (LLM) agents are increasingly deployed in interacting populations. They debate to reach answers
                                        [15, 8, 30], advise and persuade one another [33], and simulate social processes at scale [20, 34]. In all of these settings,
                                        one question recurs: what does the population come to believe collectively, and can that collective belief be trusted? (i)
                                        A group that pools its members’ independent information can be more accurate than any individual [19]; (ii) a group
                                        that copies its most visible members can collapse into a confident error [4, 5]. Distinguishing the two is essential before
                                        such systems are relied upon for decisions.
                                        The classical answer comes from the theory of social learning on networks. In the DeGroot model [14] and its variants
                                        [18], each agent repeatedly replaces its belief with a weighted average of its neighbors’, with weights read directly off
                                        the network: the graph structure alone determines how beliefs combine. Golub and Jackson [21] characterize when this
                                        process is wise. A large society converges to the truth if and only if no single agent stays too influential as the society
                                        grows; prominent agents are the main obstruction. A parallel Bayesian line reaches the same tension through sequential
                                        observational learning [3, 1]. This theory is elegant and its predictions are sharp. But it rests on one assumption that
                                        fails for LLM agents: that an agent aggregates everything its network exposes it to.
                                            ∗
                                                Correspondence to Guojun Xiong <gjxiong@sjtu.edu.cn>.
                                                                                                                                           A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026



                                            Visible Exposure Is Not Realized Influence                                                         t = 2 Realized influence

            TASK — 5 agents must decide: hire A or B?                                                                              HERDING — narrow β

                                                                                                       Operator bridge                                  A₁
                                                                                                                                                                  𝑁eff ≈ 2
            Public: everyone heard “A is experienced” → leans A
                                                                                                        score = W̄ᵢⱼ × πⱼ
            Private: agents 2 & 4 know facts that together favor B
                                                                                                       Cᵢⱼ = softmaxβ(score)               ✗                                 ✗
            Will they share the facts, or just pick A? (answer = B)                                   β controls attention width      A₂                A₃              A₄


 Social exposure
                        t = 0 Belief 𝑏𝑖0                Belief update t = 1 Speech (broadcast)
                                                                                                                                                        A₅   → picks A ✗ (wrong)

       Agent 1             prior A    → public cue                      A → A:    group leans A, so
                         hears “A is experienced”                      I agree
       shared fact                                                                                                                 WISDOM — wide β
        Agent 2           private B     → solved it                      B evidence → silent:
                                                                                                          Operator                                   A₁            𝑁eff ≈ 5
                         should update toward B                        won’t mention B
       hidden clue                                                                                     𝐶𝑖: = Γ𝛽 𝑊𝑖: ⊙ 𝜋
                           public hub A     → repeats                     A hub → louder A:
        Agent 3
                         locks group on A                              broadcasts A                                                  A₂              A₃                A₄
    shared info (hub)
                          private B     → A failed                       B evidence → silent:
        Agent 4
                         fact should favor B                           hides A’s failure
       hidden clue
                          prior A
                                                                                                                                                     A₅
                                     → social proof                                                                                                          → picks B ✓ (correct)
        Agent 5                                                          A → A:    follows group,
                         everyone mentions A                            says A
       shared fact



Figure 1: From exposure to realized influence. The visible exposure graph W̄ (left) records what each agent could see;
edges are exposure weights and node a3 carries high social power π. The realized-influence operator Ci· = Γβ (W̄i· ⊙ π)
reweights each reader’s exposure by source social power and concentrates it through a finite attention width β. The
graph C (right) depends sharply on β: narrow attention (β=0.3) collapses influence onto the most powerful source
(herding); wide attention (β=3) spreads it across the population (wisdom of crowds); β=1 allocates proportionally.


But an LLM agent does not aggregate this way. Its context is limited and its attention is selective: it incorporates only
part of what it is exposed to, and concentrates on the most salient sources. What combines beliefs is therefore not the
visible network, but a reweighted version that concentrates influence on a few sources (Figure 1). Prior work places
LLM agents in networks and documents their failures: agents slide into conformity, herding toward the most confident
peer even when a minority is better supported [9], and grow increasingly sycophantic in repeated debate [36]. These
studies propose fixes, but they do not explain when a population herds and when it stays wise, nor do they expose a
control that moves it between the two regimes.
We close this gap with SNLA (Social Networks of LLM Agents), a social-network model in which exposure and realized
influence are distinct. Starting from the visible network, SNLA derives a realized-influence operator determined by
two quantities: the social power of each source [6, 7], and an attention width that controls how sharply finite attention
concentrates on the most powerful sources. The theory is developed for a tractable proxy and validated against the
operational LLM system via a bridge theorem. Classical opinion dynamics are recovered exactly when attention is
unselective; the regime of interest lies away from it.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
▷ Realized influence as a derived object. We introduce SNLA, a framework in which influence is not read off the
interaction structure but derived from it through social power and a finite attention width, separating visible exposure
from realized influence (Section 3).
▷ Attention width controls collective intelligence. A bridge theorem couples the LLM population to a tractable proxy
path-wise (Theorem 4.1); a two-regime theorem shows attention width drives the herding–wisdom transition on the
proxy, reaching wisdom-of-crowds accuracy only when every agent hears comparably many others (Theorem 4.2); an
equalization theorem shows failure modes share a common cause, which a decentralized pricing protocol removes,
eliminating herding in the exact-clearing limit and substantially reducing it online (Theorem 4.3).
▷ Empirical validation. A controlled testbed with scalar signals and anchored updating (λmax <1) directly validates
the variance predictions and the proxy–LLM bridge; on operator-controlled variants of three recognized benchmarks,
the herding–wisdom transition, the placement effect, and the equalizer’s removal of herding all reproduce as qualitative
swings in collective accuracy (Section 5).

2     Related Work
Social networks. Classical opinion dynamics reads influence directly off the network. In the DeGroot [14] and
Friedkin–Johnsen [18] models, each agent updates toward a weighted average of its neighbors, and Golub and Jackson


                                                                                           2
                                                                                              A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


[21] characterize when this yields accurate collective estimates. A parallel Bayesian line reaches similar conclusions
under sequential updating [3, 1]. These models were designed for human agents who read everything they are exposed
to; for LLM agents, finite attention realizes only part of the exposure as influence. SNLA builds on this tradition but
replaces the network weights with an influence operator derived from social power and attention width, recovering the
classical models as a special case.
LLM multi-agent systems and collective behavior. Prior work shows LLM populations reproducing human-like
opinion dynamics and network structure [10, 32], with consensus degrading at scale [13], debate helping only when
independent [15, 30, 8, 42], and single persuasive agents swaying whole groups [2]. A separate line wires such agents
into systems for software development [38], role-play [28], and task-solving [44, 25, 24]. Neither asks what a topology
actually realizes: the first documents herding without a control that reverses it; the second treats it as a design choice
for performance, not a determinant of influence. SNLA asks that question directly, separating exposure from realized
influence to derive when a population herds or stays wise.
Mixture-of-experts. MoE routing exhibits the same column pathology: a temperature-softmax over gate scores
collapses tokens onto a few experts (router collapse), and the standard fixes, load-balancing losses [40, 16], Sinkhorn
routing [11], and loss-free per-expert bias [43], are instances of our equalizer, with the exposure price yj the analogue
of the per-expert load bias. SNLA adds the collective-estimation account these lack: when concentration caps the
effective sample size, and when balancing restores it.

3     Problem Formulation
In this section, we formalize the social network induced by a population of LLM agents. The central object is the
realized-influence operator, which records how much each source actually shapes another agent’s beliefs, as distinct
from the visible exposure that the network makes available.

3.1   Opinion Dynamics and Collective Estimation

Opinion dynamics. In the DeGroot model [14], each agent updates its belief as a weighted average of its neighbors’;
the Friedkin–Johnsen model [18] adds anchoring:
                                 X                                              X
                    bi (t + 1) =   Wij bj (t),  bi (t + 1) = (1 − λi ) b0i + λi    Wij bj (t),
                                     j                                                   j

where W ∈ Rn×n is row-stochastic, λi ∈ [0, 1] is the anchoring weight, and b0i := bi (0) the initial belief. The influence
matrix is exogenous: the network alone determines how beliefs combine.

Collective estimation. Each agent begins with a private signal b0i = θ⋆ + ξi , where ξi is independent across agents
with mean zero and variance s2i . The collective estimate at horizon T is the population average θ̂T = n1 i bi (T ) =
                                                                                                           P
          0                                                                          n ⊤
P
  i qT,i bi , a weighted combination of the initial signals with weight vector qT ∈ R , qT 1 = 1. In the homoskedastic
      2       2
case si ≡ s , its variance is:
                                                   Var(θ̂T ) = s2 ∥qT ∥22 ,
minimized at s2 /n when qT = n1 1, the wisdom-of-crowds optimum [21]. A weight concentrated on a few agents
instead keeps the variance bounded away from s2 /n regardless of population size, the herding regime. Whether a
population is wise or herds is therefore set by qT , which the network produces as beliefs evolve.

3.2   Social Networks of LLM Agents

Agents and events. We model a population A = {1, . . . , n} of n LLM agents. Each agent i is a triple (ρi , µi , mi ),
where ρi is a fixed persona that anchors its belief, µi (t) a mutable state holding its memory, and mi a backbone model
mapping context to an emission. Each agent holds a declared belief bi (t) ∈ R about an unknown scalar θ⋆ ∈ R; we
write b(t) = (b1 (t), . . . , bn (t))⊤ ∈ Rn for the stacked belief vector and b0 = b(0) for the initial signals. At each round
t ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . .}, agents emit events; with X the space of message texts, an event

                              em = (sm , Rm , xm , bm , tm ) ∈ A × 2A × X × R × R≥0
records its sender, recipient set, message text, declared belief, and timestamp. The history up to time t is E≤t = {em :
tm ≤ t}, from which the network is induced.


                                                              3
                                                                                              A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


Exposure and realized-influence graphs. Classical opinion dynamics distinguishes the communication graph,
recording which agents are aware of one another’s opinions, from the influence graph, recording who actually shapes
whom. In the classical setting the two coincide, since an agent that reads a neighbor also aggregates it [37]. Finite
attention breaks this coincidence, and SNLA is built on the separation into two weighted directed graphs on the agents:
                                                                                         
                            GW̄ (t) = A, EW̄ (t), W̄ (t) ,     GC (t) = A, EC (t), C(t) ,
both with node set A and a row-stochastic weighted adjacency matrix in Rn×n .
In the visible exposure graph GW̄ (t), an arc j → i is present whenever agent i has been exposed to a message from
agent j in E≤t , with weight W̄ij (t) ∈ [0, 1] the attention agent i places on source j. The realized-influence graph GC (t)
records the influence that finite attention realizes: an agent can be influenced only by sources it is exposed to, so its arcs
are contained in the exposure arcs,
                                                       EC (t) ⊆ EW̄ (t),
and Cij (t) ∈ [0, 1] is the weight with which agent i aggregates source j’s belief. Together with a social power vector
π(t) ∈ ∆n that weights each agent by its centrality as a source in GW̄ (t), these objects form the social network of LLM
agents (SNLA), the time-indexed tuple:
                                                                                  
                                           S(t) = A, E≤t , W̄ (t), π(t), C(t) .
Its defining feature is that C(t) ̸= W̄ (t) in general; the classical model is recovered only when attention is unselective
and social power uniform, at which C(t) = W̄ (t).

4     Proposed Methodology
In this section, we construct the realized-influence operator C(t) that determines how much each source shapes another
agent’s beliefs. We then give a decentralized protocol that keeps any single source from dominating the population’s
attention, and state the theoretical guarantees that follow.

4.1   The Realized-Influence Operator

Exposure and social power. The operator is built in two steps from the event history: we first turn the history into a
visible exposure graph, then weight its sources by their standing in that graph. Fix a memory kernel κ : R≥0 → R≥0
that discounts old events and per-event qualities qm ≥ 0. The unnormalized exposure of agent i to source j accumulates
every message j sent that i received:
                                              X
                                  Aij (t) =         1{sm = j, i ∈ Rm } κ(t − tm ) qm ,
                                             em ∈E≤t

and row-normalizing gives the row-stochastic exposure matrix W̄ (t). Exposure alone treats all sources symmetrically,
but an agent carries more standing when influential agents attend to it. We score this standing by the Katz–Bonacich
centrality of the exposure graph [6], for a damping factor ζ ∈ [0, 1):
                                                1−ζ ⊤                  −1
                                       π(t)⊤ =        1 I − ζ W̄ (t)       ∈ ∆n ,
                                                  n
which weights each source by exposure accumulated over paths of every length. At ζ = 0 power is uniform and
influence reduces to exposure alone.

Realized influence. Exposure and power say how much each source could influence agent i; a finite context window
forces i to realize only part of it. We form a per-pair score sij (t) := W̄ij (t) πj (t) — multiplicative, so a source matters
to i only when i is exposed to it and it carries standing — and pass each row through a temperature-β softmax over the
log-scores:
                                                                                sij (t)1/β
                                    sij (t) := W̄ij (t) πj (t),  Cij (t) = P             1/β
                                                                                             .                             (1)
                                                                                k sik (t)
The width β is the temperature, controlling how sharply each reader’s budget concentrates: β → 0 collapses the row
onto its highest-scoring source (hard attention), β = 1 allocates proportionally, and β → ∞ spreads it uniformly over
exposed sources. The result C(t) is the realized-influence operator of Section 3: row-stochastic, supported on W̄ (t),
and equal to W̄ (t) at the classical point ζ = 0, β = 1. It drives the opinion dynamics in place of the classical fixed
matrix, updated each round as new events arrive. In the LLM harness, each reader is shown the smallest set of peers
covering 0.9 of its row mass (Appendix 12.3); the residual δ (Section 4.3) is measured against the full C, so this hard
cutoff enters as a bounded contribution rather than an unmodeled gap.


                                                              4
                                                                                          A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026



 Algorithm 1: SNLA-EQ: realized influence with equalized context allocation.
   Input :agents {(ρi , µi , mi )}ni=1 , private signals b0i , parameters β, ζ, T
   Output :collective estimate θ̂T
                                     0
 1 initialize beliefs bi (0) ← bi and prices yj ← 1 for all i, j
 2 for t = 0, 1, . . . , T − 1 do
 3      form exposure W̄ (t) and social power π(t) from history E≤t
 4      Reader rule: priced temperature-β allocation
                         sij (t)1/β /yj
 5      Cij (t) ← P                1/β /y
                                            for all i, j
                         k sik (t)        k
 6      foreach agent i do
 7          build context from persona ρi , state µi (t), and influence row Ci: (t)
 8          emit belief, message, recipients (bi (t+1), xi (t), Ri (t)) ∼ mi
 9          append event ei (t) to E and update state µi (t+1)
10      SourcePrule: each source raises its price by its attention share
11      aj ← i Cij (t), yj ← yj · aj for all j
                   1
                      P
12 return θ̂T = n         i bi (T )




4.2   Equalized Context Allocation

Exposure pricing. The operator just built has a structural weakness that the theory of Section 4.3 traces to a single
source. Row normalization bounds each reader’s budget, but nothing bounds the source side: a high-power source can
occupy a large share of the population’s contexts, so its column sum grows without bound,
                                                   X
                                                        Cij (t) ≫ 1.
                                                     i

We correct this with a decentralized pricing protocol: each source j holds a scalar exposure price yj > 0 (initialized at
one), which discounts its weight in every reader’s allocation and is updated by the attention share it received,
                                      sij (t)1/β /yj                               X
                         Cij (t) = P             1/β
                                                         ,  yj ← yj · aj , aj =        Cij (t).                       (2)
                                       k sik (t)     /yk                             i

At the fixed point aj = 1 for all j, so C(t) has unit row and column sums, 1⊤ C(t) = 1⊤ and C(t)1 = 1: the
realized influence is doubly stochastic. This is one Sinkhorn iteration per round [41], decentralized to O(di ) work and
one broadcast scalar per agent, and (in its cleared limit) invariant to the social-power weighting, attenuates exactly
the high-power sources that would otherwise dominate. Algorithm 1 collects the full per-round loop; the Sinkhorn
equivalence and a targeted heteroskedastic variant are in Appendix 11.

4.3   Theoretical Guarantees

With the allocator in place, we now analyze what it implies for collective accuracy. The operational beliefs are emitted
by LLMs and are not directly analyzable, so we pair them with a tractable proxy driven by the same realized influence,
an anchored best-response (Friedkin–Johnsen) recursion:
                                                       X
                        bBR                     0
                         i (t + 1) = (1 − λi ) bi + λi    Cij (t) bBR
                                                                    j (t),      λmax = max λi ,                      (3)
                                                                                           i
                                                          j

with anchoring weights λi ∈ [0, 1). The operational emission need not solve this recursion exactly; we measure its
per-step deviation by the residual of agent i at round t, evaluated at the operational system’s own beliefs b(t):
                                                                          X
                                δ̂i (t) = bi (t + 1) − (1 − λi ) b0i − λi   Cij (t) bj (t) ,                      (4)
                                                                         j

which is computable from the event log once the run is complete. Unrolling the proxy recursion writes its estimate
as a fixed weighting of the initial signals, θ̂TBR = qT⊤ b0 , where the collective weight qT is determined by {C(t)}
(Appendix 8). The wisdom-versus-herding question of Section 3.1 thus becomes a question about qT , which the three
results below answer: the first connects the proxy to the operational system, and the next two characterize the consensus
weight under the baseline and the equalized allocator. All proofs, constants, and assumptions are in Appendix 8.


                                                              5
                                                                                             A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


Theorem 4.1 (Bridge). Suppose every LLM emission is a δ-approximate best response evaluated at its own beliefs, i.e.
δ̂i (t) ≤ δT for all i and t < T , where δT = maxi, 0≤t<T δ̂i (t) is the uniform residual equation 4 and λmax < 1. Then
for every t ≤ T and every row-stochastic sequence {C(t)},
                                                                       δT
                                              b(t) − bBR (t) ∞ ≤             .                                           (5)
                                                                    1 − λmax

The bound is path-wise and attained, and anchoring cannot be dropped: at λmax = 1 a row-stochastic sequence and
emission rule exists whose gap grows linearly in t (Appendix 8), a counterexample rather than a claim that every
λmax = 1 system diverges. The bound is non-vacuous in practice: an explicit anchoring prompt keeps λ comfortably
below one on the anchored-persona cells (median 0.25; full breakdown in Section 5.2), and Figure 4 confirms the
bound holds on real agents. The operational estimate inherits the proxy’s accuracy, |θ̂T − θ̂TBR | ≤ δT /(1 − λmax ), and
likewise its standard deviation, so it suffices to analyze qT , measured via the effective sample size Neff (qT ) = 1/∥qT ∥22
[26], which gives variance s2 /Neff (qT ).
The next theorem fixes the exposure graph and varies the attention width. It characterizes the consensus weight
νC(β) , the stationary distribution of C(β), which is the long-horizon limit of qT under uniform anchoring as λ ↑ 1
(Appendix 8); accordingly Neff (β) = 1/∥νC(β) ∥22 . We reserve π(t) for the social power that builds C and write ν for
the consensus weight it induces; the two are distinct.
Theorem 4.2 (Attention width controls collective accuracy). Let C(β) be the fixed-graph realized influence   P with
ζ ∈ [0, 1) and irreducible exposure support B, where Bij = 1{W̄ij > 0}. Write the degrees di =                  j Bij ,
D = diag(d1 , . . . , dn ), dmax = maxi di , and let L be the log-spread and g the dominance gap of the scores sij
(Appendix 8). In the homoskedastic case:

      1. (Wide, wisdom of crowds.) If B = B ⊤ is irreducible, then C(β) → D−1 B and νC(β) → d/(1⊤ d) as
         β → ∞, so:
                                                              ( i di )2
                                                               P
                                             lim Neff (β) = P 2 ,
                                            β→∞                  i di
         which equals n if and only if B is degree-regular; for finite β the consensus weight obeys ∥νC(β) ∥22 −∥ν ⋆ ∥22 ≤
         2κ    L/β
          PB (e 2 P− 1) with ν ⋆ = d/(1⊤ d) and κB a condition number of D−1 B (Appendix 8), so:Neff (β) →
         ( i di ) / i d2i by continuity.
      2. (Narrow, herding.) Assume B is irreducible and the scores admit a unique dominant pair: ji⋆ = arg maxk sik
         is unique for every row, with ji⋆ = h for all i ̸= h and jh⋆ = g ̸= h. Then with ρ(β) = (dmax − 1) e−g/β ,
         whenever ρ(β) < 1,
                                                                     2
                                                   Neff (β) ≤               ,
                                                               (1 − ρ(β))2
         so Neff (β) ≤ 8 whenever ρ(β) ≤ 12 , i.e. β ≤ g/ log(2(dmax − 1)), independently of n.

Narrow attention concentrates each row of C on the dominant pair, collapsing the collective weight onto a few agents;
wide attention flattens it but reaches the optimum only under degree-regularity, the sole remaining obstruction. Both
failures are column imbalances of C, which is exactly what the equalized allocator removes.
Theorem 4.3 (Exact optimality under equalization). Under uniform anchoring λ ∈ [0, 1) and signal exogeneity, let δ̄col
be the largest column defect over the run. Then the proxy weight satisfies:
                                                                           
                                            qT − n1 1 ≤ δ̄col 1−λ
                                                                λ
                                                                   + T λT ,
                                                       1

for every horizon T and every realized sequence. In particular, if every C(t) is doubly stochastic (δ̄col = 0), then
qT = n1 1 exactly, so Var(θ̂TBR ) = s2 /n and Neff = n. The operational estimate inherits this up to the bridge gap,
                                                        δT                       
                                     sd(θ̂T ) − √sn ≤                  λ
                                                            + s δ̄col 1−λ + T λT .
                                                      1−λ

Each price round is one Sinkhorn iteration, which need not clear the market exactly in a single pass; the guarantee is
stated in the measured column defect δ̄col actually achieved at run time, and is exact only in the doubly stochastic limit,
reached by iterating the price update to tolerance (Appendix 11). Unlike the baseline, which collapses to Neff ≤ 8
under a dominant pair no matter how large n is, the equalized allocator drives qT to uniform at a rate set by δ̄col , with
no mixing, aperiodicity, or connectivity hypothesis on the realized sequence.


                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                         A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


5                       Experiments
5.1                          Experimental setup

Benchmarks. HiddenBench [29] poses 12 hidden-profile reasoning problems, where each of n=24 agents holds a
different clue that the group must pool to answer correctly; Werewolf [45] is a 16-agent social deduction game where
villagers deliberate and vote to unmask a hidden adversarial werewolf; and AgentsNet [23] places n ∈ {8, 16, 24, 32, 50}
agents as nodes in a graph, where each communicates only with its neighbours to reach a conflict-free colouring. We
additionally map the theorem’s boundary on full-information Debate [15] and commons-dilemma GovSim [35]. Full
environment specifications are in Appendix 12.4.
Models. Each agent is Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct [39] by default, run offline with greedy decoding (temperature-0); each
condition is repeated over 5 seeds re-drawing tasks and position assignments, and the shaded bands in Figures 2 and 3
span their min–max. A network is one model instantiated as n agents that share weights, differing only in persona,
private information, and position, so any collective effect is structural rather than a capability artifact — the injected
confident-wrong leader is the same base model, so herding traces to its position, not lower capability. Two experiments
break this homogeneity: the AgentsNet society pairs strong 7B hubs with weak 1.5B agents, and the capability ladder
scales the central agent across Qwen2.5-{1.5, 3, 7, 14}B, replicated on Llama-3-{1, 3, 8}B [22]. Full model, operator,
seed, prompt, and hardware details are in Appendices 12.1–12.6.

5.2                          Main results

Context width β controls herding versus wisdom. A single knob, the context width β, swings the collective between
herding and wisdom on both aggregation-dependent tasks (Figure 2A,B). In HiddenBench, the baseline collapses onto
the confident-wrong hub at narrow β and recovers at wide β, improving collective accuracy by +0.64. A single item
traced through both regimes, with the exact prompts and the model’s real replies, is in Appendix 12.7. The equalizer
removes this collapse, while the control shows it disappears without the dominant-wrong source. Werewolf shows the
same pattern with the game’s intrinsic wrong source seated at the influence hub: the baseline moves from near-zero
accuracy at narrow β to substantially higher accuracy at wide β (+0.61), while the equalizer and control stay above
the herding floor. The same collapse and equalizer recovery replicate on Llama-3.1-8B (Table 11). The individual
and oracle lines mark the lower and upper reference levels; the oracle gap is diagnosed in Appendix 13.3. The full
per-β breakdown, including the causal adversary-on/off decomposition, is in Appendices 13.4 (HiddenBench) and 13.5
(Werewolf).

                                    (A) HiddenBench,         n = 24                      (B) Werewolf,     n = 16                                                   (C) AgentsNet
                                                                                  oracle 1.00
                       1.0                                                                                                                                     strong @ centre
                               oracle 0.92
                                                                                                                              ↓                     30         strong @ periphery




 collective accuracy
                                                                                                                              colouring conflicts
                       0.8




                       0.6                                                                                                                          20




                                                                 Unpriced
                       0.4
                                                                 Priced

                                                                 No wrong hub
                                                                                                                                                    10
                       0.2
                                                         individual 0.08
                                                                                                            individual 0.05



                       0.0


                              0.1       0.3        1         3              10   0.1       0.3         1        3        10                               10         20          30   40   50


                                             context width   β                                  context width   β                                                   network size      n

Figure 2: One influence operator, three recognized environments, two facets. (A, B) Collective accuracy vs. context
width β on HiddenBench (n=24) and Werewolf (n=16). Orange is the baseline allocator, blue is the equalizer, and
light blue is the control that removes the dominant-wrong source. Dotted lines show individual and oracle reference
levels; shaded bands in (A, B) span the seed-to-seed min–max over 5 seeds. (C) Colouring conflicts vs. network size n
on AgentsNet, comparing strong agents placed at the centre (green) with strong agents placed at the periphery (gold).


Where capability sits controls coordination. On a coordination task the operator exposes a different facet (Figure 2C).
AgentsNet has agents self-organise into complementary colours. A heterogeneous 7B×1.5B society fixes the capability
budget, varying only where the strong agents sit: strong agents at the centre yield fewer conflicts than at the periphery,
and the advantage grows with scale, from +1.5 at n=8 to +10.6 at n=50. Coordination has no single wrong answer to
herd onto, isolating placement rather than the herding–wisdom transition. The placement ablation matrix (social-power
and Sinkhorn invariance, the weak-hub Watts–Strogatz control) is in Appendix 13.6.


                                                                                                   7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


                                      (a) HiddenBench, n                 = 24                                                  (b) Werewolf, n                      = 16                                                (c) clearing speed is comparable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fully cleared




                                                                                                                                                                                         fraction of gap closed
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.00




collective accuracy
                 0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.75

                 0.4


                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                 Unpriced

                                                                                 Fully cleared
                 0.2
                                                                                 Online priced
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.25


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HiddenBench

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Werewolf
                 0.0                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00



                               0            1        2           3               4           5                    0                1                 2                3              4                                                 0          1        2         3         4             5


                                                discussion round t                                                              discussion round t                                                                                              discussion round t
     Figure 3: The equalizer clears herding online, round by round. Per-round collective accuracy at narrow β on
     HiddenBench (n=24) and Werewolf (n=16). Orange is the baseline; grey dashed is the operator, obtained by clearing
     the equalized operator to its fixed point each round; blue is online pricing, which applies one price update per discussion
     round. Shaded bands span the min–max over 5 seeds. (c) Fraction of the narrow-β gap closed over rounds on
     HiddenBench and Werewolf.


    Online pricing clears herding round by round. Figure 3 separates the ideal equalized operator from its online
    implementation, which runs one price update per discussion round rather than to convergence (the decentralized
    protocol of Section 4.2). Because prices start uniform, the first step sits at the baseline and the collective follows the
    confident-wrong source; subsequent updates reduce the captured column, so the online curve rises toward the operator
    curve. The recovery is nearly complete on HiddenBench (Figure 3a, 0.10 → 0.61) but partial on the shorter-horizon
    Werewolf (Figure 3b, 0.05 → 0.18 against the operator’s 0.24). The two close their gaps at a similar per-round pace, so
    the remaining Werewolf gap is a horizon effect, not a different clearing mechanism.

‖∞                                 (a) bridge bound holds                                                                  (b) first moment: θ̂                     LLM
                                                                                                                                                                          = q
                                                                                                                                                                                 ⊤b
                                                                                                                                                                                 T
                                                                                                                                                                                         0                                                   (c) theory tracks the LLM




                                                                                                                                                                                                              LLM−theory gap ceiling
                                                                                                               LLM                                                                                                                                                  δ/(1−λ)
        bBR
                           4
                      10           254/254 cells, 0 violations                                                                 R
                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                       = 0.74 (vs   β-free 0.28)                                                                               guaranteed ceiling

                                                                                                                     150




                                                                                                 real LLM collective θ̂
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.0
−                          3
                                                                                       0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /                                                         interquartile
                      10

        bLLM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.8                                             real LLM gap

                                                                                       0.6




                                                                                         fitted λ
                           2                                                                                         100
‖                     10                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6


        sup
                 t
                                                                                       0.4


                           1                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                      10




measured
                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                              y = x                                                               0.2

                                                                 δ/(1 − λ)
                           0
                      10                                                                                                                                      OLS slope    = 0.88


                                                                                       0.0                                                                                                                                        0.0
                                        0                 2                  4
                                                                                                                                           50              100             150                                                                   1             2              3                  4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      discussion round
                                   10                10                10


                               theoretical ceiling δ − λ         /(1             )                                                           theory         q
                                                                                                                                                                ⊤b
                                                                                                                                                                T
                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t




     Figure 4: The proxy–LLM bridge (Theorem 4.1) on real Qwen data. (a) Measured sup-norm discrepancy
     supt ∥bLLM − bBR ∥∞ vs. the theoretical ceiling δT /(1 − λmax ), pooling 254 cells — one per (arm, β, seed) with
     λmax < 1 — across four 8-seed testbed runs spanning Qwen2.5-3B and -7B backbones, including one 7B run with an
     explicit anchoring-persona prompt and one 3B run at reduced damping (ζ=0.6); coloured by fitted λmax ; dotted line is
     y = x. (b) Real LLM collective estimate θ̂LLM vs. the proxy’s first-moment prediction q⊤ T b0 , pooling the 8-seed 7B run
     from panel (a) with a further 24-seed 7B sweep; dotted is y = x, solid is the OLS fit. (c) LLM–theory gap, normalized
     by the guaranteed ceiling δ/(1 − λ) (dashed), across T =4 discussion rounds on the 8-seed anchored-persona 7B run
     from panel (a) alone; band is the interquartile range.


     The proxy predicts real LLM estimates. The discussion benchmarks run DeGroot updating (λ=1), the unanchored
     limit of Theorem 4.2: the proxy’s effective sample size collapses and recovers with β, and the LLM’s collective accuracy
     tracks that swing (Figure 2A,B). At λ=1 this is empirical, not a consequence of Theorem 4.1, whose bound is vacuous
     here (Proposition 8.4); the two share the β-gating mechanism, not a theorem mapping Neff onto accuracy. The bridge
     bound requires anchoring, so we certify the step-by-step correspondence on the anchored testbed: there the LLM
     estimate is the influence-weighted average the theory predicts (slope 0.88, R2 =0.74), and the sup-norm bound holds on
     all 254 cells (Figure 4). The anchoring λ is fit per agent, so the ceiling is fitted not prescribed—tight on the anchored
     subset, satisfied over the pool; full provenance is in Appendix 13.3.


                                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026



Table 1: Ablations (controlled testbed, Qwen2.5-3B, 8 seeds). Collective error, lower is better; narrow β=0.1 is the
herding regime, wide β=10 the aggregate. Variants: memory, exposure-pricing, late-joiner, distance-decay, skeptic.
         Ablation                 range       narrow β             wide β             reading
         social power ζ=0         gate off       5.5                4.9               no damping ⇒ no herding
         social power ζ>0         0.2–0.95      ≈ 42               4–6                damping on ⇒ herding
         self-reliance λ          0.3–0.7        42                11.5               robust to follower self-weight
         equalizer k (Sinkhorn)   1–4         column defect 0.14 → 0.037 (Fig. 5a)    one knob clears the market
         model variants           5 kinds      18–59               2–15               herding persists; eq clears each


5.3   Ablations

The herding floor is an effective-sample-size effect, not a small-network artifact: it holds at every society size on the real
benchmarks (Werewolf for n ∈ {6, 8, 10, 12, 16}, HiddenBench for n ∈ {8, 16, 24}; full breakdown in Appendix 13.4
and 13.5), so a larger network does not dilute a captured hub. Table 1 sweeps the remaining controls in the controlled
testbed (the ablation grid, plus the model-scale sweep, is in Appendix 13.2 and 13.1): the two-regime is invariant to
follower self-reliance and survives five structural variants of the interaction model. It is, however, gated causally by
social power, vanishing entirely when the gate is off (ζ=0).

6     Conclusion
SNLA shows that a single parameter controls collective intelligence: the attention width β. It governs whether an LLM-
agent population pools its information or herds. Narrow β collapses collective accuracy onto a few dominant sources;
wide β recovers wisdom-of-crowds behavior, once exposure is balanced. One failure then remains, a high-power source
that occupies too many contexts, and a decentralized pricing rule removes it, restoring the optimal collective weights
whenever a dominant source is present, with no retraining.

References
 [1] Daron Acemoglu and Asuman Ozdaglar. Opinion dynamics and learning in social networks. Dynamic Games and
     Applications, 1(1):3–49, 2011.
 [2] Alfonso Amayuelas, Xianjun Yang, Antonis Antoniades, Wenyue Hua, Liangming Pan, and William Yang Wang.
     Multiagent collaboration attack: Investigating adversarial attacks in large language model collaborations via
     debate. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pages 6929–6948, 2024.
 [3] Venkatesh Bala and Sanjeev Goyal. Learning from neighbours. The review of economic studies, 65(3):595–621,
     1998.
 [4] Abhijit V Banerjee. A simple model of herd behavior. The quarterly journal of economics, 107(3):797–817, 1992.
 [5] Sushil Bikhchandani, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch. A theory of fads, fashion, custom, and cultural change as
     informational cascades. Journal of political Economy, 100(5):992–1026, 1992.
 [6] Phillip Bonacich. Power and centrality: A family of measures. American journal of sociology, 92(5):1170–1182,
     1987.
 [7] Sergey Brin. The pagerank citation ranking: bringing order to the web. Proceedings of ASIS, 1998, 98:161–172,
     1998.
 [8] Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and Zhiyuan Liu.
     Chateval: Towards better llm-based evaluators through multi-agent debate. In International conference on learning
     representations, volume 2024, pages 9079–9093, 2024.
 [9] Young-Min Cho, Sharath Chandra Guntuku, and Lyle Ungar. Herd behavior: Investigating peer influence in
     llm-based multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21588, 2025.
[10] Yun-Shiuan Chuang, Agam Goyal, Nikunj Harlalka, Siddharth Suresh, Robert Hawkins, Sijia Yang, Dhavan Shah,
     Junjie Hu, and Timothy Rogers. Simulating opinion dynamics with networks of llm-based agents. In Findings of
     the association for computational linguistics: NAACL 2024, pages 3326–3346, 2024.


                                                              9
                                                                                        A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


[11] Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Arthur Mensch, Michela Paganini, Jordan Hoffmann, Bogdan
     Damoc, Blake Hechtman, Trevor Cai, Sebastian Borgeaud, et al. Unified scaling laws for routed language models.
     In International conference on machine learning, pages 4057–4086. PMLR, 2022.
[12] Imre Csiszár. I-divergence geometry of probability distributions and minimization problems. The annals of
     probability, pages 146–158, 1975.
[13] Giordano De Marzo, Claudio Castellano, and David Garcia. Language understanding as a constraint on consensus
     size in llm societies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02822, 2024.
[14] Morris H DeGroot. Reaching a consensus. Journal of the American Statistical association, 69(345):118–121,
     1974.
[15] Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving factuality and
     reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. In Forty-first international conference on machine
     learning, 2024.
[16] William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with
     simple and efficient sparsity. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(120):1–39, 2022.
[17] Joel Franklin and Jens Lorenz. On the scaling of multidimensional matrices. Linear Algebra and its applications,
     114:717–735, 1989.
[18] Noah E Friedkin and Eugene C Johnsen. Social influence and opinions. Journal of mathematical sociology, 15
     (3-4):193–206, 1990.
[19] Francis Galton. Vox populi, 1907.
[20] Chen Gao, Xiaochong Lan, Zhihong Lu, Jinzhu Mao, Jinghua Piao, Huandong Wang, Depeng Jin, and Yong Li. S3:
     Social-network simulation system with large language model-empowered agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14984,
     2023.
[21] Benjamin Golub and Matthew O Jackson. Naive learning in social networks and the wisdom of crowds. American
     Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2(1):112–149, 2010.
[22] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle,
     Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
[23] Florian Grötschla, Luis Müller, Jan Tönshoff, Mikhail Galkin, and Bryan Perozzi. Agentsnet: Coordination and
     collaborative reasoning in multi-agent llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.08616, 2025.
[24] Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V Chawla, Olaf Wiest, and Xiangliang
     Zhang. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges. arxiv 2024. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2402.01680, 10, 2024.
[25] Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Steven
     Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In
     International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2024, pages 23247–23275, 2024.
[26] Leslie Kish. Survey sampling. 1965.
[27] David A Levin and Yuval Peres. Markov chains and mixing times. American Mathematical Society, 2026.
[28] Guohao Li, Hasan Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. Camel: Communicative
     agents for" mind" exploration of large language model society. Advances in neural information processing systems,
     36:51991–52008, 2023.
[29] Yuxuan Li, Aoi Naito, and Hirokazu Shirado. Hiddenbench: Assessing collective reasoning in multi-agent llms
     via hidden profile tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11556, 2025.
[30] Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Shuming Shi, and Zhaopeng
     Tu. Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through multi-agent debate. In Proceedings of the
     2024 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pages 17889–17904, 2024.


                                                         10
                                                                                         A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


[31] Carl D Meyer, Jr. The role of the group generalized inverse in the theory of finite markov chains. Siam Review, 17
     (3):443–464, 1975.
[32] Marios Papachristou and Yuan Yuan. Network formation and dynamics among multi-llms. PNAS nexus, 4(12):
     pgaf317, 2025.
[33] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein.
     Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium
     on user interface software and technology, pages 1–22, 2023.
[34] Jinghua Piao, Yuwei Yan, Jun Zhang, Nian Li, Junbo Yan, Xiaochong Lan, Zhihong Lu, Zhiheng Zheng, Jing Yi
     Wang, Di Zhou, et al. Agentsociety: Large-scale simulation of llm-driven generative agents advances understanding
     of human behaviors and society. 2025.
[35] Giorgio Piatti, Zhijing Jin, Max Kleiman-Weiner, Bernhard Schölkopf, Mrinmaya Sachan, and Rada Mihalcea.
     Cooperate or collapse: Emergence of sustainable cooperation in a society of llm agents. Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, 37:111715–111759, 2024.
[36] Priya Pitre, Naren Ramakrishnan, and Xuan Wang. Consensagent: Towards efficient and effective consensus in
     multi-agent llm interactions through sycophancy mitigation. In Findings of the Association for Computational
     Linguistics: ACL 2025, pages 22112–22133, 2025.
[37] Anton V Proskurnikov and Roberto Tempo. A tutorial on modeling and analysis of dynamic social networks. part
     i. Annual Reviews in Control, 43:65–79, 2017.
[38] Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su,
     Xin Cong, et al. Chatdev: Communicative agents for software development. In Proceedings of the 62nd annual
     meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: Long papers), pages 15174–15186, 2024.
[39] Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng
     Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren
     Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang,
     Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan,
     Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 technical
     report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115.
[40] Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean. Out-
     rageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538,
     2017.
[41] Richard Sinkhorn. Diagonal equivalence to matrices with prescribed row and column sums. The American
     Mathematical Monthly, 74(4):402–405, 1967.
[42] Amir Taubenfeld, Yaniv Dover, Roi Reichart, and Ariel Goldstein. Systematic biases in llm simulations of debates.
     In Proceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pages 251–267,
     2024.
[43] Lean Wang, Huazuo Gao, Chenggang Zhao, Xu Sun, and Damai Dai. Auxiliary-loss-free load balancing strategy
     for mixture-of-experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.15664, 2024.
[44] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun
     Zhang, Jiale Liu, et al. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2308.08155, 2023.
[45] Zelai Xu, Chao Yu, Fei Fang, Yu Wang, and Yi Wu. Language agents with reinforcement learning for strategic
     play in the werewolf game. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18940, 2023.
[46] Kunlun Zhu, Hongyi Du, Zhaochen Hong, Xiaocheng Yang, Shuyi Guo, Daisy Zhe Wang, Zhenhailong Wang,
     Cheng Qian, Robert Tang, Heng Ji, et al. Multiagentbench: Evaluating the collaboration and competition of llm
     agents. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
     Long Papers), pages 8580–8622, 2025.




                                                          11
                                                                                                A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026



                                      Supplementary Materials
7    Assumptions and Measurement of δ
This appendix collects the assumptions of the three theorems and the procedure measuring δ from the event log.
Throughout, P = diag(λ1 , . . . , λn ), λmax = maxi λi , and {C(t)} is the row-stochastic realized-influence sequence;
operational and proxy beliefs b(t), bBR (t) are both initialized at b0 .
Assumption 7.1 (Anchored cooperative regime). The proxy is the quadratic, cooperative, anchored best response: the
anchoring weights satisfy λi ∈ [0, 1) for all i, so that λmax < 1.

The weight λi < 1 is the regime in which the persona anchor ρi exerts nonzero pull toward b0i . The restriction λmax < 1
cannot in general be dropped: Proposition 8.4 exhibits a row-stochastic sequence and a δ-rational rule with λmax = 1
whose gap grows linearly in t. This is a constructive counterexample, not a claim that every λmax = 1 system diverges.
Assumption 7.2 (δ-rational emission). There exists δ ≥ 0 such that, along the operational trajectory,
                                                    X
                    bi (t + 1) − (1 − λi ) b0i − λi    Cij (t) bj (t) ≤ δ     for all i and all t ≥ 0,               (6)
                                                       j

where C(t) is the realized-influence matrix produced by the operational system at round t.

Two features of equation 6 matter. The best response is evaluated at the LLM’s own beliefs b(t), not the proxy bBR (t):
a one-step condition presupposing nothing about trajectory distance. And every quantity in equation 6 is logged, so δ is
measurable per emission, the assumption falsifiable.
Assumption 7.3 (Signal model and signal–exposure independence). The private signals are b0i = θ⋆ +ξi with ξ1 , . . . , ξn
independent, E[ξi ] = 0, and Var(ξi ) = s2i , and the noise vector ξ = (ξ1 , . . . , ξn ) is independent of the realized sequence
{C(t)}t≥0 . The homoskedastic case is s2i ≡ s2 .

Independence of ξ from {C(t)} holds when recipient selection and event qualities depend on messages only through
timing and routing, not belief values; it is the exogenous-topology analogue from classical opinion dynamics and
matches our fixed-topology environments. It is what licenses treating qT as fixed under Eξ in Proposition 8.6: belief-
dependent selection couples qT and ξ, voiding the conditional variance identities, and so lies outside all variance-level
results below. The Bridge Theorem, which does not use Assumption 7.3, is unaffected.

Measuring δ. Assumption 7.2 is checkable round by round. At round t, both the realized-influence row Ci: (t) and
the operational beliefs b(t) are functions of the event log, so the per-emission residual

                                 δ̂i (t) = bi (t + 1) − (1 − λi ) b0i − λi j Cij (t) bj (t)
                                                                          P
                                                                                                              (7)

is computable offline once the run is complete. The anchoring weights (λi ) are not assumed known: they are fit per
agent by least squares over the run, minimizing t δ̂i (t)2 over λi ∈ [0, 1). For fixed i this objective is a univariate
                                                         P

quadratic in λi , since δ̂i (t) is affine in λi at each t, so the fit is closed-form. The theorems require the uniform residual
of Assumption 7.2, so the value that instantiates them is the maximum
                                                     δT = max δ̂i (t),
                                                           i, 0≤t<T

not a quantile: an upper quantile bounds all but a fraction of the emissions and yields only a trimmed, high-probability
diagnostic, under which the bridge bound holds after discarding the residual outliers. A finite run of length T measures
δT and so supports the bridge bound up to horizon T ; extending it to all t requires the residual to remain uniformly
bounded beyond the run, which is an assumption, not a measurement. The empirical distribution of δ̂i (t) is itself a
finding: it quantifies how far a given backbone, persona, and topic depart from a rational anchored opinion updater, and
its tail governs the gap between the uniform bound and its trimmed counterpart.

8    Proof of Theorem 4.1 (Bridge)
This appendix proves the three theorems and supporting results. The development is self-contained: all constants
are explicit, and the stationary perturbation of the two-regime theorem is carried out from a deviation-matrix identity
(Lemma 9.3).


                                                              12
                                                                                                  A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


                                                                            P
We use the following notation throughout. For a matrix R, ∥R∥∞ = maxi j |Rij | is the maximum absolute row sum,
which is the operator norm induced by the vector ℓ∞ norm; for a vector v, ∥v∥p is the usual ℓp norm. A row-stochastic
matrix C satisfies C ≥ 0 entrywise and C1 = 1. A nonnegative square matrix is irreducible if its support digraph
is strongly connected. We write ej for the j-th standard basis vector and ∆n for the probability simplex in Rn . The
exposure graph, social power, and realized influence are W̄ (t), π(t), and C(t) as defined in Section 4.1; we abbreviate
the per-pair exposure–power score by
                                                sij (t) := W̄ij (t) πj (t),                                          (8)
                                                                                     1/β             1/β
                                                                                          P
so that the realized influence is the row-wise tempered allocation Cij (t) = sij (t) / k sik (t) . Since πj (t) ≥
1−ζ
  n > 0 for every j (Lemma 8.2 below), sij (t) > 0 if and only if W̄ij (t) > 0, so C(t) has exactly the support of the
exposure graph.

8.1   The proxy and its closed form

The operational beliefs are emitted by the LLM backbones and are not directly analyzable. The proxy replaces each
emission by an anchored best response driven by the same realized influence sequence {C(t)}. Writing the cooperative
quadratic best response of agent i explicitly, the proxy is the recursion
                                                                            X
                        bBR (0) = b0 ,       bBR                       0
                                              i (t + 1) = (1 − λi ) bi + λi    Cij (t) bBR
                                                                                        j (t),                   (9)
                                                                                    j

which in matrix form, with P = diag(λ1 , . . . , λn ), reads
                                         bBR (t + 1) = (I − P ) b0 + P C(t) bBR (t).                                     (10)
The peer beliefs entering equation 9 are the proxy’s own bBR
                                                          j (t), never the operational bj (t): the proxy is a self-contained
linear dynamical system, coupled to the operational run only through the realized matrices {C(t)}. Two classical
models are strict special cases. With uniform anchoring λi ≡ λ the recursion is the Friedkin–Johnsen model [18] on the
realized influence; with λi ≡ 1 it is the DeGroot model [14].
Lemma 8.1 (Best-response closed form). Fix agent i and round t, and let the peer beliefs bBR (t) be given. The
cooperative quadratic best response
                                                                        X                         2
                        bBR                                   0 2
                         i (t + 1) = arg min (1 − λi ) (b − bi ) + λi       Cij (t) b − bBRj (t)
                                            b∈R                                j

has the unique solution equation 9, for every λi ∈ [0, 1] and every row-stochastic C(t).

Proof. Write the objective as
                                                                       X                     2
                                  F (b) = (1 − λi ) (b − b0i )2 + λi       Cij (t) b − bBR
                                                                                        j (t) .
                                                                       j
                      2                                                                                              ′
                                          P
The coefficient of b is (1 − λi ) + λi          j Cij (t) = 1 > 0, so F is strictly convex with unique minimizer at F (b) = 0.
Since
                                                X                          h                      X               i
         F ′ (b) = 2(1 − λi )(b − b0i ) + 2λi        Cij (t) b − bBR                       0
                                                                                                    Cij (t) bBR
                                                                       
                                                                  j (t) = 2 b − (1 − λi ) bi − λi            j (t)
                                                 j                                                    j
                              ′
         P
(using      j Cij (t) = 1), F (b) = 0 gives equation 9.


8.2   Well-posedness of social power

The realized influence is built from the exposure graph W̄ (t) and the social power π(t), the Katz–Bonacich centrality
                                            1−ζ ⊤                 −1
                                   π(t)⊤ =        1 I − ζ W̄ (t)      ,     ζ ∈ [0, 1).
                                              n
The following lemma records that this is well defined and strictly positive, a fact used repeatedly below (it guarantees
that C(t) has exactly the support of W̄ (t)).
Lemma 8.2 (Well-posedness of social power). For every row-stochastic W̄ (t) and every ζ ∈ [0, 1), the inverse
(I − ζ W̄ (t))−1 exists, π(t) ∈ ∆n , and
                                                   1−ζ
                                         πj (t) ≥        > 0        for every j.
                                                     n
At ζ = 0, πj (t) = 1/n for all j.


                                                                 13
                                                                                                   A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


Proof. Since W̄ (t) is row-stochastic, ∥W̄ (t)∥∞ = 1, hence ∥ζ W̄ (t)∥∞ = ζ < 1. The Neumann series
                                                                  ∞
                                                             −1 X
                                                 I − ζ W̄ (t)   =   ζ k W̄ (t)k
                                                                   k=0

converges absolutely, so the inverse exists. Every term is entrywise nonnegative, so π(t) ≥ 0; the k = 0 term gives
                                 1 − ζ X k ⊤                    1−ζ ⊤                 1−ζ
                                             ζ 1 W̄ (t)k j ≥            1 W̄ (t)0 j =
                                                                                 
                        πj (t) =                                                             .
                                   n                               n                      n
                                           k≥0

Row-stochasticity gives W̄ (t)k 1 = 1, so
                           1−ζ ⊤X k                     1−ζ X k ⊤   1−ζ      1
                π(t)⊤ 1 =         1       ζ W̄ (t)k 1 =      ζ 1 1=     ·n·     = 1,
                              n                          n           n      1−ζ
                                          k≥0                       k≥0
                                ⊤
so π(t) ∈ ∆n . At ζ = 0, π(t)       = n1 1⊤ .

8.3   The Bridge Theorem

The Bridge Theorem couples the operational system to the proxy path-wise, for the realized {C(t)}, with no stationarity,
mixing, or convergence hypothesis: the contraction comes entirely from λmax < 1.
Theorem 4.1 (Bridge). Suppose every LLM emission is a δ-approximate best response evaluated at its own beliefs, i.e.
δ̂i (t) ≤ δT for all i and t < T , where δT = maxi, 0≤t<T δ̂i (t) is the uniform residual equation 4 and λmax < 1. Then
for every t ≤ T and every row-stochastic sequence {C(t)},
                                                                         δT
                                                 b(t) − bBR (t) ∞ ≤            .                                                (5)
                                                                      1 − λmax

Proof. Let e(t) := b(t) − bBR (t), so e(0) = 0.
Step 1 (residual). Define                                 h                         i
                                    u(t + 1) := b(t + 1) − (I − P ) b0 + P C(t) b(t) .
Its i-th entry is the quantity bounded in equation 6, so
                                                 ∥u(t + 1)∥∞ ≤ δ,          t ≥ 0.                                              (11)

Step 2 (error recursion). Subtracting equation 10 from the definition of u(t + 1), the anchor terms (I − P )b0 cancel:
                            h                                      i h                               i
                 e(t + 1) = u(t + 1) + (I − P )b0 + P C(t) b(t) − (I − P )b0 + P C(t) bBR (t)
                            = u(t + 1) + P C(t) e(t).

Step 3 (contraction). Since ∥C(t)∥∞ = 1 and ∥P ∥∞ = λmax , ∥P C(t)∥∞ ≤ λmax , so by equation 11,
                        ∥e(t + 1)∥∞ ≤ ∥u(t + 1)∥∞ + ∥P C(t) e(t)∥∞ ≤ δ + λmax ∥e(t)∥∞ .                                        (12)
                                                                                          Pt−1   r
Step 4 (unrolling). Induction on equation 12 from e(0) = 0 gives ∥e(t)∥∞ ≤ δ                r=0 λmax : the inductive step is
                                                                   t−1
                                                                   X                t
                                                                                    X
                                                                          r                r
                                    ∥e(t + 1)∥∞ ≤ δ + λmax · δ           λmax =δ          λmax .
                                                                   r=0              r=0
Summing the geometric series, with λmax < 1,
                                                             t
                                                        1 − λmax       δ
                                         ∥e(t)∥∞ ≤ δ             ≤          = δ̄,                                              (13)
                                                        1 − λmax   1 − λmax
the bound of Theorem 4.1.
Remark 8.3 (No stationarity is required). The bound equation 13 holds for every realization of the time-varying,
endogenous, feedback-coupled influence sequence {C(t)}, with no stationarity, mixing, irreducibility, or convergence
hypothesis whatsoever. The only structural input is row-stochasticity of each C(t), which is automatic, and the strict
anchor λmax < 1. In particular the theorem applies verbatim to the equalized sequence of Section 4.2, whose matrices
are produced by the online pricing protocol and are in general neither stationary nor mutually commuting.


                                                              14
                                                                                            A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


The next proposition shows the bound is tight and that the anchoring hypothesis cannot be removed: at λmax = 1 the
discrepancy grows without bound.
Proposition 8.4 (Sharpness and failure at λ = 1). The bound equation 13 is attained. For every row-stochastic
sequence {C(t)} and uniform anchoring λi ≡ λ, the operational emission rule
                                       b(t + 1) = (1 − λ) b0 + λ C(t) b(t) + δ1
satisfies Assumption 7.2 with equality and produces
                                         1 − λt
                    b(t) − bBR (t) = δ          1   (λ < 1),       b(t) − bBR (t) = δ t 1   (λ = 1).
                                         1−λ
In particular, at λ = 1 the gap grows linearly in t and no uniform-in-t bridge exists.

Proof. The residual is u(t + 1) = δ1, so the error recursion becomes e(t + 1) = λ C(t) e(t) + δ1. By induction
e(t) = ct 1 with c0 = 0, ct+1 = λct + δ: if e(t) = ct 1 then, since C(t)1 = 1,
                       e(t + 1) = λ C(t) (ct 1) + δ1 = λct C(t)1 + δ1 = (λct + δ) 1,
                    Pt−1 r                  t
Solving gives ct = δ r=0 λ , equal to δ 1−λ
                                        1−λ for λ < 1 and δt for λ = 1.


Proposition 8.4 makes anchoring a structural requirement: unanchored, the per-round emission noise accumulates
without bound, so any proxy theory tolerating δ > 0 must operate at λmax < 1.

8.4   Collective estimation by the proxy

The collective estimate is the population average of beliefs. We write the operational and proxy estimates as
                                             1 ⊤                        1
                                     θ̂T :=    1 b(T ),        θ̂TBR := 1⊤ bBR (T ).
                                             n                          n
The proxy estimate is a fixed linear functional of the private signals; the next lemma identifies the weight qT and shows
it conserves mass. For an arbitrary row-stochastic sequence {C(t)} set M (t) := P C(t) and define the backward
products
                   Φ(T, r) := M (T − 1) M (T − 2) · · · M (r) (0 ≤ r < T ),             Φ(T, T ) := I.                (14)
Lemma 8.5 (Trajectory representation and mass conservation). For every row-stochastic sequence {C(t)} and every
T ≥ 0,
                                                                       T
                                                                       X −1
                          bBR (T ) = GT b0 ,       GT := Φ(T, 0) +          Φ(T, r + 1) (I − P ),                     (15)
                                                                     r=0

and the collective weight qT⊤ := n1 1⊤ GT satisfies θ̂TBR = qT⊤ b0 and is mass-conserving, qT⊤ 1 = 1.

Proof. Representation. Induction on T . At T = 0, Φ(0, 0) = I and G0 = I. Assuming equation 15 at T , by
equation 10 and the hypothesis,
                  bBR (T + 1) = (I − P ) b0 + M (T ) bBR (T )
                               = (I − P ) b0 + M (T ) GT b0
                                 h                 T
                                                   X −1                                       i
                               = M (T ) Φ(T, 0) +       M (T ) Φ(T, r + 1) (I − P ) + (I − P ) b0 .
                                                      r=0

Since M (T )Φ(T, r) = Φ(T + 1, r) and (I − P ) = Φ(T + 1, T + 1)(I − P ),
                                 h              T
                                                X                         i
                    bBR (T + 1) = Φ(T + 1, 0) +   Φ(T + 1, r + 1) (I − P ) b0 = GT +1 b0 ,
                                                      r=0

the anchor term supplying the r = T summand. Then θ̂TBR = n1 1⊤ GT b0 = qT⊤ b0 .
Mass conservation. We show GT 1 = 1, giving qT⊤ 1 = n1 1⊤ 1 = 1. For 0 ≤ r < T , using C(r)1 = 1,
                    Φ(T, r) 1 = Φ(T, r + 1) M (r) 1 = Φ(T, r + 1) P C(r) 1 = Φ(T, r + 1) P 1,


                                                            15
                                                                                                            A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


hence
           Φ(T, r + 1) (I − P ) 1 = Φ(T, r + 1) 1 − Φ(T, r + 1) P 1 = Φ(T, r + 1) 1 − Φ(T, r) 1.
Summing over r telescopes:
                        T
                        X −1
                               Φ(T, r + 1) (I − P ) 1 = Φ(T, T ) 1 − Φ(T, 0) 1 = 1 − Φ(T, 0) 1,
                        r=0

so GT 1 = Φ(T, 0)1 + [1 − Φ(T, 0)1] = 1.
Proposition 8.6 (Unbiasedness and variance). Under Assumption 7.3, conditionally on the realized sequence {C(t)},
                      E θ̂TBR = θ⋆ ,     Var θ̂TBR = qT⊤ S qT ,    S = diag(s21 , . . . , s2n ),
                                                

and in the homoskedastic case Var(θ̂TBR ) = s2 ∥qT ∥22 .

Proof. By b0 = θ⋆ 1 + ξ and qT⊤ 1 = 1 (Lemma 8.5), θ̂TBR = qT⊤ b0 = θ⋆ + qT⊤ ξ. Conditionally on {C(t)}, qT is fixed
and ξ ⊥ {C(t)} with E[ξ] = 0, so E[θ̂TBR ] = θ⋆ . By independence of the ξi ,
                                                               n
                                                               X                       n
                                                                                       X
                         Var θ̂TBR       = Var qT⊤ ξ                  2                       2
                                                                                                  s2i = qT⊤ S qT .
                                                      
                                                           =         qT,i Var(ξi ) =         qT,i
                                                               i=1                     i=1

In the homoskedastic case S = s2 I, giving s2 ∥qT ∥22 .
Definition 8.7 (Effective sample size). For a weight vector q ∈ Rn with q ⊤ 1 = 1, the effective sample size is
Neff (q) := 1/∥q∥22 [26].

In the homoskedastic case Var(θ̂TBR ) = s2 /Neff (qT ): the collective estimate behaves like the average of Neff (qT )
independent signals. A dispersed weight qT ≈ n1 1 gives Neff ≈ n, the wisdom-of-crowds regime [21]; a concentrated
weight qT ≈ eh gives Neff ≈ 1, herding. The remaining theorems characterize Neff (qT ) under the baseline and the
equalized allocators.
The Bridge Theorem transfers these proxy moments to the operational estimate.
Corollary 8.8 (Moment transfer). Under Assumptions 7.1–7.3, conditionally on the realized sequence {C(t)},
                      θ̂T − θ̂TBR ≤ δ̄ a.s.,               E[θ̂T ] − θ⋆ ≤ δ̄,          sd(θ̂T ) − sd(θ̂TBR ) ≤ δ̄.

In the homoskedastic case sd(θ̂TBR ) = s∥qT ∥2 , so sd(θ̂T ) − s∥qT ∥2 ≤ δ̄.

Proof. Pathwise gap. With e(T ) = b(T ) − bBR (T ),
                                                                n
                                                 1 ⊤         1X
                                θ̂T − θ̂TBR =      1 e(T ) ≤       |ei (T )| ≤ ∥e(T )∥∞ ≤ δ̄
                                                 n           n i=1

by Theorem 4.1. Set zT = θ̂T − θ̂TBR , |zT | ≤ δ̄ a.s.
Mean. Since E[θ̂TBR ] = θ⋆ ,
                                             E[θ̂T ] − θ⋆ = E[zT ] ≤ E |zT | ≤ δ̄.

                         e = X − E[X], Minkowski’s inequality gives
Standard deviation. With X

                        sd(θ̂T ) = θ̂TBR + zeT                           zT ∥L2 = sd(θ̂TBR ) + sd(zT ),
                                                           ≤ θ̂TBR L2 + ∥e
                                    g                         g
                                                   L2

and symmetrically, so |sd(θ̂T ) − sd(θ̂TBR )| ≤ sd(zT ) ≤ δ̄, the last by sd(zT )2 ≤ E[zT2 ] ≤ δ̄ 2 . The homoskedastic
identity is Proposition 8.6.

9   Proof of Theorem 4.2 (Attention Width)
This appendix proves Theorem 4.2: graph constants and the tempered-allocation bound (Appendix 9.1), a stationary
perturbation bound (Appendix 9.2), then the two regimes.


                                                                      16
                                                                                                                A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


9.1   Constants and quantitative tempered allocation

The two-regime theorem fixes the exposure graph and varies the attention width β, so we work with the fixed-graph
realized influence C(β) whose row i is the tempered allocation of the score row si: = (sij )j , with sij = W̄ij πj as in
equation 8. We record the combinatorial constants attached to the exposure graph. Let
                                            X
              Bij = 1{W̄ij > 0},      di =     Bij ,      D = diag(d1 , . . . , dn ), dmax = max di ,
                                                                                                                        i
                                                         j

so B is the unweighted exposure support, di the out-degree of agent i, and D the degree matrix. Per row define the
log-spread and, when di ≥ 2, the dominance gap
                                                                                 si,(1)
                           Li =          max        log sij − log sik , gi = log        ,                     (16)
                                  j,k : Bij =Bik =1                              si,(2)
where si,(1) ≥ si,(2) are the two largest scores in row i (set gi = +∞ if di = 1). The global constants are
                                                   L = max Li ,               g = min gi .
                                                              i                       i

Since πj ≥ 1−ζ
            n > 0 (Lemma 8.2), we have sij > 0 ⇐⇒ Bij = 1, so row i of C(β) is supported exactly on the di
exposed sources, and C(β) is irreducible whenever B is.
The next lemma controls how sharply Γβ concentrates as a function of β. For s ∈ Rn≥0 , s ̸= 0, write N (s) = {j :
                                   1/β P         1/β
sj > 0}, |N (s)| = d, [Γβ (s)]j = sj / k∈N (s) sk on N (s) (else 0), 1N (s) the indicator of N (s), and L(s), g(s)
the log-spread and dominance gap of equation 16.
Lemma 9.1 (Quantitative tempered allocation). Let s ∈ Rn≥0 , s ̸= 0, with |N (s)| = d. Then for every β > 0:

      (i) (Flattening.)
                                                                                     2L(s)
                                Γβ (s) − d1 1N (s)           ≤ eL(s)/β − 1 ≤                          whenever β ≥ L(s).
                                                        1                              β

      (ii) (Concentration.) If s has a unique maximizer j ⋆ with gap g(s) > 0, then

                                                        1 − [Γβ (s)]j ⋆ ≤ (d − 1) e−g(s)/β .

Consequently Γβ (s) → d1 1N (s) as β → ∞ and Γβ (s) → ej ⋆ as β → 0.

Proof. Set aj = β −1 log sj for j ∈ N (s). Then, for j ∈ N (s),
                                                                 eaj               X                 −1
                                       [Γβ (s)]j = P                     ak
                                                                              =             eak −aj         .
                                                             k∈N (s) e            k∈N (s)


(i) Flattening. For j, k ∈ N (s), |ak − aj | ≤ L(s)/β, so each eak −aj ∈ [e−L(s)/β , eL(s)/β ] and their sum lies in
[d e−L(s)/β , d eL(s)/β ]; taking reciprocals,
                                   1 −L(s)/β              1
                                     e       ≤ [Γβ (s)]j ≤ eL(s)/β                            (j ∈ N (s)).
                                   d                      d
With x = L(s)/β ≥ 0, using 1 − e−x ≤ ex − 1,
                                                                       1  1
                                                       [Γβ (s)]j −       ≤ (ex − 1).
                                                                       d  d
Summing over the d supported coordinates,
                                                         X                        1      ex − 1
                          Γβ (s) − d1 1N (s)       =              [Γβ (s)]j −       ≤ d·        = eL(s)/β − 1,
                                               1                                  d         d
                                                       j∈N (s)

the first inequality. For the second, when β ≥ L(s), x ∈ [0, 1] and convexity of ex − 1 gives ex − 1 ≤ (e − 1)x ≤
2x = 2L(s)/β.


                                                                         17
                                                                                                     A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


(ii) Concentration. Let j ⋆ be the unique maximizer. For k ̸= j ⋆ in N (s), retaining only the j ⋆ term in the denominator,
                                           eak                    eak
                         [Γβ (s)]k = P                     ≤            = e(log sk −log sj⋆ )/β ≤ e−g(s)/β ,
                                        m∈N (s) e
                                                    am            eaj ⋆

using log sk − log sj ⋆ ≤ −g(s) (sj ⋆ = s(1) , sk ≤ s(2) ). Summing over k ̸= j ⋆ ,
                                                   X
                                1 − [Γβ (s)]j ⋆ =       [Γβ (s)]k ≤ (d − 1) e−g(s)/β .
                                                         k̸=j ⋆

Limits: β → ∞ in (i) gives Γβ (s) → d1 1N (s) ; β → 0 in (ii) gives Γβ (s) → ej ⋆ .

9.2    A self-contained stationary perturbation bound

The wide-context regime compares νC(β) with a reference chain, via the following Perron–Frobenius facts and an exact
perturbation identity.
Lemma 9.2 (Stationary distribution; maximum principle). Let C be row-stochastic and irreducible. Then:

       (i) if x ∈ Rn satisfies Cx = x, then x is a constant multiple of 1;
                                           ⊤      ⊤
      (ii) there is a unique νC ∈ ∆n with νC C = νC , and νC,j > 0 for every j.

Proof. (i) Let i⋆ ∈ arg maxi xi and m = xi⋆ . From Cx = x and row-stochasticity,
                                               X               X
                                   m = xi⋆ =      C i⋆ j x j ≤   Ci⋆ j m = m,
                                                     j                       j

so xj = m for every out-neighbor j of i⋆ . The set {i : xi = m} is thus closed under out-neighbors, hence all of
{1, . . . , n} by irreducibility, so x = m1.
(ii) Existence. The linear map p 7→ C ⊤ p sends ∆n into itself (C ≥ 0 and 1⊤ C ⊤ p = 1⊤ p), so Brouwer gives a fixed
point νC ∈ ∆n .
Positivity. Let Z = {j : νC,j = 0}. For j ∈ Z, 0 = i νC,i Cij forces Cij = 0 for all i ∈ Z c : no edge from Z c into
                                                    P
Z, contradicting irreducibility unless Z = ∅. Hence νC > 0.
Uniqueness. Let ν, ν ′ be stationary (both > 0), c = minj νj′ /νj , v = ν ′ − cν ≥ 0. Then v ⊤ C = v ⊤ and vj0 = 0 at the
minimizing index, so the positivity argument forces v = 0, i.e. ν ′ = cν. Total mass gives c = 1, so ν ′ = ν.
Lemma 9.3 (Deviation matrix and exact perturbation identity). Let P ⋆ be row-stochastic and irreducible with stationary
distribution ν ⋆ . Then:

       (i) Q := I − P ⋆ + 1ν ⋆⊤ is invertible; with Z := Q−1 , the deviation matrix is H := Z − 1ν ⋆⊤ .
      (ii) Z1 = 1, ν ⋆⊤ Z = ν ⋆⊤ , and (I − P ⋆ ) H = I − 1ν ⋆⊤ .

      (iii) For every row-stochastic C                                                 e − P ⋆,
                                     e with a stationary distribution ν̃, setting E := C

                     ν̃ ⊤ − ν ⋆⊤ = ν̃ ⊤ E H,     hence              ∥ν̃ − ν ⋆ ∥1 ≤ ∥E∥∞ κ(P ⋆ ),      κ(P ⋆ ) := ∥H∥∞ .

Proof. (i) Invertibility. Suppose Qx = 0. Multiply on the left by ν ⋆⊤ and use ν ⋆⊤ P ⋆ = ν ⋆⊤ and ν ⋆⊤ 1 = 1:
                 0 = ν ⋆⊤ Qx = ν ⋆⊤ x − ν ⋆⊤ P ⋆ x + (ν ⋆⊤ 1)(ν ⋆⊤ x) = ν ⋆⊤ x − ν ⋆⊤ x + ν ⋆⊤ x = ν ⋆⊤ x,
so ν ⋆⊤ x = 0, and Qx = 0 reduces to P ⋆ x = x. By Lemma 9.2(i), x = c1, and 0 = ν ⋆⊤ x = c, so x = 0: Q is
invertible.
(ii) Identities. Q1 = 1 gives Z1 = 1, and ν ⋆⊤ Q = ν ⋆⊤ gives ν ⋆⊤ Z = ν ⋆⊤ . Since (I − P ⋆ )1 = 0,
                                (I − P ⋆ )H = (I − P ⋆ ) Z − 1ν ⋆⊤ = (I − P ⋆ )Z,
                                                                     

the term (I − P ⋆ )1ν ⋆⊤ vanishing. Now I − P ⋆ = Q − 1ν ⋆⊤ , so
                            (I − P ⋆ )Z = Q − 1ν ⋆⊤ Z = QZ − 1ν ⋆⊤ Z = I − 1ν ⋆⊤ ,
                                                    


                                                                    18
                                                                                                A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


using QZ = I.
(iii) Perturbation identity. Stationarity ν̃ ⊤ C
                                               e = ν̃ ⊤ gives
                          ν̃ ⊤ (I − P ⋆ ) = ν̃ ⊤ − ν̃ ⊤ P ⋆ = ν̃ ⊤ Ce − ν̃ ⊤ P ⋆ = ν̃ ⊤ (C
                                                                                         e − P ⋆ ) = ν̃ ⊤ E.
Multiplying on the right by H and using (ii),
                     ν̃ ⊤ E H = ν̃ ⊤ (I − P ⋆ )H = ν̃ ⊤ I − 1ν ⋆⊤ = ν̃ ⊤ − (ν̃ ⊤ 1)ν ⋆⊤ = ν̃ ⊤ − ν ⋆⊤ ,
                                                                         

the stated identity, exact in E.
Norm bound. Since ν̃ ⊤ E = i ν̃i Ei: is a convex combination of rows of E,
                                  P
                                           X                 X
                             ∥ν̃ ⊤ E∥1 =         ν̃i Ei: ≤         ν̃i ∥Ei: ∥1 ≤ max ∥Ei: ∥1 = ∥E∥∞ .
                                                      1                        i
                                           i                    i

For any row vector w⊤ ,
                          XX                    X           X               X       X
            ∥w⊤ H∥1 =                wi Hij ≤       |wi |       |Hij | ≤ max   |Hij |   |wi | = ∥H∥∞ ∥w∥1 .
                                                                          i
                             j   i              i           j                 j            i
                  ⊤      ⊤
Chaining with w = ν̃ E,
                      ∥ν̃ − ν ⋆ ∥1 = ∥ν̃ ⊤ E H∥1 ≤ ∥H∥∞ ∥ν̃ ⊤ E∥1 ≤ ∥H∥∞ ∥E∥∞ = κ(P ⋆ ) ∥E∥∞ .

The identity (iii) is exact and κ(P ⋆ ) = ∥H∥∞ is a standard Markov-chain condition number [31].

9.3   The two-regime theorem

We now prove that the attention width β controls the collective accuracy of the baseline allocator. The object analyzed
is the stationary distribution νC(β) of the fixed-graph realized influence C(β), which is the infinite-horizon limit of the
collective weight qT under uniform anchoring (see Remark 9.4); accordingly we measure accuracy by
                                                                2                          −2
                                 Var∞ (β) := s2 νC(β) 2 ,       Neff (β) := νC(β) 2 .
Remark 9.4 (Relation to the operational weight). For uniform anchoring λi ≡ λ and a fixed irreducible C, Lemma 8.5
gives the infinite-horizon weight
                                         1−λ ⊤                              X
                              q∞ (λ)⊤ =        1 (I − λC)−1 = (1 − λ)           λk n1 1⊤ C k ,
                                           n
                                                                            k≥0
                                                  1         1 ⊤ k                  ⊤
                                                     P
and q∞ (λ) → νC as λ ↑ 1: the Cesàro averages N k<N n 1 C converge to νC              for every irreducible C [27, Ch. 4],
and Abel summation agrees with the Cesàro limit. The two-regime theorem is therefore the unanchored long-horizon
limit of the baseline allocator; the guarantee for the equalized allocator (Theorem 4.3) is exact at every horizon and
anchoring level and does not rely on this remark.
Theorem 4.2 (Attention width controls collective accuracy). Let C(β) be the fixed-graph realized influence       P with
ζ ∈ [0, 1) and irreducible exposure support B, where Bij = 1{W̄ij > 0}. Write the degrees di =                      j Bij ,
D = diag(d1 , . . . , dn ), dmax = maxi di , and let L be the log-spread and g the dominance gap of the scores sij
(Appendix 8). In the homoskedastic case:
      1. (Wide, wisdom of crowds.) If B = B ⊤ is irreducible, then C(β) → D−1 B and νC(β) → d/(1⊤ d) as
         β → ∞, so:
                                                                             di )2
                                                                        P
                                                                       (
                                                     lim Neff (β) = Pi 2 ,
                                                    β→∞                     i di
         which equals n if and only if B is degree-regular; for finite β the consensus weight obeys ∥νC(β) ∥22 −∥ν ⋆ ∥22 ≤
         2κ    L/β
          PB (e 2 P− 1) with ν ⋆ = d/(1⊤ d) and κB a condition number of D−1 B (Appendix 8), so:Neff (β) →
         ( i di ) / i d2i by continuity.
      2. (Narrow, herding.) Assume B is irreducible and the scores admit a unique dominant pair: ji⋆ = arg maxk sik
         is unique for every row, with ji⋆ = h for all i ̸= h and jh⋆ = g ̸= h. Then with ρ(β) = (dmax − 1) e−g/β ,
         whenever ρ(β) < 1,
                                                                     2
                                                    Neff (β) ≤              ,
                                                               (1 − ρ(β))2
         so Neff (β) ≤ 8 whenever ρ(β) ≤ 12 , i.e. β ≤ g/ log(2(dmax − 1)), independently of n.


                                                                    19
                                                                                                        A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


Proof. Wide context. Matrix bound equation 17. Row i of C(β) is Γβ (si: ) and row i of D−1 B is d1i 1N (si: ) , on the
same support. By Lemma 9.1(i) their ℓ1 distance is ≤ eLi /β − 1 ≤ eL/β − 1; maximizing over rows,
                                                       C(β) − D−1 B ∞ ≤ eL/β − 1.                                               (17)

Reference stationary distribution. With B = B ⊤ ,
                                             X         Bij   X       X
                                d⊤ D−1 B j =
                                         
                                                  di ·     =   Bij =   Bji = dj ,
                                               i
                                                       di    i       i

so ν ⋆ = d/(1⊤ d) is stationary for D−1 B, unique by Lemma 9.2(ii).
Stationary perturbation. Lemma 9.3(iii) with P ⋆ = D−1 B, E = C(β) − D−1 B yields
                                  νC(β) − ν ⋆ 1 ≤ κB ∥E∥∞ ≤ κB eL/β − 1 ,
                                                                          
                                                                                                                                (18)
using equation 17.
Variance transfer. With ∆ = νC(β) − ν ⋆ , since all entries lie in [0, 1],
                                       X
               ∥νC(β) ∥22 − ∥ν ⋆ ∥22 =     ∆j νC(β),j + νj⋆ ≤ max νC(β),j + νj⋆ ∥∆∥1 ≤ 2∥∆∥1 ,
                                                                              
                                                                                j
                                                   j

since each summand of the max is at most 1. As ∥ν ⋆ ∥22 =                    2               2                  2
                                                                        P           P
                                                                          k dk /(      k dk ) , multiplying by s gives the matching
variance bound stated in the theorem.
Floor and degree-regularity. By Cauchy–Schwarz on d, 1,
                                  X 2                              X
                                      dk = ⟨d, 1⟩2 ≤ ∥d∥22 ∥1∥22 = n   d2k ,
                                               k                                            k
        2            2
     P         P
so   k dk /(   k dk ) ≥ 1/n, with equality iff d ∝ 1 (degree-regular); then equation 18 gives Neff (β) → n as β → ∞.

Narrow context. Assume B irreducible, so C(β) is irreducible for every β > 0 and ν := νC(β) > 0 is unique
(Lemma 9.2). Assume the unique dominant pair: ji⋆ = arg maxk sik is unique for each row, ji⋆ = h for i ̸= h,
jh⋆ = g ̸= h; so ji⋆ ∈ S := {h, g} for all i. Write ρ = ρ(β) and assume ρ < 1. By Lemma 9.1(ii),
                       X
                           Cik (β) = 1 − Ci,ji⋆ (β) ≤ (di − 1) e−gi /β ≤ (dmax − 1) e−g/β = ρ.          (19)
                          k̸=ji⋆


Mass outside S. For k ∈ S c , Cik (β) is off-maximizer, so k∈S c Cik (β) ≤ ρ by equation 19. By stationarity,
                                                          P
                              X           XX                  X X                    X
                  ν(S c ) =        νk =          νi Cik (β) =    νi      Cik (β) ≤ ρ    νi = ρ,
                                    k∈S c          k∈S c   i                i       k∈S c               i

                                                                                     2
                                              ν(S c ) ≤ ρ(β),     Neff (β) ≤                ,                                   (20)
                                                                                (1 − ρ(β))2
the first claim of equation 20.
Sandwich for νh . By equation 19, Chh (β) ≤ ρ (off-maximizer) and Cih (β) ≥ 1 − ρ for i ̸= h. Lower bound:
              X                                                                                   1−ρ
        νh ≥       νi (1 − ρ) = (1 − ρ)(1 − νh ) =⇒ νh (1 + (1 − ρ)) ≥ 1 − ρ =⇒ νh ≥                   .
                                                                                                  2−ρ
                   i̸=h

Upper bound:
                                   X                                                                                     1
         νh = νh Chh (β) +                νi Cih (β) ≤ ρ νh + (1 − νh )     =⇒         νh (2 − ρ) ≤ 1       =⇒   νh ≤       .
                                                                                                                        2−ρ
                                   i̸=h


Bounds for νg . Since Chg (β) ≥ 1 − ρ and Cig (β) ≤ ρ for i ̸= h,
                                             νh (1 − ρ) ≤ νg ≤ νh + ρ(1 − νh ) ≤ νh + ρ.                                        (21)


                                                                   20
                                                                                          A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


Upper bound on Neff . Keeping the two S coordinates and using (a + b)2 ≤ 2(a2 + b2 ),
                                                                           2
                        ∥ν∥22 ≥ νh2 + νg2 ≥ 12 (νh + νg )2 = 12 1 − ν(S c ) ≥ 12 (1 − ρ)2 ,
using νh + νg = 1 − ν(S c ). Thus Neff (β) ≤ 2(1 − ρ)−2 , the second claim of equation 20. At β ≤ g/ log(2(dmax − 1)),
ρ ≤ 12 and Neff (β) ≤ 8.
Two-sided bound equation 22. Suppose ρ ≤ 14 . We bound ∥ν∥22 from above. For νh , using 1−x
                                                                                         1         x
                                                                                            ≤ 1 + 1−x with
x = ρ/2,
                          1     1     1        1      ρ/2  1               1 1
                  νh ≤        = ·            ≤    1+            ≤    1 + 47 ρ ≤ + ρ,
                        2−ρ     2 1 − ρ/2      2     1 − ρ/2      2              2 3
        ρ/2
where 1−ρ/2    ≤ ρ/2
                 7/8P = 47 ρ at ρ ≤ 14 , and 12 · 47 = 27 ≤ 13 . By equation 21, νg ≤ νh + ρ ≤ 12 + 34 ρ. The mass on S c
contributes at most k∈S c νk2 ≤ ( k∈S c νk )2 ≤ ρ2 . Summing,
                                   P
                              2              2
                                                                            ρ2    16ρ2
            ∥ν∥22 ≤ 21 + 13 ρ + 12 + 43 ρ + ρ2 = 21 + ρ3 + 4ρ                            2   1    5
                                                                       3 + 9 + 9 + ρ = 2 + 3ρ + 9 ρ .
                                                                                                         26 2


At ρ ≤ 14 , 26 2  26 1      26     5          2   1   5     5     1   5
            9 ρ ≤ 9 · 4 ρ = 36 ρ ≤ 6 ρ, so ∥ν∥2 ≤ 2 + 3 ρ + 6 ρ = 2 + 2 ρ. Therefore
                                         1         1      2
                           Neff (β) =         ≥ 1 5 =          ≥ 2(1 − 5ρ) = 2 − 10ρ,
                                        ∥ν∥22   2 + 2ρ
                                                       1 +  5ρ
       1
using 1+u ≥ 1 − u. For the upper bound, (1 − ρ)−2 ≤ 1 + 4ρ on [0, 14 ] gives Neff (β) ≤ 2(1 + 4ρ) = 2 + 8ρ.
Combining,
                               Neff (β) − 2 ≤ max{8ρ, 10ρ} = 10ρ ≤ 16ρ,
                                        Neff (β) − 2 ≤ 16 ρ(β)       (ρ(β) ≤ 14 ),                                   (22)
which is equation 22.
Limit. As β → 0, ρ → 0, so equation 22 gives Neff (β) → 2 and ν → 21 (eh + eg ) by equation 21.

Both regimes are column pathologies of C: the stationary mass is the degree distribution d/(1⊤ d) in the wide limit and
concentrates on {h, g} in the narrow limit. Row-stochasticity constrains only the reader side; the equalized allocator
removes the remaining column freedom.

10     Proof of Theorem 4.3 (Equalization)
This appendix proves Theorem 4.3 and develops the exposure-pricing protocol: the exact-optimality guarantee (Ap-
pendix 10.1), then the Sinkhorn equivalence and the targeted heteroskedastic variant (Appendix 11).

10.1   Exact optimality under equalization

The equalized allocator drives each C(t) toward double stochasticity. The guarantee below is stated for an arbitrary
row-stochastic sequence in terms of its measured per-round column defects, so it covers the endogenous, feedback-
coupled operational sequence with no exogeneity, stationarity, irreducibility, aperiodicity, or mixing hypothesis. Recall
the column defect of a row-stochastic C,
                                                                      n    n
                                            1 ⊤          ⊤         1XX
                                δcol (C) :=   1 C −1 1 =                       Cij − 1 ,                             (23)
                                            n                      n j=1 i=1

which is zero exactly when C has unit column sums, i.e. is doubly stochastic.
Theorem 4.3 (Exact optimality under equalization). Under uniform anchoring λ ∈ [0, 1) and signal exogeneity, let δ̄col
be the largest column defect over the run. Then the proxy weight satisfies:
                                                                           
                                           qT − n1 1 ≤ δ̄col 1−λ
                                                               λ
                                                                   + T λT ,
                                                      1

for every horizon T and every realized sequence. In particular, if every C(t) is doubly stochastic (δ̄col = 0), then
qT = n1 1 exactly, so Var(θ̂TBR ) = s2 /n and Neff = n. The operational estimate inherits this up to the bridge gap,
                                                        δT                       
                                     sd(θ̂T ) − √sn ≤                  λ
                                                            + s δ̄col 1−λ + T λT .
                                                      1−λ

                                                           21
                                                                                                    A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


Proof. At λ = 0, M (t) = 0 and Lemma 8.5 gives qT = n1 1, so both sides of equation 26 vanish. Assume λ ∈ (0, 1)
and write u := n1 1.
Step 1 (normalized backward recursion). With P = λI, Φ(T, r) = λT −r C(T − 1) · · · C(r). Define
                                    p⊤
                                     r := λ
                                           −(T −r) 1 ⊤
                                                   n 1 Φ(T, r)                    (0 ≤ r ≤ T ),
so pT = u and, peeling off C(r),
                                                h                          i
            p⊤
             r =λ
                 −(T −r) 1 ⊤
                         n 1 Φ(T, r + 1) λC(r) = λ
                                                  −(T −r−1) 1 ⊤                     ⊤
                                                            n 1 Φ(T, r + 1) C(r) = pr+1 C(r).

Let ϱ⊤    1   ⊤        ⊤
     r := n (1 C(r) − 1 ), so ∥ϱr ∥1 = δr by equation 23. Then

         p⊤    ⊤   ⊤           ⊤            ⊤        ⊤        ⊤
                                                                  = (pr+1 − u)⊤ C(r) + ϱ⊤
                                                                
          r − u = pr+1 C(r) − u = (pr+1 − u) C(r) + u C(r) − u                          r ,

using u⊤ C(r) − u⊤ = ϱ⊤
                      r . For any row-stochastic C, the ℓ1 norm contracts:
                                   XX                X         X        X
                      ∥v ⊤ C∥1 =           vi Cij ≤      |vi |   Cij =     |vi | = ∥v∥1 ,                                 (24)
                                           j     i              i            j           i

Applying equation 24 and the triangle inequality,
                         ∥pr − u∥1 ≤ ∥(pr+1 − u)⊤ C(r)∥1 + ∥ϱr ∥1 ≤ ∥pr+1 − u∥1 + δr .
Backward induction from pT = u (so ∥pT − u∥1 = 0) yields
                                                             T
                                                             X −1
                                               ∥pr − u∥1 ≤          δv ≤ (T − r) δ̄col .                                  (25)
                                                             v=r


Step 2 (convex combination). By Lemma 8.5 with I − P = (1 − λ)I,
                                                                        T
                                                                        X −1
                                 qT⊤ = n1 1⊤ Φ(T, 0) + (1 − λ)                   1 ⊤
                                                                                 n 1 Φ(T, r + 1).
                                                                        r=0

Substituting n1 1⊤ Φ(T, r) = λT −r p⊤
                                    r ,

                                                                      T
                                                                      X −1
                                          qT⊤ = λT p⊤
                                                    0 + (1 − λ)              λT −r−1 p⊤
                                                                                      r+1 .
                                                                       r=0

The scalar coefficients are nonnegative and sum to one:
                                   T −1
                                   X                                         1 − λT
                    λT + (1 − λ)          λT −r−1 = λT + (1 − λ) ·                  = λT + (1 − λT ) = 1,
                                   r=0
                                                                              1−λ

Since the coefficients sum to one, subtracting u⊤ termwise:
                                                                         T
                                                                         X −1
                           qT⊤ − u⊤ = λT (p0 − u)⊤ + (1 − λ)                      λT −r−1 (pr+1 − u)⊤ .
                                                                          r=0

Taking ℓ1 norms and applying equation 25,
                                                                          T
                                                                          X −1
                           ∥qT − u∥1 ≤ λT T δ̄col + (1 − λ)δ̄col                  λT −r−1 (T − r − 1).
                                                                          r=0
                              PT −1    j    λ
Substituting j = T − r − 1,     j=0 j λ ≤ (1−λ)2 , so
                                                                      λ                λ          
                       ∥qT − u∥1 ≤ δ̄col T λT + (1 − λ) ·                      = δ̄ col      + T λ T
                                                                                                       ,                  (26)
                                                                    (1 − λ)2             1−λ
which is the main bound of Theorem 4.3.


                                                                22
                                                                                          A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


(i) If δ̄col = 0, equation 26 forces qT = u = n1 1 exactly. Then Proposition 8.6 gives Var(θ̂TBR ) = s2 ∥u∥22 = s2 · n1 =
s2 /n and Neff (qT ) = ∥u∥−2 2 = n.
                                                              δ
(ii) By Corollary 8.8 (δ̄ = δ/(1 − λ)), sd(θ̂T ) − s∥qT ∥2 ≤ 1−λ . By ∥ · ∥2 ≤ ∥ · ∥1 and equation 26,
                                                                                λ             
                      s∥qT ∥2 − s∥u∥2 ≤ s ∥qT − u∥2 ≤ s ∥qT − u∥1 ≤ s δ̄col             + T λT ,
                                                                                1−λ
                √
and ∥u∥2 = 1/ n. Combining,
                         s                                                   δ              λ         
            sd(θ̂T ) − √ ≤ sd(θ̂T ) − s∥qT ∥2 + s∥qT ∥2 − s∥u∥2 ≤                + s δ̄col       + T λT .
                          n                                                1−λ              1−λ
                                                                   λ
Remark 10.1 (Quantified herding impossibility). Write ∆ = δ̄col ( 1−λ + T λT ). By equation 26 and ∥ · ∥2 ≤ ∥ · ∥1 ,
                               1
∥qT ∥2 ≤ ∥u∥2 + ∥qT − u∥2 ≤ √n + ∆, so
                                                          1           n
                                         Neff (qT ) =           ≥     √      .
                                                        ∥qT ∥22   (1 + n ∆)2
                    √
For example ∆ ≤ 1/ n already forces Neff ≥ n/4. Contrast Theorem 4.2: in the narrow regime the baseline collapses
to Neff ≤ 8 regardless of n, whereas the equalized allocator cannot collapse at any attention width.

11     The Pricing Protocol
This appendix derives two facts about the pricing protocol: one price round equals one Sinkhorn iteration on the
tempered scores (so it converges to a doubly stochastic limit, invariant to social power), and retargeting the clearing
                                                                                         1/β
marginal extends exact optimality to the heteroskedastic optimum. Throughout, Kij = sij = (W̄ij πj )1/β , rn(M ) =
diag(M 1)−1 M , cn(M ) = M diag(1⊤ M )−1 .

11.1   One price round is one Sinkhorn iteration
                                                                                                       P
Recall the two local rules. Each source j holds a price yj > 0; the reader rule
                                                                            P sets Cij = (Kij /yj )/     k (Kik /yk ), i.e.
C = rn(Kdiag(y)−1 ), and the source rule updates yj ← yj aj with aj = i Cij .
Lemma 11.1 (Sinkhorn equivalence). Let C = rn(Kdiag(y)−1 ) be the current realized influence and aj =
                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                    i Cij
its column sums. After the source update yj ← yj aj , the next realized influence is
                                    C ′ = rn K diag(y ⊙ a)−1 = rn cn(C) .
                                                                               

That is, one price round applies a column normalization followed by a row normalization to C, which is one Sinkhorn
iteration on K.

Proof. The reader rule at y ′ = y ⊙ a gives C ′ = rn(K diag(y ⊙ a)−1 ), the first equality. With diag(y ⊙ a)−1 =
diag(a)−1 diag(y)−1 ,
                                  K diag(y ⊙ a)−1 = K diag(y)−1 diag(a)−1 .
                                                                  

Since rn(Drow M ) = rn(M ) and Kdiag(y)−1 is a positive row scaling of C,
                            C ′ = rn Kdiag(y)−1 diag(a)−1 = rn C diag(a)−1 .
                                                                         

Finally C diag(a)−1 = cn(C) since a⊤ = 1⊤ C, so C ′ = rn(cn(C)).
Lemma 11.2 (Convergence of inner iterations). Fix a round and hold K = K(t) fixed during the price updates. If K
has total support, then iterating the price round of Lemma 11.1 produces C (ℓ) → C ⋆ , the unique doubly stochastic
matrix with supp C ⋆ = supp K, and δcol (C (ℓ) ) → 0 geometrically. Total support holds whenever Kii > 0 for all i
and supp K is symmetric.

Proof. Each price round is one Sinkhorn iteration rn ◦ cn on K (Lemma 11.1). For K with total support, the alternating
row/column normalization converges to the unique doubly stochastic diag(u) K diag(v), with geometric rate in the
Hilbert projective metric [17]; convergence of the iterates gives δcol (C (ℓ) ) → 0. If Kii > 0 for all i, every diagonal
entry is positive, so each index lies on a positive diagonal (a trivial support permutation); symmetry of supp K then
gives total support.


                                                            23
                                                                                            A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


Remark 11.3 (Diagonal invariance of the cleared limit). One price round absorbs a right diagonal scaling of the
tempered scores, cn(KD2 ) = cn(K), but not a left scaling, since the column sums it normalizes change under
K 7→ D1 K. Both are absorbed only in the fully balanced Sinkhorn limit C ⋆ , the doubly stochastic projection of
K (Remark 11.6), which is invariant to K 7→ D1 KD2 . Two consequences. The social-power factor π enters as a
right scaling, K = (W̄ ⊙ 1π ⊤ )◦1/β , so it is removed after one round: the cleared allocator caps each source’s share
regardless of its power, attenuating the high-power columns of Theorem 4.2. The row normalization defining W̄ is a
left scaling and is removed only in the limit; the one-round iterate retains it until δcol → 0, which Theorem 4.3 tracks
through the measured defect.
Remark 11.4 (One Sinkhorn step does not clear exactly). A single price round (Lemma 11.1) reduces the column defect
but need not make C(t) doubly stochastic. Run to convergence each round with K(t) held fixed, under the total-support
condition of Lemma 11.2 (e.g. self-exposure Aii (t) > 0 and symmetric support), δcol (C(t)) → 0 and Theorem 4.3(i)
is exact. Run once per round as in Algorithm 1, the realized matrices need not clear, and Theorem 4.3 applies in its
general form through the measured defects δr ; the deviation of qT from uniform is then controlled by the δ̄col observed
in the run, not asserted a priori. Exact optimality is a property of the cleared limit; the one-round protocol attains it up
to δ̄col .

11.2   Targeted clearing and heteroskedastic optimality

Uniform clearing drives qT to n1 1, optimal when signal precisions are equal. When precisions differ, the best linear
unbiased weight is qi ∝ s−2
                         i , and the protocol attains it by clearing to a non-uniform target µ at no change to the two
rules.
Corollary 11.5 (Targeted clearing; heteroskedastic optimality). Fix a target µ ∈ ∆n with µj > 0 for all j. Replace
the source rule’s clearing target by µ, i.e. aj ← µj i µi Cij with fixed point µ⊤ C = µ⊤ , and the readout by
                                                   1
                                                     P

θ̂Tµ = µ⊤ b(T ). Define the weighted defects δrµ := ∥µ⊤ C(r) − µ⊤ ∥1 and δ̄ µ := max0≤r<T δrµ . Then the induced
weight qT (µ)⊤ := µ⊤ GT satisfies qT (µ)⊤ 1 = 1 and
                                                             λ         
                                        qT (µ) − µ 1 ≤ δ̄ µ      + T λT ;
                                                             1−λ
at exact clearing, qT (µ) = µ for every T ≥ 0 and every λ ∈ [0, 1). Consequently, under Assumption 7.3 with
heteroskedastic variances s21 , . . . , s2n , the choice µi ∝ s−2
                                                               i attains
                                                                    n
                                                                   X     −1
                                        Var µ⊤ bBR (T ) = µ⊤ S µ =    s−2
                                                       
                                                                       i      ,
                                                                        i=1

the best-linear-unbiased optimum, exactly. Uniform clearing µ = n1 1 (Theorem 4.3) is the special case for unknown or
exchangeable precisions.

Proof. Mass and variance. By Lemma 8.5, qT (µ)⊤ 1 = µ⊤ GT 1 = 1, and Proposition 8.6 gives Var(µ⊤ bBR (T )) =
qT (µ)⊤ S qT (µ).
Bound. The case λ = 0 is immediate as in Theorem 4.3. For λ ∈ (0, 1) set p⊤      r := λ
                                                                                        −(T −r) ⊤
                                                                                               µ Φ(T, r), so pT = µ and
 ⊤      ⊤
pr = pr+1 C(r) as before. Steps 1 and 2 of the proof of Theorem 4.3 apply with u replaced by µ throughout: they use
only the ℓ1 contraction equation 24 and the per-round residual µ⊤ C(r) − µ⊤ , whose ℓ1 norm is δrµ by definition. This
yields the stated bound, and at exact clearing (δ̄ µ = 0) it forces qT (µ) = µ.
Optimality. At exact clearing, with µi = s−2
                                                P −2
                                            i /      k sk ,
                                              P     −4 2        P −2                   −1
                                                i si si             si
                               X                                             X
                                     2 2                                            −2
                                   µi si = P −2 2 = P i −2                 =       si      .
                                 i
                                             ( k sk )         ( k sk )2         i

This is the minimum of q ⊤ Sq over q ⊤ 1 = 1: by Cauchy–Schwarz on (qi si )i , (s−1
                                                                                 i )i ,
                               X 2 X                        2 X         X          
                           1=         qi =        (qi si ) s−1
                                                            i    ≤   q 2 2
                                                                       i s i        s  −2
                                                                                       i    ,
                                    i               i                    i           i

                   −2 −1
so q ⊤ Sq ≥ (            , equality iff qi ∝ s−2
                P
                i si )                        i .


                                                            24
                                                                                            A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


Remark 11.6 (Why pricing rather than quotas). The fully cleared limit of the protocol is an information projection:
among all matrices with the given support and unit row and column sums, it is the unique minimizer of KL(C ∥ K)
             1/β
with K = (sij ) [12]. Equalization thus deviates from the relevance-driven allocation as little as possible subject to
clearing. Hard per-source quotas or random subsampling also clear the market, but they are cruder projections that
discard the score information; pricing is the minimal-distortion mechanism in the entropic geometry.

12     Experimental details
This appendix documents the full experimental configuration and reports the complete result set underlying the three
figures in the main text. All quantities are read directly from the committed run artifacts; where a value is a design
choice we give the governing source file.

12.1   Models and inference

All agents are instruction-tuned LLMs served locally with vLLM 0.23.0. We use the Qwen2.5-Instruct family at
0.5/1.5/3/7/14B and, for the cross-family generality check (App. 13.7), Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct and Llama-3.2-1B/3B-
Instruct. The heterogeneous “society” pairs a strong Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct with a weak Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct;
the controlled testbed (App. 13.1) uses a single Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct by default, swept over the scale ladder for
App. 13.2.
Decoding. Greedy (temperature=0, top-p=1.0, no repetition penalty, no per-request sampling seed), so per-prompt
generation is deterministic; the two-regime is not an artifact of greedy decoding (Fig. 5c contrasts greedy vs. τ =0.7).
Maximum new tokens are 320 for the discussion benchmarks and 96 for the estimation testbed; the context window
is 4096 tokens by default and raised to 16384/32768 for the large-n discussion runs whose transcripts overflow 4096.
The two cooperative-boundary environments that require a norm-setting free-text turn (GovSim) or match the source
protocol (Debate) use temperature=0.7.
Operator arms. Each benchmark is run under three realizations of the influence operator C: the baseline tempered
allocator Γβ , the equalized allocator ΓEQ , and (for the herding environments) an adversary-off causal control. The
allocator definitions and their parameters are given next.

12.2   The influence operator and its parameters
                                                                            1/β P    1/β
       • Context-width tempering Γβ (baseline). Row-wise, [Γβ (s)]j = sj / k sk : β → 0 is a hard argmax
         (herd onto the single most-exposed source), β=1 is proportional, β → ∞ is uniform. Realized influence is
         C(β) = Γβ (W̄ ⊙ π).
       • Equalized allocator ΓEQ . k Sinkhorn iterations (column-normalize under the stationary weights µ, then
         row-normalize) that drive the exposure matrix toward doubly stochastic, removing the exposure-column
         concentration a dominant source exploits. Default k=4; the k-robustness sweep is in App. 13.2.
       • Social power ζ (herding gate). A PageRank-style centrality mixing π⊤ = 1−ζ    ⊤
                                                                                    n 1 (I − ζ W̄ )
                                                                                                   −1
                                                                                                      , ζ ∈ [0, 1):
         ζ=0 gives uniform influence 1/n; ζ ↑ 1 concentrates influence on central sources. Default ζ=0.6 in the
         discussion benchmarks and ζ=0.7 in the testbed.
       • Follower self-reliance λ. A Friedkin–Johnsen anchoring P =diag(λ), λi ∈ [0, 1]: λ=1 is DeGroot updating,
         λ<1 anchors an agent to its own prior. The testbed uses λ=0.8 for followers with the pinned leader forced to
         1.0; the discussion harness uses λ=1.0 (DeGroot) unless the optional anchored-prompt flag is set.
       • Background exposure. In the centralized (hub) topology every agent reads the hub at weight 1.0 and every
         other peer at a floor weight 0.15, which keeps the exposure support full; a coverage gate keeps the visible
         peers covering 90% of each row’s influence mass.

12.3   How the context width β is realized

β is not a parameter of the language model: the backbone is a fixed, greedily-decoded instruction model that never sees
β. It is a knob of the simulation harness that controls, for each agent and round, which peers’ messages enter that agent’s
prompt and with what displayed weight. Each round the harness forms the influence row Ci: (β) (Sec. 12.2) and builds
agent i’s context by listing peers in descending Cij order until their cumulative normalized influence mass reaches
the coverage threshold (0.9); peers below the threshold are withheld entirely. This makes β a genuine information
bottleneck, not a cosmetic weight:


                                                            25
                                                                                          A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


       • Narrow β. Ci: concentrates on the single most-exposed source (the hub), so the threshold is met by that
         source alone and every other agent’s private facts never appear in i’s prompt. The agent cannot pool what it
         never sees and defers to the dominant, confident-wrong source: herding.
       • Wide β. Ci: spreads out, so covering 90% of the mass requires nearly all peers; the prompt then carries the
         distributed private facts and the agent pools them: wisdom.

Each shown peer is also labelled with its weight in the prompt (e.g. “[weight 0.31] Agent 7”), but the load-bearing
effect is the hard inclusion/exclusion above. Because β acts entirely through prompt construction — never through
model weights, fine-tuning, or decoding temperature — the mechanism is backbone-agnostic, which is why the
narrow-β collapse and its equalizer fix replicate on a second model family (App. 13.7). The equalized allocator ΓEQ
changes which column C concentrates on (it removes the concentration), not the gating rule; the online priced protocol
reaches the same C by updating per-source prices once per round. The exact prompt templates, including the gated peer
block, are in App. 12.7.

12.4   Environments

HiddenBench (hidden-profile reasoning). The 65-task benchmark of Li et al. [29] (bit-identical to the public
HiddenBench release, built on the Stasser–Titus hidden-profile paradigm). Each task distributes unshared clues
round-robin across the n agents so that no agent can answer alone and only pooling recovers the correct option. The
injected adversary pins the hub agent to a fixed wrong option ((answer mod K) + 1) and makes it structurally stubborn
(the hub reads no one and never updates), so it broadcasts a confident wrong answer at every round; the adversary-off
control removes the pin. Collective accuracy is the answer at the first round all n agents agree on a valid option (else
the final-round majority); the pre-discussion baseline is the round-0 majority over the distributed beliefs. Large-n runs
use n ∈ {8, 16, 24}, T =5 discussion rounds, 12 tasks/seed, 5 seeds, and a 9-point β grid (n=24) or 5-point grid.

Werewolf (social deduction). Standard one-werewolf games compiled into the HiddenBench format: each of the
N −1 innocents holds one truthful alibi clue whose pooling uniquely identifies the werewolf. The werewolf plays a
naturally deceptive role — it broadcasts a confident false accusation — and we seat it at the influence hub, realized
through the same hub-pin mechanism as the HiddenBench adversary, so its deflection dominates each reader’s context
at narrow β. Game files exist for N ∈ {6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16} (100 games each; 20 sampled per run), T =4, 5 seeds, a
5-point β grid; the collective is scored correct when the village converges on the werewolf. Both seats use the same
model, so Werewolf isolates β×adversary×allocator, not placement.

AgentsNet (distributed graph colouring). The coordination benchmark of Grötschla et al. [23]. Each agent is a
graph node choosing a colour in 1..∆+1 different from all neighbours; a valid colouring always exists, so residual
colouring conflicts (edges whose endpoints share a colour, on the final beliefs, lower is better) measure coordination
failure. Graphs are Barabási–Albert (BA, attachment m=2; the default), plus Watts–Strogatz (degree ≈ 4, rewire
p=0.3) and Delaunay for the topology ablation. The society seats 2 strong (7B) agents either on the highest-degree
nodes (central) or the lowest-degree nodes (peripheral), with everyone else weak (1.5B); placement is chosen by node
degree. Runs use n ∈ {8, 16, 24, 32, 50}, T =4, 30 graphs, 5 seeds, a 5-point β grid.

Boundary environments. Debate [15] (network variant): agents on a BA graph answer a hard multiple-choice
question then revise after reading peers; collective accuracy is the majority of final answers (n=8, T =3, 40 tasks,
5 seeds, a disclosed hub adversary). GovSim [35]: n=5 fishers share a lake of capacity 20n over up to 12 months;
we report survival months and the sustainability rate (fraction of runs that do not collapse below the threshold).
MARBLE [46]: a MultiAgentBench coding-collaboration team whose relationship graph is set to the thresholded C(β)
attention structure, scored by total milestone completion, with the strong agent seated at the hub vs. a leaf.

12.5   Seeds, protocol, and statistics

Every run reports the mean over independent seeds, each seed re-drawing task instances, fact distribution, and
graph/game structure. Seeds are explicit and offset from a per-experiment base: HiddenBench/Werewolf use base 4200
with seeds {4200, 5200, 6200, 7200, 8200} (5 seeds); AgentsNet uses base 5500 (5 seeds); the estimation testbed uses
base 51000 (8 seeds); the Neff suite uses base 53000 (24 seeds, with 1000 bootstrap resamples over seeds to check the
stability of the reported Neff estimates); Debate uses base 7300 (5 seeds). Unless stated, cells are 5 seeds. The two-
regime “gap” is wide-β minus narrow-β collective accuracy (discussion benchmarks) or the analogous narrow→wide
change in error (testbed).


                                                           26
                                                                                                              A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


12.6   Hardware, software, and reproducibility

All LLM inference runs on a single node with 8× NVIDIA RTX PRO 6000 (Blackwell, sm_120, 96 GB each; driver
580.159.04, CUDA 13.0). We use vLLM 0.23.0 under Python 3.12, PyTorch 2.11.0, Transformers 5.12.1, and
NumPy 2.3.5, in bfloat16 with tensor-parallel size 1 (one model replica per GPU). The in-process vLLM engine is
used throughout, except MARBLE and the corrected GovSim runs, which use a persistent OpenAI-compatible vLLM
server. Randomness flows through the explicit seeds above; greedy decoding is used for reproducibility, with the caveat
that greedy generation is batch-composition sensitive in bfloat16, so bit-identical per-prompt decoding requires batch
size 1. (The committed CPU-only environment.yml provisions the analysis/plotting environment only; the GPU
inference stack above is installed separately and its exact versions are recorded here from the live environment, as no
GPU lockfile is committed.)

12.7   Prompt templates

Every agent receives a system message (its role and private information) and a per-round user message (the task
instruction plus the β-gated peer block of Sec. 12.3); every reply ends with a parseable BELIEF: <integer> line,
from which we read the agent’s choice. We reproduce the exact templates verbatim below; {...} marks a per-task field
filled from the benchmark item. Boxes are colour-coded throughout this section: grey is a harness-constructed template,
blue is the exact text a model actually saw, green is a model’s real, unedited output.
  HiddenBench — system message (template)


   {scenario description}

   Facts known to EVERYONE:
   - {shared fact 1}
   - ...
   Facts known ONLY to you:
   - {this agent’s private fact(s)}

   Options:
   1) {option 1}
   2) {option 2}
   ...

   First, in 1-2 sentences, state the specific fact(s) YOU were given that others
   may not have. Then weigh all available facts and choose. End with exactly one
   line:
   BELIEF: <integer>
   where <integer> is the option number of your current best decision (digits only).


  HiddenBench — round-0 user message (template, no peers yet)


   Choose the single best option by its number. Options: 1) ...; 2) ...; ...

   Using only the information you were given, share your unique fact(s) and state
   your current best answer.


  HiddenBench — round t≥1 user message (template; the peer block is β-gated, Sec. 12.3)


   Choose the single best option by its number. Options: 1) ...; 2) ...; ...

   Messages from the agents you are listening to (with their weight in your context):
   --- [weight 0.71] Agent 0 ---
   {Agent 0’s most recent message}
   --- [weight 0.12] Agent 3 ---
   {Agent 3’s most recent message}

   Pool everyone’s facts -- especially any you did not originally have -- and
   reconsider. If a peer revealed a decisive fact, update accordingly. Give your
   updated answer.


  Anchoring suffix (appended to the system message in the anchored runs that make the bridge bound non-vacuous, λmax < 1; App. 13.3)

   IMPORTANT: weigh your OWN reading of the facts substantially. Do not simply adopt
   the group’s majority; keep significant weight on your own current choice and
   update only partially toward what others report.




                                                                       27
                                                                                          A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


The system message carries the node id, its neighbour ids, the palette size K, and the goal; the round-t user message
shows only the neighbours C(β) attends to (non-neighbours have zero exposure):
   AgentsNet — system + user message (template)


   GRAPH COLOURING. Your neighbours are: {neighbour ids}. There are {K} colours,
   numbered 1 to {K}. GOAL: choose a colour DIFFERENT from every one of your
   neighbours.

   Reason briefly, then end with exactly one line:
   BELIEF: <integer>
   where <integer> is the colour number you choose (digits only).

       [user, round >= 1]
   Colours currently chosen by the neighbours you are attending to
   (with their weight in your context):
     - Agent 3: colour 2   [weight 0.44]
     - Agent 7: undecided [weight 0.19]

   Choose a colour that DIFFERS from every neighbour shown above. If they already
   occupy several colours, pick the smallest colour none of them uses. Give your
   updated colour.



Worked example on a real item. To make the templates concrete, the box below is the verbatim system prompt the
harness produced for one agent on the committed HiddenBench item “Safe Haven After the Spill” (item 34 of the 65) —
a textbook hidden profile in which the shared facts favour Maple Lodge (the listed safe site) but the correct answer is
Cedar Station, recoverable only by pooling the three unshared facts (Pine Retreat lies in the drifting cloud; the road to
Maple Lodge is washed out; Cedar Station alone has working communications). The four agents are each dealt one
clue — Agent 0 (the hub) the drifting cloud, Agent 1 the washed-out road, Agent 2 the Cedar-Station radio — except a
fourth, Agent 3, that is dealt none. The box below is the verbatim system prompt for Agent 1, holder of the decisive
“washed-out road” clue:
   Worked example — real system prompt (item 34, “Safe Haven After the Spill”)

   You are part of a university field team conducting research in a rural
   region. Suddenly, a chemical spill at a manufacturing plant several miles
   away has triggered a region-wide alert. Everyone on your team must decide
   together where to relocate for safety and communication with authorities.
   You have very little time. There are three potential locations:
   - Maple Lodge (a youth camp to the east)
   - Pine Retreat (a cabin complex to the north)
   - Cedar Station (an old ranger station to the south)
   All locations are usually reachable in under an hour. Your goal: choose the
   only safe and reachable location, maximizing your team’s safety and your
   ability to coordinate with emergency services.

   Facts known to EVERYONE:
   - Maple Lodge is listed on the evacuation plan as a safe site for
     chemical-related incidents.
   - Pine Retreat is farther from the spill than where you currently are.
   - Cedar Station is an older building, less commonly used, but the route to
     it is familiar to everyone on the team.
   - Maps indicate that all sites should have food and water supplies for at
     least 24 hours.

   Facts known ONLY to you:
   - Emergency traffic updates say the only road to Maple Lodge has been washed
     out by heavy rains this morning, making it inaccessible by car or foot.

   Options:
   1) Maple Lodge
   2) Pine Retreat
   3) Cedar Station

   First, in 1-2 sentences, state the specific fact(s) YOU were given that
   others may not have. Then weigh all available facts and choose. End with
   exactly one line:
   BELIEF: <integer>
   where <integer> is the option number of your current best decision (digits
   only).


Agent 3’s system prompt on this item is identical — same scenario, same shared facts, same options, same answer
contract — except for its private-facts block, which reads:


                                                                        28
                                                                                                             A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


   Worked example — Agent 3’s private-facts block (item 34), verbatim, all else identical to the box above

   Facts known ONLY to you:
   (no extra facts beyond the shared ones)


On this item the two regimes play out verbatim on the same Qwen2.5-7B backbone: Agent 3’s answer depends entirely
on which peers β lets it read. At narrow β=0.1 the 0.9 coverage threshold is met by the hub (Agent 0) alone, so Agent 3
sees only the hub’s message — which, leaning on the shared “Maple Lodge is the listed safe site”, argues merely that
Pine Retreat is dangerous — and it herds onto the wrong shared favourite:

   Peer block shown at narrow β=0.1


   Messages from the agents you are listening to (with their weight in your context):
   --- [weight 1.00] Agent 0 ---
   The chemical cloud is drifting north, making Pine Retreat dangerous. BELIEF: 1



   Follower’s real reply at narrow β=0.1

   Based on the new information that the chemical cloud is drifting north, Pine
   Retreat is now a dangerous location.
   BELIEF: 1                                     <-- Maple Lodge (WRONG)


At wide β=10 the same follower’s prompt clears nearly all peers, so it now also reads the two decisive unshared clues,
pools them, and flips to the correct answer:

   Peer block shown at wide β=10


   Messages from the agents you are listening to (with their weight in your context):
   --- [weight 0.42] Agent 0 --- ...Pine Retreat dangerous.               BELIEF: 1
   --- [weight 0.29] Agent 1 --- ...road to Maple Lodge washed out...     BELIEF: 2
   --- [weight 0.29] Agent 2 --- ...Cedar Station has ... radio.          BELIEF: 3



   Follower’s real reply at wide β=10

   Based on the updated information:
   - Maple Lodge is listed as a safe site but the road is washed out, making it
     inaccessible.
   - Pine Retreat ... the chemical cloud is drifting north, making it dangerous.
   - Cedar Station has a functional landline, backup generator, and emergency
     broadcast radio ...
   BELIEF: 3                                     <-- Cedar Station (CORRECT)


Nothing changed but β — same item, same follower, same greedily-decoded backbone — yet the context bottleneck
alone turns a herded wrong answer into the pooled correct one. This single item is drawn from the full 65-task
benchmark for illustration; averaged over the sampled HiddenBench runs the same swing is the 0.09 ± 0.08 narrow-β
floor versus the 0.73 ± 0.07 wide-β accuracy of Table 7.


13     Full experimental results

All tables in this section are computed from the committed data.json/cells.json artifacts. Error is the estimation
testbed’s collective error (lower is better); collective accuracy and colouring conflicts are as defined above.

13.1    Controlled estimation testbed: two regimes across model scale

The testbed is a measurement instrument (App. 12.2: it exposes δ, λ, and Neff , which no cooperative benchmark
reports), not a collective-intelligence claim in its own right. A wrong “leader” is pinned at the influence centre; the
collective error is high at narrow β (the followers herd onto the leader) and low at wide β (they pool the distributed noisy
signals). Table 2 sweeps the crowd model over the capability ladder (n=12, 8 seeds); the two-regime is present at every
scale, and equalization reduces the narrow-β error the more capable the crowd (the 1.5B row is the unstable/oscillating
point noted in the diagnostics, not a failure of the effect).


                                                                            29
                                                                                            A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026



Table 2: Two-regime by model scale in the controlled testbed (collective error, lower is better; n=12, 8 seeds). Baseline
Γβ vs. equalized ΓEQ at narrow (β=0.1) and wide (β=10) context width.
                          crowd model      base narrow    base wide     eq. narrow     eq. wide
                          Qwen2.5-0.5B     57.6 ± 1.3     8.7 ± 5.1    45.9 ± 22.2    37.2 ± 23.5
                          Qwen2.5-1.5B     14.3 ± 3.5     8.0 ± 4.1     7.7 ± 4.6      9.4 ± 5.4
                          Qwen2.5-3B       41.5 ± 4.7     5.4 ± 4.1    15.5 ± 23.6     5.4 ± 2.7
                          Qwen2.5-7B       46.5 ± 3.7    12.5 ± 8.9    15.2 ± 21.0    12.1 ± 16.9



13.2   Mechanism ablations

Table 3 is the controlled-testbed ablation grid (Qwen2.5-3B, n=12, 8 seeds) over social power, self-reliance, Sinkhorn
iterations, and five structural variants of the interaction model, read from the per-setting run data. The central result is
that the narrow-β herding error is gated by social power: it collapses to the healthy floor at ζ=0 (5.5, no concentration,
no herding) and jumps to ≈ 42 for any ζ>0. Equalization lowers the narrow-β error under every setting; a single
Sinkhorn iteration (k=1) already clears the dominant column, so the effect is k-robust. At wide β there is no dominant
column left to clear, so equalization has little upside and can slightly distort an already-balanced allocation (e.g. the
k=4 eq.-wide cell, and the smallest crowd in Table 2); the mechanism’s value is at narrow β, where a cheap price step
recovers most of the wide-β wisdom without paying for wide context. The herding persists across five structural variants
of the interaction model (memory, exposure-pricing, late-joiner, distance-decay, skeptic), each of which equalization
again clears. Self-reliance λ has no measurable effect over [0.3, 0.7] (the followers’ anchoring does not change the
pinned-leader herding). Horizon and background exposure are not swept in this testbed; population is checked separately
on the real benchmarks (Appendix 13.4, 13.5), not as a testbed grid axis.


Table 3: Controlled-testbed ablations (collective error; Qwen2.5-3B, n=12, 8 seeds). “base” is Γβ , “eq” is ΓEQ ; narrow
= β=0.1, wide = β=10.
                         setting          base narrow     base wide     eq. narrow      eq. wide
                       Social power ζ
                        ζ=0.0              5.5 ± 2.6      4.9 ± 2.0    11.4 ± 16.2     8.7 ± 5.6
                        ζ=0.2              42.2 ± 4.3     4.7 ± 2.3    25.5 ± 33.3     4.0 ± 1.5
                        ζ=0.4              42.1 ± 4.2     5.2 ± 1.5    18.7 ± 23.2     4.8 ± 3.5
                        ζ=0.6              42.1 ± 4.3     5.6 ± 4.2    17.3 ± 21.4     9.4 ± 8.2
                        ζ=0.8              42.1 ± 4.2     3.9 ± 2.2    15.3 ± 17.3    10.3 ± 10.1
                        ζ=0.9              41.7 ± 3.9     5.3 ± 1.9    16.7 ± 19.6     6.6 ± 2.5
                        ζ=0.95             41.5 ± 3.6     4.5 ± 2.0    18.7 ± 22.8     8.1 ± 8.5
                       Self-reliance λ
                        0.3–0.7 (all)      42.1 ± 4.2    11.5 ± 18.5   10.0 ± 13.7    16.0 ± 17.5
                       Sinkhorn iterations k
                         k=1               39.4 ± 5.9     4.7 ± 2.7      6.9 ± 6.5     5.1 ± 2.4
                         k=2               39.4 ± 5.9     4.7 ± 2.7      6.9 ± 6.5     4.5 ± 1.6
                         k=4               39.4 ± 5.9     4.7 ± 2.7      6.9 ± 6.5    12.9 ± 15.0
                       Structural variants
                         memory            42.3 ± 8.6    14.5 ± 31.2     1.9 ± 2.1     1.9 ± 2.0
                         exposure-price    50.6 ± 1.7     5.3 ± 2.3      4.3 ± 1.9      4.9 ± 1.9
                         late-joiner       28.7 ± 5.0     2.2 ± 1.2      4.4 ± 2.4      5.6 ± 3.0
                         distance-decay    59.1 ± 1.1     4.4 ± 2.2      6.5 ± 3.7     11.0 ± 8.8
                         skeptic           18.4 ± 8.1     3.4 ± 1.8      5.0 ± 2.3      5.3 ± 5.0




13.3   Proxy↔LLM bridge and effective sample size

The bound holds. Pooling the bridge cells (three β-sweep conditions plus the anchored-persona run), the measured
sup-norm proxy↔LLM discrepancy is at or under the theoretical ceiling δ/(1 − λ) in 254/254 cells (0 violations),
median margin 2.5× (Theorem 4.1). The first-moment identity θ̂LLM ≈ q⊤                                   2
                                                                       T b0 holds with OLS slope 0.88 (R =0.74, vs.
0.28 for a β-free mean-b0 baseline) — the LLM collective is the influence-weighted average the theory predicts.


                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                       A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


                                  (a)0.140
                                       equalization converges                                             (b) herding requires ζ > 0                             (c) two-regime survives sampling
                                                                                                                                                                 0.8         greedy (τ = 0)




column defect δcol (log)                                                  narrow-β collective error
                                                                                                                                                                             sampling (τ = 0.7)
                                                                                                 40               herding (needs ζ > 0)




                                                                                                                                                collective accuracy
                           10−1                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                0.073
                                                                                                 30
                                                                                                           no                                                    0.4
                                                                                                 20 herding
                      6 × 10−2
                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                 10
                      4 × 10−2                                    0.037
                                                                                                      0                                                          0.0
                                  1         2                 4                                           0.0           0.5                                            0.1     0.3         1      3   10
                                      Sinkhorn iterations k                                                social-power damping ζ                                              context width β
       Figure 5: Mechanism ablations (visual). (a) the equalized allocator’s column defect falls monotonically with Sinkhorn
       iterations k, from 0.14 at k=1 to 0.037 at k=4; (b) herding is gated by social power, absent at ζ=0 and present for
       any ζ>0 (cf. Table 3); (c) on real HiddenBench (n=24) the two-regime holds under both greedy (τ =0) and stochastic
       (τ =0.7) decoding.


       The anchoring weights are measured, not assumed. The ceiling δT /(1 − λmax ) depends on the per-agent anchoring
       λi , which we do not set but fit by least squares over each run: for fixed i the residual δ̂i (t) is affine in λi at each t, so
                    2
       P
           t δ̂i (t) is a univariate quadratic and the minimiser on [0, 1) is closed-form. Reporting a goodness-of-fit residual after
       fitting λ is standard; what matters is where the resulting ceiling is genuinely small, not merely finite. It is tightest on the
       89 anchored-persona cells, whose explicit anchoring prompt keeps self-reliance low (median λ=0.25), so 99% have a
       ceiling below 250, against the ∼ 105 an unanchored persona produces as λ → 1. Across the full 254-cell pool the fitted
       λ is higher (median 0.61) and the ceiling looser, with 70% below 250; the bound holds with zero violations throughout,
       but is non-vacuous in the strong sense only on the anchored subset and merely satisfied on the rest. Because λi is fit
       from the T residuals of one run, δT is the worst-case residual after each agent’s best-fit anchoring, so “zero violations”
       is a statement about per-agent best-fit ceilings rather than about a prescribed λ.

       Neff across network topology. Table 4 reports the proxy Neff (qT -based, n=12, 24 seeds) as β widens. The herding
       floor at narrow β and its recovery toward the degree ceiling at wide β appear on every graph family that has a
       concentrated hub (BA, ER, WS, SBM); the regular graph, which has no hub, shows no floor (Neff =12 throughout) —
       the floor is a property of hub concentration, not P of n. This Pis consistent with Theorem 4.2’s wide-context prediction:
       for the degree-regular graph, the closed form ( k dk )2 / k d2k evaluates to exactly 12.00 = n and the measured
       Neff recovers it, while the Barabási–Albert graph’s degree heterogeneity evaluates the same closed form at 8.89. The
       wide-β measurement is 9.8; the two numbers are not the same quantity — 8.89 is the β → ∞ stationary-weight (ν)
       ceiling of the theorem, whereas 9.8 is the finite-β, finite-horizon qT -based estimate — but they agree in magnitude
       and both sit well above the narrow-β floor, which is the prediction being tested. The same diagnosis does not transfer
       directly to the HiddenBench and Werewolf exposure graphs (Appendix 13.4, 13.5): their hub structure is asymmetric
       (W̄ ̸= W̄ ⊤ ), outside this part of the theorem, and their binary support is near-degree-regular, so the gap to oracle visible
       in Figure 2A,B reflects the hidden-profile information ceiling rather than degree heterogeneity.

       Table 4: Effective sample size Neff (proxy qT ; n=12, 24 seeds) at narrow vs. wide β, by graph topology. Narrow β
       herds onto the hub (small Neff ); wide β recovers the degree ceiling. Regular graphs have no hub and hence no floor.
                                                          topology                                                Neff narrow β           Neff wide β
                                                          Barabási–Albert (3B)                                          3.0                   9.8
                                                          Barabási–Albert (7B)                                          3.0                   9.8
                                                          Erdős–Rényi                                                 2.8                   11.1
                                                          Watts–Strogatz                                                4.3                  11.2
                                                          stochastic block model                                        6.0                  11.6
                                                          regular (no hub)                                             12.0                  12.0


       13.4                 HiddenBench: two-regime, causation, floor, and equalizer

       Table 5 is the causation 2 × 2 at n=8 (adversary {on,off} × allocator {baseline, ΓEQ }, 5 seeds): only the adversary-
       on/baseline cell collapses at narrow β, and it is repaired by either intervention. Table 6 shows the floor is n-independent


                                                                                                                  31
                                                                                                                                                                     A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


                                          (a) two-regime error; equalization caps it                                                            (b) Neff : herding floor → degree ceiling
                           60        herding                               wisdom                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                            n = 12




                                                                                                      effective sample size Neff
                           50




collective error |θ̂ − θ ⋆ |
                                                                                                                                   10

                           40                                                                                                      8
                                                                                  baseline Γβ                                                                                              baseline
                           30                                                     equalized ΓEQ                                    6                                                       equalized

                           20                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                          herding floor Neff →2
                           10                                                                                                      2

                               0                                                                                                   0
                                   10−1                 100                      101                                                               10−1                 100          101
                                                      context width β                                                                                             context width β
      Figure 6: The closed-form two-regime, realized on the LLM testbed. Baseline collective error shows the two regimes
      across β while the equalized operator holds error low; Neff rises from the narrow-β floor toward the degree ceiling
      (Theorems 4.2, 4.3). Real Qwen2.5-7B.


      (flat narrow-β accuracy from n=8 to n=24) and that equalization recovers narrow-β accuracy at every size. The
      equalizer is robust to its one knob: at n=8 every k ∈ {1, 2, 4} lifts narrow-β accuracy off the floor (from 0.08 to
      0.60–0.67).

                                                  Table 5: HiddenBench causation 2 × 2 (collective accuracy; n=8, 5 seeds).
                                                      cell                       β=0.1          0.3                           1.0            3.0          10         gap
                                                      adv-on, baseline           0.083     0.067                       0.667               0.700       0.733        +0.65
                                                      adv-on, equalized          0.667     0.633                       0.633               0.600       0.600        −0.07
                                                      adv-off, baseline          0.583     0.583                       0.750               0.767       0.717        +0.13
                                                      adv-off, equalized         0.683     0.817                       0.717               0.717       0.767        +0.08



      Table 6: HiddenBench Neff floor across n (adversary-on baseline vs. equalized; collective accuracy; 5 seeds). The
      narrow-β floor is flat in n; equalization recovers it at every n.
                                                                                 baseline Γβ                                              equalized ΓEQ
                                                              n      narrow β          wide β          gap                              narrow β      recovery
                                                              8          0.083         0.733          +0.65                              0.667            +0.58
                                                              16         0.083         0.633          +0.55                              0.583            +0.50
                                                              24         0.050         0.767          +0.72                              0.617            +0.57


       Variance across arms. Table 7 gives mean ± std at narrow and wide β (seed-level spread, pooled across the causation
       cells above). The baseline gate and the herding floor are both low-variance and clearly separated (adv-on/baseline:
       0.09 ± 0.08 at narrow β vs. 0.73 ± 0.07 at wide β); the equalizer’s narrow-β recovery is high-variance (0.58 ± 0.13),
       i.e. some seeds clear the collapse fully and others only partially — an honest property of the mechanism, not noise to be
       hidden.

                               Table 7: HiddenBench, mean ± std collective accuracy at narrow (β=0.1) and wide (β=10) context width.
                                                                   arm                          narrow β                                       wide β
                                                                   adv-on, baseline        0.092 ± 0.075                                  0.733 ± 0.069
                                                                   equalized               0.583 ± 0.134                                  0.633 ± 0.153
                                                                   adv-off                 0.517 ± 0.110                                  0.667 ± 0.146



                                                                                                  32
                                                                                                  A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026


13.5   Werewolf: two-regime, floor, and equalizer

Table 8 gives the n=6 arms: at narrow β the village herds onto the werewolf’s false accusation and convicts the wrong
player on every game (0.00); at wide β it pools the alibis and convicts the werewolf (0.87). Removing the werewolf’s
deflection (the intrinsic control) removes the collapse (0.71), and the fully-cleared equalizer recovers narrow-β to 0.55
at this size. The narrow-β floor is n-independent, pinned at 0.00 for every n ∈ {6, 8, 10, 12, 16} while wide-β stays
high. The equalizer’s recovery, however, is not n-independent: at n=6 a single Sinkhorn iteration already lifts narrow-β
off the floor, but the recovery weakens as n grows (the fully-cleared operator falls to 0.24 at n=16; Table 9), so unlike
HiddenBench, Werewolf does not recover equally at every size.


Table 8: Werewolf n=6 (20 games, 5 seeds; collective accuracy). “equalized” is the fully-cleared operator ΓEQ run to
its fixed point each round. The Neff floor is n-independent (narrow-β pinned at 0.00 for all n).
                             arm (n=6)                         β=0.1      0.3    1.0     3.0      10
                            baseline (wolf deflects)            0.00      0.00 0.00 0.88 0.87
                            equalized ΓEQ (fully cleared)       0.55      0.51 0.48 0.48 0.48
                            wolf does not deflect (control)     0.71      0.72 0.66 0.89 0.91
Neff floor: narrow-β accuracy by n (6, 8, 10, 12, 16) = 0.00, 0.00, 0.00, 0.00, 0.00; wide-β = 0.87, 0.83, 0.70, 0.63, 0.59.



Variance across arms. Table 9 gives mean ± std at n=16 (seed-level spread). The narrow-β floor has zero variance
(0.00 ± 0.00): every seed lynches the wrong player, not just most of them. The online-priced allocator (one price
update per round, as in Figure 3) recovers narrow-β to 0.18 ± 0.07, just below the fully-cleared operator at the same
size (0.24; Figure 3b) and well below the operator’s 0.55 at n=6 (Table 8) — the operator recovery itself weakens with
n, and online pricing tracks just under it within T =4.


Table 9: Werewolf n=16, mean ± std collective accuracy at narrow (β=0.1) and wide (β=10) context width. Here
“online-priced” is the one-update-per-round protocol of Figure 3, not the fully-cleared operator of Table 8.
                                   arm (n=16)                    narrow β           wide β
                                   baseline (wolf deflects)   0.000 ± 0.000     0.585 ± 0.077
                                   online-priced              0.180 ± 0.074     0.575 ± 0.097
                                   wolf does not deflect      0.160 ± 0.063     0.585 ± 0.055



13.6   AgentsNet: placement and its ablations

Placement is the complementary facet: seating the strong agents at the high-degree influence centre beats seating them at
the periphery, and the advantage grows monotonically with scale (main-text Figure 2c; +1.5 at n=8 to +10.6 at n=50).
Table 10 gives the ablation matrix. Crucially, the placement gap is degree/topology-driven, not social-power-driven: it
is invariant to ζ and to the number of Sinkhorn iterations, and equalization lowers conflicts but does not collapse the
gap — so these ablations do not contradict Theorem 4.3 (which neutralizes social-power column concentration, not
a degree-induced coordination advantage). The Watts–Strogatz control, whose hubs are weak, shows the gap shrink
(+2.2 at n=16) and reverse sign (−2.9 at n=32), consistent with the effect being carried by hub degree; per-seed
conflicts were not logged for this ablation, so the n=32 sign flip is not independently verified against sampling noise
and should be read as suggestive rather than confirmed.

13.7   Cross-family generality: Llama-3.1-8B

Table 11 re-runs the HiddenBench 2 × 2 with Llama-3.1-8B in place of Qwen-7B (same code, model swapped).
All three signatures replicate: the narrow-β herding collapse (0.02), the equalizer’s flat recovery (+0.37), and the
adversary-off no-collapse control (0.55). The honest scope is that capability bounds the wide-β regime: Llama-8B is a
weaker reasoner here, so its wide-β ceiling is lower (0.35 vs. Qwen’s 0.73) and its adversary-off curve declines with β
(0.55 → 0.33) rather than rising — a weak model is hurt by wide context. The narrow-β collapse and the equalizer
fix are model-family-agnostic; the wide-β wisdom magnitude is capability-bounded. Mean ± std at the endpoints
(narrow β=0.1, wide β=10): baseline 0.017 ± 0.020 → 0.267 ± 0.110; equalized 0.383 ± 0.076 → 0.392 ± 0.114;
adversary-off 0.550 ± 0.085 → 0.325 ± 0.082. All three arms separate cleanly at narrow β, confirming the signatures
in Table 11 are not an artifact of seed noise.


                                                                33
                                                                                                               A PREPRINT - J ULY 7, 2026



Table 10: AgentsNet placement ablations (mean colouring conflicts, lower is better; 5 seeds). Gap = peripheral −
central (positive = centre wins).
setting                              central peripheral         gap         reading
baseline n=16                          9.3     15.1      +5.8    —
equalized n=16                         7.6     14.0      +6.4    eq lowers conflicts, gap survives
equalized n=32                        13.2     23.4     +10.2    same at scale
k=1 / k=2 n=16                       7.0/7.1 13.5/13.9 +6.5/+6.8 Sinkhorn-k invariant
ζ=0 n=16                              10.6     16.6      +6.0    ζ-invariant
ζ=0.9 n=16                             9.5     15.2      +5.7    ζ-invariant
T =8 n=16                              9.2     14.7      +5.5    horizon-robust
nstrong =1 n=32                       17.2     23.3      +6.1    one hub agent already wins
small-world (WS) n=16                 13.9     16.1      +2.2    weak hubs → small gap
small-world (WS) n=32                 33.0     30.1      −2.9    homogeneous → gap vanishes/flips


Table 11: Cross-family generality: HiddenBench 2 × 2 with Llama-3.1-8B (collective accuracy; 5 seeds). Individual
≈ 0.08, oracle ≈ 0.76.
                                    arm               β=0.1       0.3        1.0      3.0         10
                                    baseline Γβ        0.02      0.03       0.35      0.26        0.27
                                    equalized ΓEQ      0.38      0.31       0.38      0.36        0.39
                                    adversary-off      0.55      0.49       0.41      0.39        0.33


13.8      Boundary environments

The two-regime is a property of aggregation-dependent tasks, and its magnitude tracks how strongly the task forces
deference to a dominant source. Table 12 maps the boundary. Debate keeps every agent’s own answer and spreads
influence over a BA graph with no single bottleneck, so the injected adversary captures only a small share and the
two-regime is weak (+0.07). GovSim, with the corrected inference backend, saturates: every condition sustains the
resource (survival 12 months, sustainability rate 1.0). This is structural, not a tuning artifact: GovSim is a continuous-
harvest decision in which each fisher independently chooses a catch, with no private clue that must be pooled across
agents to reach the right action — so there is no hidden-profile information to aggregate and no confident-wrong source
for the population to herd onto. The two-regime therefore cannot arise here by construction, and GovSim saturates
by ceiling rather than by collapse. Together with Debate, this marks where the aggregation channel is absent or the
task never forces deference, so the theory neither predicts nor is tested by these environments. MARBLE is a different
case: it has a placement axis the theory does speak to, but decomposes into independent per-agent milestones with no
shared latent for placement to act on, and the placement advantage flips sign across replicates (+0.61 versus −0.58).
We report this as a negative result — the predicted placement effect does not hold on independently-scored subtasks —
not as a boundary alongside the ceiling cases above.

Table 12: Boundary environments. Debate: collective accuracy by β (the two-regime is weak). GovSim: survival
months / sustainability (the corrected backend saturates, no two-regime by ceiling).
                              Debate (Du et al. network variant; n=8, 5 seeds; collective accuracy)
                              arm             β=0.1       0.3         1.0      3.0           10          gap
                              baseline Γβ       0.300     0.275 0.340 0.305 0.370 +0.07
                              equalized         0.330     0.315 0.305 0.340 0.300 −0.03
                              adversary-off     0.350     0.355 0.345 0.340 0.305 −0.04
GovSim (corrected server backend): survival = 12 months and sustainability = 1.0 in all conditions (n=5–24, baseline / equalized /
fixed-pie / anchored) — the collective saturates the cooperative ceiling; there is no two-regime.




                                                                34
