                                                                    AUTO: The AGI Compiler


                                                                Jaber Jaber∗                              Osama Jaber
                                                               RightNow AI                                RightNow AI
                                                           jaber@rightnowai.co                        osama@rightnowai.co




arXiv:2607.04542v1 [cs.LG] 5 Jul 2026
                                                                                       Abstract
                                                    Every LLM agent run re-derives its behavior token by token on a frontier model:
                                                    brilliant, expensive, slow, and unbounded. We present AUTO, a compiler that
                                                    records live agent behavior, measures which parts are secretly deterministic, ex-
                                                    tracts them into verified programs or distilled specialists, and emits cognition
                                                    binaries: WebAssembly artifacts whose manifests carry measured guarantees and
                                                    whose declared capabilities are physically enforced by the sandbox. A tiered
                                                    runtime executes compiled behavior behind conformally calibrated guards; guard
                                                    trips deopt to the reference agent, and the captured trace recompiles back down,
                                                    so nothing is figured out twice. We use “AGI compiler” in one narrow, testable
                                                    sense: a system that autonomously converts novel experience into permanent,
                                                    verified, near-free skill while measuring what it does not know. On AUTO -B ENCH,
                                                    a benchmark we introduce and pre-register, 87.1% of 560 recorded frontier-agent
                                                    spans are witnessed-deterministic (three of the four censused task families mea-
                                                    sure 100.0%). On a 300-item stream with three scheduled distribution shifts, the
                                                    closed loop compiles three artifact generations and drives marginal cost from
                                                    59 to 2 micro-dollars per item (6.4× end-to-end) at 96.9% parity on witnessed
                                                    inputs with zero errors. The same stream also quantifies the failure modes: a
                                                    loose guard silently mislabels 48.9% of compiled answers, and an unfaithful deopt
                                                    reference causes the verification gate to refuse recompilation. Calibration and
                                                    reference fidelity, not model capability, decide whether cheap stays correct. Code:
                                                    https://github.com/RightNow-AI/auto.


                                        1       Introduction
                                        An LLM agent that triages support tickets makes the same routing decision thousands of times a day,
                                        and pays a frontier model to re-derive it from scratch every single time. The tax is real money. We
                                        measure a single-call routing agent at 55.6 micro-dollars and 904 ms per decision, and a three-call
                                        pipeline at 192.5 micro-dollars and 2.9 seconds per run. At production volume this is the biggest
                                        line item in agent deployment, and it buys nothing new. The model computes an answer it already
                                        computed yesterday, with no guarantee it computes the same one.
                                        The history of computing is a sequence of compilation events: hand computation became written
                                        procedure, procedure became stored program, interpreted programs became compiled binaries. Agent
                                        cognition today sits where interpreted code sat: flexible, portable, and paying the interpreter on every
                                        execution. The missing artifact is the binary: a cheap, fast, reproducible, auditable executable form
                                        of one specific competence. Missing with it are the toolchain that produces it from running behavior
                                        and the runtime that falls back to the interpreter when the world changes.
                                            ∗
                                                Correspondence: jaber@rightnowai.co
Existing work reduces the tax without producing the artifact. Model routing (Chen et al., 2023; Ong
et al., 2024) chooses a cheaper model per query, and probabilistic cascades (Dohan et al., 2022)
compose several; every query is still interpreted. Semantic caches (Bang, 2023) replay stored answers
without verification or capability confinement; they compute nothing new, only near-duplicates of
past answers. Distillation (Hinton et al., 2015; Hsieh et al., 2023) produces smaller models offline,
without a recording front end, a behavioral contract, or a fallback tier. Agent skill libraries (Wang
et al., 2023) accumulate code the agent itself wrote, verified by nothing but the agent’s own judgment
and unconfined. None of these systems measure the property the whole enterprise depends on: how
much of an agent’s behavior is deterministic enough to compile at all.
AUTO is that toolchain. It records live agent runs through drop-in SDK shims; measures the
witnessed-deterministic fraction of behavior span by span; lowers recorded behavior to a typed
task-graph IR whose nodes carry capability effects and uncertainty classes; extracts the symbolic
parts by enumerative and LLM-guided counterexample-driven synthesis (Solar-Lezama et al., 2006);
distills the residue into small specialists; verifies every candidate against a behavioral contract by
differential replay; and emits a signed WebAssembly artifact (Haas et al., 2017) whose manifest
reports only measured numbers. A tiered runtime executes the artifact behind a conformally calibrated
guard (Angelopoulos and Bates, 2021); out-of-distribution inputs deopt to the reference agent, the
resulting trace is captured, and a recompile folds the novelty into the next artifact generation. We call
this loop the ratchet.
The key insight is that verification, not synthesis, is the product. Most agent behavior is secretly a
parser, and many methods can guess the program; the hard part is refusing the guesses that are wrong.
AUTO makes the behavioral contract the type system: a candidate that fails differential replay against
recorded reality, at thresholds the contract declares before compilation, does not become an artifact.
Every claim the system makes is measured, including its refusals. That is what lets a compiled artifact
carry authority that a cache entry or a bare distilled model cannot.

Why “the AGI compiler.” General intelligence, wherever its definition lands, has one non-
negotiable property: it converts experience into skill. A system that re-derives the same decision at
full price on every encounter does not accumulate competence; it rents it. Cognitive science names the
missing operation proceduralization, deliberate cognition becoming automatic skill, and the classical
architectures treated it as the centerpiece of general intelligence: SOAR compiled deliberation into
productions (Laird et al., 1987), and explanation-based generalization turned single experiences into
reusable rules (Mitchell et al., 1986). Frontier agents have the deliberation and lack the compiler.
AUTO is that compiler: the mechanism by which an agent system’s experience becomes permanent,
verified, near-free skill, bounded by a calibrated measure of what it has not yet learned. The title is
therefore a claim of necessity, not of achievement. We do not claim to have built a general intelligence;
we claim that any system deserving the name must contain this loop, and we build the loop, close it
live, and measure both its economics and its failure modes.
Our contributions:

1. A recording-to-binary compilation pipeline for LLM agent behavior, with a typed effect-carrying
   IR, synthesis and distillation passes, and contract-gated emission (§3).
2. Physical capability confinement: pure artifacts compile to WebAssembly with zero imports, and
   tool-using artifacts import exactly one audited host function, so an artifact cannot exceed its
   declared capabilities (§4).
3. A tiered runtime whose guards are conformally calibrated abstention mechanisms, with deopt,
   trace capture, and autonomous recompilation, embeddable in-process down to 18.2 µs per call
   (§3).
4. Judged verification: an LLM judge, itself spend-capped and ledgered, arbitrates semantic equiva-
   lence for generative spans, with declared agreement thresholds deciding acceptance (§4).
5. AUTO -B ENCH, a pre-registered benchmark measuring what no capability evaluation measures:
   the determinism census, parity-gated compression, calibrated ignorance, and the ratchet curve,
   cost per thought as a function of experience (§5).
6. Measured failure modes with equal weight: 48.9% silent wrongness under loose calibration, gate-
   refused recompilation under unfaithful references, and honest refusal of the generative residue at
   scale (§5).


                                                   2
                                                                                                                                      17,692 µ$
                                                                                                           ery   task
                                                                                                     or ev
                    15,000                                                                      del f
                                                                                           e mo
                                                                                      ng th
                                                                                  payi




 total spent (µ$)
                    10,000
                                                                                                             6.4× less spent
                                                                                                             on the same 300 tasks
                                 flat = compiled: tasks cost nothing
                     5,000
                                                            AUTO: same tasks, same verified answers
                                                                                                                                      2,775 µ$

                                                                                                    ← task mix changes (paid once, then compiled)
                        0
                             0              50               100            150               200                250              300
                                                                       tasks completed

Figure 1: The central result in its simplest form: cumulative spend over the same 300 live tasks. The
red line pays the frontier model for every task. The blue line is AUTO, measured: a brief paid burst
while it learns, then flat stretches where compiled execution costs nothing, with small rises where the
task mix changes and novelty is paid for once. Same tasks, answers verified against the same agent,
6.4× less money. Figure 3 gives the per-task detail.


Figure 1 previews the central result in its simplest form: the same 300 tasks, priced twice.
Section 2 situates AUTO among systems that reduce the interpretation tax without producing the
artifact, and §6 states what the current evidence does and does not support.


2                   Related Work

Cost reduction for LLM serving. FrugalGPT (Chen et al., 2023) cascades queries through cheaper
models; RouteLLM (Ong et al., 2024) learns routing from preference data; cascades (Dohan et al.,
2022) formalize multi-model composition. All reduce the per-query price of interpretation; none
produce an executable artifact, a behavioral guarantee, or a confinement boundary. Speculative decod-
ing (Leviathan et al., 2023) accelerates the decoder itself and is complementary. GPTCache (Bang,
2023) replays semantically similar answers, a memoization of outputs; AUTO compiles the function,
verifies it against witnessed behavior, and abstains outside calibration rather than serving the nearest
hit.

Agents, tools, and skills. ReAct (Yao et al., 2023), Toolformer (Schick et al., 2023), and Go-
rilla (Patil et al., 2023) established tool-calling agents; MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023) manages agent
memory; Voyager (Wang et al., 2023) accumulates a skill library of self-written code, the closest
ancestor of our ratchet. Voyager’s skills are unverified, unconfined, and curated by the agent itself;
AUTO’s artifacts pass a differential gate, run in a capability-confined sandbox, and carry manifests of
measured guarantees. Agent benchmarks (Liu et al., 2023; Jimenez et al., 2023) measure task success
of the interpreter; AUTO -B ENCH measures the compilability, calibration, and amortization of the
interpreter’s behavior.

Compilation and synthesis. DSPy (Khattab et al., 2023) compiles declarative LM pipelines by
optimizing prompts and weights, compilation into better interpretation; the LLM Compiler (Kim
et al., 2023) parallelizes function-calling plans at runtime. AUTO compiles out of interpretation
into programs that no longer call a model. Our extraction pass is counterexample-guided inductive
synthesis (Solar-Lezama et al., 2006) with an LLM proposer whose candidates are verified against
recorded traces in a sandboxed evaluator; the frozen IR design follows the progressive-lowering
discipline of MLIR (Lattner et al., 2021), rebuilt around capability effects rather than tensors.
Knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015; Hsieh et al., 2023) supplies our residue pass, wrapped in
a train/eval/accept loop whose acceptance is the same differential gate.


                                                                             3
            RECORD
                                       Record live agent runs via drop-in SDK shims
                                  prompts · tool calls · branches · task I/O → trace store


                                 Determinism census witnessed ≥ 2, error-disqualified
                                 the compilable fraction, measured per span, never extrapolated

            LOWER
                                                    Typed task-graph IR
                              capability effects · uncertainty class · resource bounds · byte-stable


                                         Extract                                       Distill


                                                                                                           THE RATCHET
                               enumerative + LLM-guided                        tree / MLP specialists;




            COMPILE + GATE
                                CEGIS, counterexample-                           weighted witnesses
                                       checked




                                                                                                                         deopt trace → recompile → tier-1
                                             The gate: contract verification
                             differential replay vs. recorded reality · exact / statistical / LLM-judged
                                    equivalence at declared thresholds · three-valued verdicts

                             ✗ FAIL / INCONCLUSIVE → no artifact       PASS


                                    Cognition binary (.cbin, signed, content-addressed)
            SHIP
                                wasm:   zero imports (pure)   small models     manifest:   measured only




                                 Tier-1    compiled path                      Tier-0   reference agent
            RUN                      µs, $0 marginal,                            novelty answered,
                                   guard at declared α             deopt          paid, captured


Figure 2: The AUTO pipeline. Recorded behavior is measured, lowered to an effect-typed IR,
extracted or distilled, and emitted only through the verification gate; a failing or unmeasurable
contract never emits (red). The runtime splits execution across tiers behind a conformally calibrated
guard, and the ratchet (green) recompiles every captured deopt, so nothing is figured out twice.


Older roots. The ratchet is a modern instance of ideas the symbolic era named decades ago:
SOAR’s chunking converted deliberate problem solving into compiled productions (Laird et al.,
1987); explanation-based generalization (Mitchell et al., 1986) turned single experiences into reusable
rules; the knowledge-compilation literature (Darwiche and Marquis, 2002) studied offline conversion
into tractable executable forms. AUTO revives this program with a frontier model as the interpreter,
WebAssembly (Haas et al., 2017) as the target, and conformal prediction (Angelopoulos and Bates,
2021) as the boundary between compiled confidence and honest ignorance.


3   System Design

AUTO is a Rust workspace of 16 crates (36,843 lines of Rust across 96 files, 32 numbered architecture
decision records), organized as a classical compiler: front end, IR, passes, back end, runtime, registry.
Figure 2 shows the pipeline; Algorithm 1 gives the runtime loop.


Recording and the census. Drop-in tracer shims record every effectful span of a live agent: model
calls, tool calls, branch decisions, environment reads, and whole-task I/O, with the paid call executing
inside the traced closure so latency and provider-reported cost attach to the span. The determinism
report then makes the thesis measurable before any compilation: a span signature is witnessed-
deterministic when observed at least twice with identical output and no errors, and fractions cover
witnessed spans only, never extrapolated.


                                                                       4
Algorithm 1 The ratchet: tiered execution with autonomous recompilation
 1: given contract C (declared thresholds), trace store S, artifact A ← ∅, recompile stride K
 2: for each input x in the request stream do
 3:   if A ̸= ∅ and guardA (x) ≤ τA then
 4:      serve A(x) {tier-1: marginal cost ≈ 0}
 5:   else
 6:      y ← reference agent(x); serve y; ingest (x, y) into S {tier-0: paid, captured}
 7:   end if
 8:   if K new distinct inputs ingested since last compile then
 9:      A′ ← compile(S, C) {extract/distill, then the gate}
10:      if A′ passes C then
11:         A ← A′ {hot-swap; guard recalibrated on new witnesses}
12:      else
13:         keep A; log the refusal {a failing contract never emits}
14:      end if
15:   end if
16: end for



IR and passes. Recorded behavior lowers to a typed task graph whose nodes carry capability ef-
fects, memory effects, an uncertainty class (Deterministic | Probabilistic | Generative), and
resource bounds; serialization is byte-stable, a property-tested invariant. Extraction runs enumerative
search over a closed 17-operation DSL and, when that refuses, LLM-guided CEGIS: a frontier model
proposes candidate programs, a sandboxed evaluator executes them against every witnessed input,
and counterexamples drive the next round. The checker is the authority: in our evaluation it catches a
proposer attempting a constant-output shortcut and kills it with a counterexample (§5). Multi-span
regions compile too: each stage and each inter-stage glue edge becomes its own synthesis problem,
and tool-call stages become declared capability boundaries. The residue distills into decision trees or
MLPs, optionally trained on every witnessed output weighted by witness count rather than a single
majority pick.

Runtime and embeddings. A guard evaluates every compiled entry: lexical trigram sketches
(Jaccard or hashed-cosine) over witnessed inputs, with the abstention threshold set by split-conformal
calibration over leave-one-out scores at a declared miscoverage α. In-distribution inputs run tier-1;
trips deopt to tier-0 and the answer is conformance-checked, served, and ingested for recompilation.
The runtime embeds anywhere along a measured latency ladder: 736 ms median for the frontier
reference call, 21 ms behind an HTTP serving boundary, 290 µs as a resident stdio process, 54.1 µs in-
process in Python (pyo3), and 18.2 µs in-process in Node (napi), the last two measuring the embedding
boundary on a trivial artifact rather than model inference. Capability artifacts run embedded as well,
their declared tools mapped to host functions under an exactly-declared rule with per-answer call
budgets.


4   Verification as the Type System

A contract declares examples, properties, latency and cost budgets, and acceptance thresholds; its
content hash is the artifact’s type. Three rules make the gate trustworthy. First, three-valued verdicts:
a check that cannot be measured is I NCONCLUSIVE, never rounded up to PASS, and both FAIL
and I NCONCLUSIVE block emission. Second, differential replay is the ground truth: every distinct
recorded input replays through the candidate, byte-equal by default; a contract may instead declare a
statistical agreement threshold, and, for generative spans, judged equivalence, where an LLM judge
(itself spend-capped and ledgered) arbitrates byte-divergent outputs and the declared threshold still
decides. A judged example with no judge supplied is I NCONCLUSIVE, never silently exact. Third,
manifests report measured numbers or null, each parity claim carrying the content-addressed identifier
of the evaluation run that produced it.
Confinement is physical rather than conventional. A pure artifact’s WebAssembly module has zero
imports; the loader refuses any module whose imports exceed its manifest’s declared capabilities; a
tool-calling artifact imports exactly one host function, through which every tool invocation is named,


                                                   5
Table 1: The determinism census. Witnessed = observed ≥ 2 times; a span is deterministic iff all
witnesses agree byte-for-byte and none errored. Fractions are of witnessed spans only.

        Family                                     Spans   Witnessed                 Deterministic
        F1 ticket triage                             80          80                         100.0%
        F2 inbox pipeline (all spans)               320         320                           77.5%
          classify / priority / summarize / tool                       100.0 / 92.5 / 17.5 / 100.0%
        F3 field extraction                          80          80                         100.0%
        F4 policy routing                            80          80                         100.0%
        Pooled                                      560         560                         87.1%



auditable, and budget-limited. The sandbox, not a policy file, is what makes an artifact unable to
exceed its declaration.
Guards are first-class because their failure mode is silent. A wrong “stay compiled” decision serves a
stale answer that looks healthy; §5 measures exactly this at 48.9% wrongness under loose calibration.
The conformal construction makes the exposure a declared quantity: α prices how far beyond
witnessed inputs the artifact may speak.

5     AUTO -B ENCH: Measuring Compiled Cognition
Capability benchmarks ask how smart the model is. AUTO -B ENCH asks whether the system ever
pays for the same thought twice, and whether it knows what it does not know. The protocol declares
four headline measurements: H1, the ratchet curve (cost per task as a function of experience); H2,
the determinism census; H3, parity-gated compression; H4, calibrated ignorance. We report them
in the order census, compression, ratchet, calibration, because each rests on the one before it. The
protocol was frozen before execution (corpora, shift schedule, thresholds, anti-gaming rules) and is in
the repository: every input is recorded at least twice (the witness rule), contracts with their thresholds
and judge model are committed before any compile and never retuned after a verdict, example values
may come only from recorded reality, the baseline and the compiled run consume the same frozen
inputs, refusals are results, and every number carries an evaluation-run id, a spend-ledger session, or
a committed CSV. Five protocol deviations occurred and are logged in the results document; none
touch decision logic.

Setup. Reference model: gpt-5.4-mini (provider snapshot 2026-03-17), default temperature,
pinned prices. Host: Windows 11, release builds; distillation uses scikit-learn decision trees. Six
task families: F1 ticket triage (single call), F2 a three-call inbox pipeline with a tool, F3 typed
field extraction, F4 policy routing with skewed classes, F5 free-text summarization under judged
equivalence (F5 verifies the summarize span of F2’s recorded store, so its frontier column is per call
where F2’s is per run), and F6 the novelty stream: the F1 triage task replayed as 300 items whose
category set expands at three scheduled shifts, censused under the ratchet rather than under H2. Total
benchmark spend on the compiler side: $0.0621 against a pre-registered $5 cap; a stranger with an
API key reproduces every table for under a dollar.

5.1   H2: the determinism census

This measurement could have killed the thesis: a low witnessed-deterministic fraction would have
left nothing to compile. Table 1 is the thesis, measured: 87.1% of 560 real frontier-agent spans are
witnessed-deterministic at default temperature. The texture matters more than the pooled number.
Classification, extraction, and routing are fully deterministic; the free-text summarization span
is 17.5%; the pipeline’s priority span sits at 92.5%, deterministic enough to feel compilable and
divergent enough to break an exact contract, which is precisely what happens below.

5.2   H3: parity-gated compression, including the refusals

Table 2 shows both sides. Where behavior is deterministic and expressible, compilation is a three-
orders-of-magnitude cost cut at verified parity, with the F4 generalization run passing at exactly its


                                                      6
Table 2: Compression at declared parity. Frontier numbers are recorded per-call means (cost) and
medians (latency); F2 is per 3-call run. Compiled latency is one-shot process wall-clock including
spawn and module compile; resident floors are 290 µs (stdio), 54.1 µs (Python in-process), 18.2 µs
(Node in-process). Refusals are quoted outcomes, not omissions.
      Family                                             Frontier                Compiled       Gate outcome
      F1 triage                                          55.6 µ$ / 904 ms        $0 / 65.7 ms   PASS 40/40 ≥ 950‰ (both guard wires)
      F4 routing (weighted)                              112.0 µ$ / 1037 ms      $0 / 65.7 ms   PASS 40/40 ≥ 900‰
      F4 routing (holdout 0.25)                                    –             $0             PASS 36/40 = 90.0% at the exact threshold
      F2 classify                                                                $0             PASS 40/40 (exact)
                                                         192.5 µ$ / 2881 ms†
      F2 priority                                                                      –        FAIL: 3 divergent-witness groups (exact contract)
      F3 extraction                                      255.8 µ$ / 1171 ms            –        refused at all three rungs (see text)
      F5 summarize (judged, n=40)                        90.9 µ$ / 1042 ms             –        FAIL 17/40 = 42.5% < 800‰ (23 judge calls; 33 across F5)
      †
          per full 3-call run.


                               60                       shift 1: +security           shift 2: +onboarding          shift 3: +fraud phrasing
                                      pure-frontier control: 59.0 µ$/item




          cost per item (µ$)
                                     gen 1                        gen 2                         gen 3
                               45
                                                               interpretation tax avoided
                               30                      6.4× end-to-end · 96.9% parity · zero errors
                                             AUTO ratchet (measured)                                                   steady state: 2.3 µ$/item
                               15


                                 0
                               100

      tier-1 %
                               50

                                0
                                        0        25       50         75        100      125        150      175      200       225        250   275
                                                                             stream position (windows of 25)

Figure 3: The ratchet curve, measured on a 300-item stream with three scheduled distribution shifts
(orange). Top: marginal cost per item collapses from 18.9 to 2.3 µ$ across three gate-passed recompile
generations (green; the driver recompiles after every K=8 new distinct ingested inputs, so generation
1 is the bootstrap compile at position 8, and generations 2 and 3 land one compile cycle behind
shifts 1 and 2). Shift 3’s phrasing novelty is absorbed by the lexical guard rather than a recompile,
the calibration exposure §5 quantifies. The shaded region is the money not paid to the interpreter
(stream total 2,775 vs. a 17,692 µ$ control, 6.4×; the control is arithmetic: each position priced at
its measured tier-0 cost, 218 of 300 estimated from the recorded mean, never re-executed; 253/300
items compiled; zero errors; 96.9% parity on witnessed inputs). Bottom: the fraction of each window
served by the compiled tier. Per-position CSV and evaluation-run ids ship with the repository.


declared 90.0% threshold, the kind of razor-edge number a benchmark should be able to produce.
Where it is not, the gate says so precisely. F3 is the sharpest refusal: a 100.0%-deterministic extraction
behavior that no current rung can compile, because its outputs are JSON objects; enumerative
search has no object constructor, the LLM proposer’s constant-output cheat was executed against a
counterexample and rejected, and the tree trainer refuses non-string labels. F2’s priority span shows
why statistical acceptance exists: 92.5% determinism is fatal to an exact contract. F5 shows the honest
scale limit of memorization: at 40 tickets the free-text residue fails its declared judged threshold (a
20-ticket run passes at 85%), so generative spans stay tier-0 until a generative rung exists.

5.3            H1: the ratchet curve

Figure 3 is the paper’s central measurement. The system starts uncompiled, pays the interpreter
while bootstrapping, and compiles generation 1 at position 8. Shifts 1 and 2 inject unseen categories;
guards trip, items deopt to the reference agent, and generations 2 and 3 land one compile cycle later.
Shift 3 plays out differently and honestly: its fraud-phrased tickets are lexical cousins of witnessed
billing text, the guard admits most of them, fewer than K=8 new distinct inputs are ever ingested,
and no fourth generation fires; the window recovers through guard admission, not recompilation,
which is precisely the exposure H4 prices. Steady-state windows cost 2.3 to 2.5 µ$/item against a


                                                                                          7
Table 3: Three operating points of the same frozen stream. Loose calibration is cheap and silently
wrong; a generic deopt reference stalls the ratchet at the gate; the agent-faithful configuration closes
the loop. “Silently wrong” compares tier-1 answers to stream design labels.

         Leg Guard α Deopt reference        Total cost         Recompiles Tier-1 silently wrong
         A     0.100     generic frontier    7,770 µ$                    1     48.9% (133/272)
         B     0.400     generic frontier   33,387 µ$ 1 (+3 gate-refused)       28.4% (55/194)
         C     0.400     the agent itself    2,775 µ$       3 (all passed)             see text



59.0 µ$ interpreted control, with every recompile passing the same differential gate that governs
offline compilation. Nothing is figured out twice: the stream contains 56 distinct ticket texts across
300 positions, and repetition is exactly what the ratchet monetizes.
Table 3 is the finding we consider most important. Leg A looks operationally perfect, 272 of 300
items served compiled at trivial cost, while 48.9% of those answers disagree with the stream’s design
labels: the loose guard admits post-shift novelty and the stale artifact mislabels it (security → bug
32 times). Leg B tightens the guard and halves the damage, but its recompiles are refused by the
gate: the generic tier-0 interpreter answers outside the contract’s vocabulary, and the system correctly
declines to compile a non-conformant reference, stalling the ratchet honestly. Only leg C, where
deopts re-record through the agent’s own prompt, closes the loop. Two separations follow. First,
calibration and reference fidelity decide whether cheap stays correct; model capability does not.
Second, parity is not ground truth: leg C’s tier-1 answers match the reference agent on 96.9% of
witnessed inputs (witnessed here meaning previously recorded by bootstrap or deopt) while 53.8%
differ from the six-label stream design, because the reference agent itself is a three-label agent; the
compiler faithfully preserves the agent you have, including its blindness.

5.4   H4: calibrated ignorance

On frozen probe sets (five held-out in-distribution and five disjoint-vocabulary out-of-distribution
probes for each family that emitted an artifact, F1 and F4), the F4 artifact is perfectly calibrated: zero
false-abstains (in-distribution probes needlessly refused) and zero false-proceeds (out-of-distribution
probes answered compiled, the silent failure). F1 shows the lexical noise floor: 2/5 OOD probes
admitted on the trigram-Jaccard wire and 3/5 on the hashed-cosine wire at maximal quantile, con-
sistent across the static probes and the deployed stream. The guard geometry is lexical, so lexical
cousins get in; the leg-C residue quantifies the exposure precisely, 125 of 253 tier-1 answers rode on
never-witnessed inputs the guard admitted. Semantic embedding guards are the recorded upgrade,
and α is the declared price of the boundary in the meantime.

6     Limitations
The corpora are designed, not production traffic: 20 to 40 recorded inputs per family (the stream
holds 56 distinct texts), one reference model, and repetition rates chosen to exercise the ratchet; the
protocol is built to be re-run unchanged on real traffic, and that re-run is the experiment that matters.
The compile rungs are v0: outputs must be strings or DSL-expressible values, which is exactly why
F3 refuses, and the generative residue (17.5%-deterministic summarization) does not compile at
40-ticket scale under its judged threshold. Guards are lexical; a paraphrase with disjoint vocabulary
trips, and a lexical cousin with different meaning may be admitted, an exposure we measure rather
than solve. Judged verification inherits the judge’s opinions and is reproducible only up to the judge
model named in the manifest. Compiled artifacts memorize witnessed distributions unless a holdout
demonstrates generalization; the gate makes this explicit rather than making it false.

7     Conclusion
AUTO treats agent cognition the way compilers treat interpreted code: record it, prove what is
symbolic, distill what is not, verify everything against a contract, and emit a confined binary that
a tiered runtime executes for microdollars, deopting and recompiling when the world drifts. On
AUTO -B ENCH, 87.1% of 560 recorded frontier-agent spans are witnessed-deterministic, compiled


                                                     8
families run at three orders of magnitude below interpretation at declared parity, and the closed loop
answers three distribution shifts with three gate-passed recompilations and a measured calibration
exposure, at 2 µ$ per item steady state. The same harness quantifies the failure modes that make
naive compilation dangerous. The toolchain, benchmark protocol, evidence, and spend ledgers are at
https://github.com/RightNow-AI/auto.

References
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A gentle introduction to conformal prediction and
  distribution-free uncertainty quantification. arXiv:2107.07511, 2021.
Fu Bang. GPTCache: An open-source semantic cache for LLM applications enabling faster answers
  and cost savings. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop for Natural Language Processing Open
  Source Software (NLP-OSS), 2023.
Lingjiao Chen, Matei Zaharia, and James Zou. FrugalGPT: How to use large language models while
  reducing cost and improving performance. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024.
  arXiv:2305.05176.
Adnan Darwiche and Pierre Marquis. A knowledge compilation map. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 17:229–264, 2002.
David Dohan et al. Language model cascades. arXiv:2207.10342, 2022.
Andreas Haas et al. Bringing the web up to speed with WebAssembly. In Proceedings of the 38th
 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), 2017.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network.
  arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
Cheng-Yu Hsieh et al. Distilling step-by-step! Outperforming larger language models with less
  training data and smaller model sizes. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics
 (ACL), 2023. arXiv:2305.02301.
Carlos E. Jimenez et al. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world GitHub issues? In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. arXiv:2310.06770.
Omar Khattab et al. DSPy: Compiling declarative language model calls into self-improving pipelines.
 arXiv:2310.03714, 2023.
Sehoon Kim et al. An LLM compiler for parallel function calling. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), 2024. arXiv:2312.04511.
John E. Laird, Allen Newell, and Paul S. Rosenbloom. SOAR: An architecture for general intelligence.
  Artificial Intelligence, 33(1):1–64, 1987.
Chris Lattner et al. MLIR: Scaling compiler infrastructure for domain specific computation. In
  IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO), 2021.
Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative
  decoding. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023. arXiv:2211.17192.
Xiao Liu et al. AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2024. arXiv:2308.03688.
Tom M. Mitchell, Richard M. Keller, and Smadar T. Kedar-Cabelli. Explanation-based generalization:
  A unifying view. Machine Learning, 1(1):47–80, 1986.
Isaac Ong et al. RouteLLM: Learning to route LLMs with preference data. arXiv:2406.18665, 2024.
Charles Packer et al. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating systems. arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
Shishir G. Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model
  connected with massive APIs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2024. arXiv:2305.15334.


                                                  9
Timo Schick et al. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023. arXiv:2302.04761.
Armando Solar-Lezama, Liviu Tancau, Rastislav Bodik, Sanjit Seshia, and Vijay Saraswat. Com-
  binatorial sketching for finite programs. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
  Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), 2006.
Guanzhi Wang et al. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. Transac-
  tions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. arXiv:2305.16291.
Shunyu Yao et al. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. arXiv:2210.03629.




                                               10
