                                             Evaluating Large Language Models for
                                        Decision-Making in Agent-Based Urban Mobility
                                                          Simulations

                                                         Bruno Cascaes Alves1 , Míriam Blank Born1 ,
                                                 Ulisses Gilioli Francescatto Júnior2 , Felipe Moura Goulart3 ,
                                                Letícia Brandão Caldas3 , and Marilton Sanchotene de Aguiar1




arXiv:2607.02716v1 [cs.MA] 2 Jul 2026
                                                             Postgraduate Program in Computing
                                                              1

                                                              Undergraduate in Computer Science
                                                               2
                                                          3
                                                            Undergraduate in Computer Engineering
                                                         Federal University of Pelotas, Pelotas, Brazil
                                         {bcalves,mbborn,ugfjunior,fmgoulart,lbcaldas,marilton}@inf.ufpel.edu.br



                                              Abstract. Urban mobility modeling faces challenges in representing
                                              decision-making in dynamic environments. Although Multi-Agent Sys-
                                              tems are widely used, rule-based approaches rely on fixed heuristics that
                                              limit adaptive behavior. This work investigates the integration of Large
                                              Language Models (LLMs) as decision-making components in multi-agent
                                              simulations. We propose a hybrid architecture that connects the GAMA
                                              platform to an external LLM-based module through an API, enabling
                                              agents to determine whether route replanning is necessary. Rather than
                                              replacing routing algorithms, the LLM serves as a decision layer that
                                              guides replanning behavior. The approach incorporates persistent mem-
                                              ory, allowing past interactions to influence future decisions and promote
                                              behavioral consistency. We compare rule-based and LLM-assisted ap-
                                              proaches across multiple road-blockage scenarios and population scales.
                                              Results indicate that LLM-enabled agents exhibit greater adaptability
                                              and contextual awareness, particularly in scenarios with higher route
                                              flexibility. Memory influences performance and behavioral consistency,
                                              with effects varying across configurations. Overall, LLMs serve as comple-
                                              mentary cognitive layers that enrich behavioral representations in urban
                                              mobility simulations and hold potential for modeling complex decision-
                                              making in spatial multi-agent systems.

                                              Keywords: Agent-Based Modeling · GAMA Platform · Large Language
                                              Models · Multi-Agent Systems · Urban Mobility.


                                        1   Introduction

                                        Urban mobility management faces the challenge of predicting and mitigating the
                                        impacts of events in increasingly saturated transportation networks [8]. The effi-
                                        cacy of interventions depends on the understanding that traffic dynamics emerge
                                        from individual behavioral decisions made by agents in dynamic environments
2      B. C. Alves et al.

under uncertainty [4]. In this context, Artificial Intelligence (AI) emerges as a
component for increasing realism of experiments, enabling the incorporation of
adaptation and contextual reasoning in urban mobility analysis [12].
     Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) simulations have consolidated as a predominant
approach for representing individuals and analyzing their impacts on urban sys-
tems. This approach enables the investigation of mobility dynamics through the
interaction of autonomous agents in dynamic environments, capable of mak-
ing decisions to achieve individual or collective goals [17]. However, traditional
modeling often relies on fixed heuristics and predefined rules, limiting behavioral
adaptability in high-contextual-variability scenarios.
     To mitigate these limitations, Large Language Models (LLMs) emerge as
a promising alternative for enriching decision-making in agent-based systems.
Models such as GPT [1] and Gemini [2] exhibit reasoning and semantic capa-
bilities that enable the processing of contextual information [10]. By integrating
these models into MAS, agents can exhibit greater behavioral flexibility and
make more context-sensitive decisions aligned with environmental conditions.
     Recent studies demonstrate advances in LLM-based Agentic frameworks, in
which these models serve as system cores capable of planning and iterating on
their own actions. These frameworks, including Agno [13] and CrewAI [16], uti-
lize memory mechanisms and integration with external tools, promoting greater
consistency and continuity in decision-making over time. However, researchers
primarily evaluate these approaches in textual domains and rarely explore them
in multi-agent simulations that heavily rely on geospatial constraints.
     The GAMA platform [15] stands out as one of the most robust agent-based
simulation environments, with native support for geographic data. Despite its
efficiency in spatial modeling, the platform lacks native mechanisms for inte-
grating language models into agents’ decision-making processes, limiting the
representation of more adaptive, context-aware behaviors.
     Given this scenario, this work proposes integrating an LLM-based decision
module into a GAMA-based urban mobility simulation environment. Unlike
purely rule-based approaches, the proposal introduces a context-driven mech-
anism triggered by events, in which the LLM determines whether to maintain
the agents’ trajectory or trigger route recalculation. The objective is to explore
how this decision layer influences agent behavior under dynamic conditions of ur-
ban mobility. The central hypothesis is that this mechanism enhances behavioral
adaptability while preserving simulation consistency.


2   Theoretical Background

This section presents the fundamental concepts for this work, including Multi-
Agent Systems, Large Language Models, Agentic AI, and the GAMA Platform.
   Multi-Agent Systems consist of multiple autonomous entities that interact
within a shared environment. Each agent operates based on local information,
and global system behavior emerges from their interactions. This decentralized
 Evaluating LLMs for Decision-Making in Agent-Based Mobility Simulations           3

structure is particularly suitable for modeling complex systems where collective
dynamics arise from individual decision-making processes [6].
    Large Language Models are neural networks trained on large-scale text cor-
pora that can perform language understanding and generation tasks. Beyond
their traditional use in language understanding and generation tasks, LLMs can
also support decision-making processes by providing context-aware interpreta-
tions of structured inputs. When integrated into decision pipelines, LLMs can act
as reasoning components that transform contextual information into structured
outputs, enabling their use in systems that require adaptive responses [19].
    Agentic AI comprises autonomous systems that perceive environmental states
and execute actions to achieve specific objectives. Instead of relying solely on pre-
defined rules, Agentic AI incorporates context-aware decision mechanisms that
integrate memory and external model feedback, which directly influence their
actions during simulation runtime [14]. In this work, we model agents as com-
ponents of a multi-agent simulation system and augment their decision-making
process with LLMs, enabling more adaptive behavior in dynamic environments.
    Finally, GAMA is an open-source platform for agent-based modeling and sim-
ulation with strong support for spatially explicit systems. It enables the represen-
tation of heterogeneous agents operating in environments based on geographic
information systems (GIS), supporting large-scale simulations of complex sys-
tems. GAMA provides the GAML modeling language and tools for defining agent
behaviors, spatial interactions, and environment dynamics [15].


3   Related Work

This section presents the main research areas relevant to this work, organized into
two perspectives: agent-based urban mobility simulation in spatial environments
and the use of LLM-based Agentic frameworks as decision-making components
in intelligent systems.
    The literature reports several applications of multi-agent systems for urban
mobility in geospatial environments. For instance, [9] uses GAMA to investi-
gate social dynamics in smart cities, modeling daily routines and interactions
between urban infrastructures. In the context of transportation planning, the
authors of [7] consider the GAMA platform to model mobility patterns and
evaluate the integration of new transport modes. Additionally, studies such as
[3] explore evacuation scenarios with heterogeneous agents. Despite these con-
tributions, such approaches primarily rely on rule-based models, limiting their
ability to represent adaptive behaviors under dynamic conditions.
    Advances in LLMs have enabled new forms of decision support in intelligent
systems. Frameworks such as CrewAI [16] and AutoGen [18] provide mechanisms
to structure LLM-based workflows, enabling coordination among components,
integration with external tools, and the use of persistent memory. These ap-
proaches have demonstrated promising results across domains such as software
engineering and collaborative task automation. However, these approaches are
4      B. C. Alves et al.

primarily designed for language-centered environments and rarely consider spa-
tial constraints in MAS simulations.
    Based on the related work, we identify a lack of studies that explore LLM-
based decision mechanisms in spatially explicit multi-agent simulations where
agents must respond to real-time changes in urban mobility while respecting
road network constraints. To address this gap, we incorporate an LLM-based
decision layer into a GAMA urban mobility simulation. The proposed compo-
nent determines whether agents should maintain their current route or trigger
recalculation based on contextual information and memory, enabling the inves-
tigation of context-sensitive decision-making in dynamic mobility scenarios.

4   Methodology
This section describes the experimental framework used to evaluate LLM-based
agents in an urban mobility simulation. Building on previous work on the appli-
cation of LLM-based agents in an urban mobility scenario [5], which investigated
transportation mode choice among heterogeneous agent profiles, the present
study shifts the focus to in-transit decision-making. Specifically, it examines
how different language models, memory configurations, and environmental con-
ditions influence route-adaptation decisions in response to dynamic events in
the road network. The evaluation focuses on mobility-related behaviors such as
route selection and adaptation to disruptions encountered throughout the sim-
ulation. Figure 1 presents an overview of the architecture, organized into three
main components:
Simulation Platform: Represents the GAMA-based environment and its agents.
   The environment includes buildings and a road network. Agents travel be-
   tween origins and destinations using shortest-path algorithms on weighted
   graphs, where traffic conditions affect travel costs. During the simulation,
   they monitor congestion and road events and receive alerts that may influ-
   ence LLM-based decisions.
Integration Layer: Acts as an intermediary between the simulation platform
   and the Agentic framework. It handles API communication, retrieves contex-
   tual information from GAMA, and forwards it to the LLM-based Agentic
   module. It also manages a relational database that stores simulation and
   round states, agent attributes, and decision logs, ensuring traceability and
   supporting memory mechanisms.
Agentic Framework: Implements the cognitive layer through the Agno frame-
   work, which orchestrates contextual reasoning, memory management, and
   LLM-based decision-making. The module processes contextual information
   and returns a structured decision on whether an agent should maintain its
   current route or trigger a recalculation, updating the agent’s behavior within
   the GAMA platform.
   The following subsections describe the components that support the exper-
imental evaluation: i) Environment and Agent Modeling; ii) Integration and
Persistence Layer; and, finally, iii) LLM-based Agentic Module.
 Evaluating LLMs for Decision-Making in Agent-Based Mobility Simulations                        5

           Simulation Platform               Integration Layer              Agentic Framework

              Spatial Agents                       API                        Cognitive Agent


                                  Send                           Agentic
                                 Context                         Request




                                 Retrieve                        Agentic
                                 Decisions                       Response


               Environment                       Database                          LLM




Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed architecture integrating an LLM-based decision layer
into the simulation platform.


4.1   Environment and Agent Modeling
This study extends the urban mobility model based on the Traffic and Pollution
example from the GAMA platform. In the original model, mobility dynamics
depend on vehicle density, and agents move using shortest-path algorithms over
a weighted road network derived from geographic data. Although the original
model includes pollution-related mechanisms, this work does not incorporate
them and focuses instead on the agents’ mobility decision-making process. Fig-
ure 2 illustrates the spatial representation of the simulation in the GAMA plat-
form, highlighting agent interaction with urban infrastructure.
   The model represents agents as colored circles according to their profile (stu-
dent, worker, or retired) and as triangles once they reach their destinations.
Each agent is also associated with attributes such as digital trust level and ac-
cumulated travel time, which influence its response to traffic events during the
simulation.
   For comparison purposes, we implement a rule-based baseline model that
does not incorporate language models. When agents approach a blocked road
segment, they receive an alert and decide whether to continue on their route
or recalculate it. This decision relies on a threshold-based heuristic score S,
composed of additive contextual factors: S = Fdist + Fcong + Ftime + ∆trust ,
where Fdist , Fcong , and Ftime represent the influence of event proximity, local
congestion, and accumulated travel time, respectively. The term ∆trust models
behavioral differences between agent profiles through a linear transformation
centered on digital trust level, modulating sensitivity to route changes. The
model triggers route recalculation when S > 0.5.
   To overcome the limitations of the rule-based model, we replace the heuristic
mechanism with an LLM-based decision module integrated via API. In this
approach, when an agent receives an alert, it sends its current state to the
cognitive module, which decides whether to trigger route recalculation. The LLM
6       B. C. Alves et al.




      Fig. 2. Spatial representation at the beginning of a simulation in GAMA.


does not perform route computation; instead, it serves solely as a decision layer
that determines when to run the traditional routing algorithm.


4.2   Integration and Persistence Layer

To integrate the simulation platform with the agentic framework, we develop a
layer implemented as a Python API using FastAPI [11]. This layer manages com-
munication between system components through asynchronous HTTP requests,
allowing multiple agents to request decisions concurrently without blocking sim-
ulation execution.
    The system includes a relational database to store simulation information,
including agent states, environmental conditions, and generated decisions. Each
decision record contains the agent’s context at the time of the event, including
occupation, digital trust level, travel time, and location, along with the LLM’s
response, enabling detailed analysis and traceability. Beyond experiment log-
ging, the persistence layer supports memory retrieval by storing previous agent
experiences and decision outcomes. Retrieved records can be incorporated into
the contextual information sent to the LLM, allowing decisions to consider both
current environmental conditions and relevant past interactions.
    The integration follows an event-driven model. For instance, when a road
interruption alert occurs, the agent sends its contextual state to the API, which
forwards the request to the LLM-based agentic module. The module evaluates
the context and returns a structured decision indicating whether to trigger route
recalculation. This architecture decouples cognitive processing from spatial sim-
    Evaluating LLMs for Decision-Making in Agent-Based Mobility Simulations        7

ulation, ensuring experimental flexibility while preserving the simulation plat-
form’s execution model.


4.3     LLM-based Agentic Module

To enable adaptive decision-making, we implement an LLM-based module us-
ing the Agno framework. Unlike rule-based approaches, the module analyzes the
agent’s and environmental contexts to determine whether route recalculation is
necessary. We chose Agno for its flexibility and support for semantic memory.
For each decision, the Agno system stores the observed context, selected action,
and model-generated reasoning. When memory is enabled, semantically simi-
lar experiences can be retrieved and incorporated into the reasoning process,
allowing previous outcomes to influence subsequent actions.
    The decision process is triggered whenever an agent receives a traffic alert.
Agno generates a prompt from agent attributes (e.g., occupation and digital
trust level), current travel conditions (e.g., fatigue level), and environmental fac-
tors (e.g., congestion level). Listing 1 shows a simplified version of the prompt;
the actual implementation includes additional instructions to enforce structured
outputs. The LLM returns a JSON response indicating whether the agent should
maintain its route or trigger recalculation, along with a brief justification. In-
valid responses are validated and, when necessary, replaced through a fallback
mechanism. This approach enables the analysis of context and memory-aware
decisions while preserving the original routing algorithms.
    Furthermore, it is possible to incorporate additional contextual variables,
external information sources, or auxiliary tools into the system during reasoning.
This flexibility makes the proposed approach suitable for exploring increasingly
complex decision-making processes in urban mobility simulations.
You are a driver traveling through a city . A digital traffic
alert indicates a possible road blockage ahead . Based on the
driver ’ s profile and the current travel conditions , decide
whether to maintain the current route or recalculate it .

Profile :                                   Context :
- Occupation : Worker                       - Weather : Rainy
- Fatigue Level : Medium                    - Traffic Congestion : High
- Trust Level : High                        - Distance to blockage : Near

Return ONLY a JSON object in the following format :

{
       " action ": " RECALCULATE | STAY " ,
       " reasoning ": " < brief_explanation >"
}
Listing 1. Simplified prompt illustrating the contextual information provided to LLM-
based agents for route-replanning decisions.
8       B. C. Alves et al.

5     Results and Discussion
This section presents the experimental evaluation of the proposed architecture,
focusing on how LLMs influence agent behavior in urban mobility simulations.
Rather than a direct performance comparison with a rule-based model, the anal-
ysis aims to understand how context-aware decision mechanisms, particularly the
use of memory, affect agent adaptation in response to dynamic events.

5.1   Experimental Setup
To assess the impact of incorporating LLMs into the decision-making process,
we conducted experiments comparing three approaches: i) a rule-based baseline
model, ii) an LLM-assisted model using Google’s Gemini 2.5 Flash-Lite, and
iii) an LLM-assisted model using OpenAI’s GPT-4o Mini. For the LLM-based
models, we evaluated configurations with and without persistent memory. We
selected GPT and Gemini models for their favorable balance of performance,
cost, and inference speed in large-scale agent-based simulations. Also, we run all
experiments with a temperature setting of 1.0, balancing response consistency
and behavioral variability in the agents’ decisions.
     We conducted the experiments using the GAMA platform, considering a road
network derived from geographic data and heterogeneous agents classified into
three profiles: students (20%), workers (60%), and retirees (20%). Each agent has
attributes such as a digital trust level and a dynamic travel state that influence
its decision-making. Each simulation run consists of 540 cycles, each represent-
ing 10 seconds in the simulated environment, for a total of approximately 90
minutes. During the simulation, when a road interruption alert occurs, each
agent decides whether to maintain its current route or trigger route recalcula-
tion using traditional shortest-path algorithms. In the LLM-assisted models, an
external cognitive module handles this decision.
     The system introduces interruption events dynamically, starting at cycle 120
and being removed at cycle 420, allowing the observation of both adaptation
and recovery phases of the system. We implemented two scenarios: Localized,
characterized by a point-like interruption with greater availability of alternative
routes, and Extended, characterized by the disruption of significant road seg-
ments, substantially reducing rerouting options. For each scenario, we consider
two population scales (500 and 1000 agents) to evaluate the impact of density
on collective behavior.
     We run each experimental configuration with 10 independent random seeds
and report mean values and, when applicable, standard deviations. We consider
the following metrics: i) Replanning Rate, the percentage of route recalculation
decisions; ii) Arrival Rate, the percentage of agents that reach their destinations;
iii) Stuck Time Ratio, the proportion of total travel time spent in congestion; iv)
Simulation Time, the total simulation execution time in seconds; and v) Error
Rate, the percentage of responses that could not be processed by the system,
including invalid JSON outputs. Together, these metrics enable the analysis of
both individual performance and emergent collective behavior in the network.
 Evaluating LLMs for Decision-Making in Agent-Based Mobility Simulations          9

5.2   Localized Blockage Scenario
Results for the localized blockage scenario show that incorporating LLMs sig-
nificantly changes agent decision dynamics, particularly in local adaptation and
spatial redistribution across the network. As shown in Figure 3, LLM-assisted
agents tend to avoid critical regions earlier, leading to a more balanced distribu-
tion across the road network. This behavior arises not only from more frequent
replanning but also from the ability to interpret contextual information and
adjust decisions accordingly.




      Fig. 3. Spatial representation during a localized blockage event in GAMA.


    Table 1 shows that LLM-assisted approaches generally achieve higher arrival
rates and comparable or lower congestion levels when compared to the rule-based
baseline. For 500 agents, the arrival rate increases from 70% to approximately
90% (OpenAI with memory). At the same time, the Stuck Time Ratio varies
across configurations, decreasing to 11.06% for Gemini with memory but in-
creasing to 14.17% for OpenAI with memory. For 1000 agents, the arrival rate
increases from 53% to 62% (OpenAI with memory), and the Stuck Time Ratio
decreases to around 5% (Gemini with memory).
    Memory affects the models differently. For instance, with 500 agents, OpenAI
found that memory reduces replanning (from 94.1% to 82.8%) while increasing
arrival rates (from 83.5% to 89.7%), indicating changes in decision consistency
over time. However, it also increases the Stuck Time Ratio in some configurations
(from 9.4% to 14.2%), suggesting potential trade-offs between successful arrival
and congestion. For Gemini, memory reduces the Stuck Time Ratio (from 13.2%
10      B. C. Alves et al.

to 11.1%) and increases arrival rates, indicating more effective utilization of
prior experience in congestion avoidance. The observed changes in replanning
rates suggest that memory serves as a behavioral stabilizer, reducing excessive
reactive decisions and favoring responses more consistent with prior experiences.


Table 1. Comparative analysis of semantic memory impact on affected agents under
a local blockage scenario.

     Agents       Model         Memory Replanning (%) Arrival (%) Stuck Ratio (%)
                Rule-Based        —          63.06        70.00         15.03
              Gemini-Assisted     No         66.58        78.25         13.24
      500     Gemini-Assisted     Yes        63.33        79.44         11.06
              OpenAI-Assisted     No         94.10        83.45         9.43
              OpenAI-Assisted     Yes        82.76        89.66         14.17
                Rule-Based        —          68.37        53.00         10.74
              Gemini-Assisted     No         80.39        54.81         7.55
      1000    Gemini-Assisted     Yes        85.92        61.50         4.94
              OpenAI-Assisted     No         97.42        58.88         6.41
              OpenAI-Assisted     Yes        92.91        62.06          5.06




    The per-profile analysis for 1000 agents, shown in Figure 4, further highlights
behavioral differences across agent types. Students exhibit higher arrival rates
with LLM-assisted approaches, whereas retirees show smaller variation. These re-
sults suggest that LLM-based decision-making induces heterogeneous responses
across agent profiles, contributing to more diverse system-level dynamics.




Fig. 4. Arrival rate and stuck time ratio by agent profile for 1000 agents under the
localized blockage scenario.
 Evaluating LLMs for Decision-Making in Agent-Based Mobility Simulations          11

    Overall, the results indicate that LLM-assisted decision-making does not act
as a strict performance optimizer compared to rule-based approaches, but in-
stead generates heterogeneous behavioral dynamics under local blockage condi-
tions. Model choice and memory jointly shape how agents adapt to congestion,
with memory serving to incorporate prior experience into decision-making and
modulate agent responses over time.


5.3    Extended Blockage Scenario

In the extended blockage scenario, the results highlight the limitations of in-
dividual decision-based adaptation when the network structure imposes strong
constraints. As shown in Figure 5, disruptions to critical roads substantially
reduce route alternatives, concentrating traffic on a few links. In this context,
LLM-based decision-making still affects local agent behavior but has a reduced
impact on overall system performance.




      Fig. 5. Spatial representation during an extended blockage event in GAMA.


    Table 2 shows that LLM-assisted approaches consistently reduce the stuck
time ratio compared to the rule-based baseline, although gains in arrival rate
remain limited. For 500 agents, the Stuck Time Ratio drops from 8.01% to 1.86%
(OpenAI with memory), with similar reductions for 1000 agents, where values fall
to around 2% across LLM-assisted configurations. Despite these improvements,
arrival rates increase only modestly for 500 agents (up to 72.13% with Gemini
and memory) and remain close to the baseline for 1000 agents (around 40%).
12      B. C. Alves et al.

These results suggest that, under extended blockage conditions, LLMs improve
local congestion avoidance but are constrained by global network limitations in
translating these gains into overall performance.


Table 2. Comparative analysis of semantic memory impact on affected agents under
an extended blockage scenario.

      Agents       Model         Memory Replanning (%) Arrival (%) Stuck Ratio (%)
                 Rule-Based        —          70.62        67.00         8.01
               Gemini-Assisted     No         83.60        63.72         3.89
       500     Gemini-Assisted     Yes        80.83        72.13         4.19
               OpenAI-Assisted     No         97.20        62.74         2.61
               OpenAI-Assisted     Yes        95.58        62.69         1.86
                 Rule-Based        —          82.07        40.00         6.14
               Gemini-Assisted     No         88.73        41.90         3.14
       1000    Gemini-Assisted     Yes        90.94        41.41         2.53
               OpenAI-Assisted     No         98.62        39.53         2.22
               OpenAI-Assisted     Yes        96.64        40.69         2.15




    Memory exhibits model-dependent effects. For OpenAI-assisted agents, it re-
duces the time spent stuck. Still, it has a negligible impact on arrival rates,
indicating a role focused on local behavioral refinement rather than global per-
formance improvement. For Gemini-assisted agents, memory contributes more
noticeably to improvements in arrival rate in the 500-agent scenario (from 63.72%
to 72.13%), while also slightly increasing replanning. However, for 1000 agents,
memory effects are marginal in both models, yielding only small reductions in
congestion without significantly altering arrival rates. Overall, these results sug-
gest that memory serves as a stabilizing mechanism whose impact diminishes as
environmental constraints intensify.
    The per-profile analysis for 1000 agents, shown in Figure 6, further indi-
cates a reduction in behavioral differences across agent types when compared to
the localized scenario. Unlike the previous case, where individual profiles exhib-
ited more pronounced variation under LLM-assisted decision-making, here we
observe stronger convergence in both arrival rates and congestion-related met-
rics among retirees, students, and workers. These results suggest that, under
extended blockage conditions, system dynamics are increasingly dominated by
structural network constraints, limiting the influence of individual agent charac-
teristics and reducing the impact of LLM-mediated behavioral heterogeneity.

5.4    Computational Cost and Robustness Analysis
Table 3 summarizes the computational cost and robustness of the evaluated ap-
proaches in terms of simulation time and error rate. Overall, the results indicate
that incorporating LLM-based decision-making results in a substantial increase
in computational cost compared to the rule-based baseline. This increase is con-
sistent across both population scales, reflecting the additional overhead intro-
 Evaluating LLMs for Decision-Making in Agent-Based Mobility Simulations          13




Fig. 6. Arrival rate and stuck time ratio by agent profile for 1000 agents under the
extended blockage scenario.



duced by external model inference and communication between components. In
contrast, the rule-based model remains significantly more efficient due to its
purely local and deterministic execution.
    Despite this overhead, error rates remain low across all LLM-based configura-
tions, indicating that robustness is not significantly affected by LLM integration.
Even in more complex configurations, failures are rare, suggesting stable inter-
action between the simulation environment and the external decision module.
These results highlight a trade-off: while LLM integration increases computa-
tional cost, it preserves robustness and enables richer decision-making within
the simulation framework.


Table 3. Computational cost and robustness analysis of the evaluated approaches,
reporting average simulation time and error rate across simulations.

      Agents       Model         Memory    Simulation Time (s)   Error Rate (%)
                 Rule-Based       —            21.92 ± 5.78            —
               Gemini-Assisted    No          79.40 ± 16.04           0.58
       500     Gemini-Assisted    Yes          98.50 ± 10.61          1.17
               OpenAI-Assisted    No          102.30 ± 24.27          0.00
               OpenAI-Assisted    Yes         111.50 ± 12.62          0.00
                 Rule-Based       —            58.40 ± 7.79            —
               Gemini-Assisted    No          152.50 ± 24.62          0.49
       1000    Gemini-Assisted    Yes         219.25 ± 34.28          1.25
               OpenAI-Assisted    No          184.80 ± 22.60          0.00
               OpenAI-Assisted    Yes         239.67 ± 28.50          0.00
14      B. C. Alves et al.

6    Conclusion and Future Work

This study evaluates an architecture that integrates an LLM-based Agentic
framework as a decision module within multi-agent urban mobility simulations.
We propose a hybrid setup connecting the GAMA platform to the Agno frame-
work, replacing rule-based heuristics with context-sensitive reasoning enhanced
by semantic memory while preserving spatial consistency.
    The results suggest that LLM-assisted decision-making changes agent adap-
tation patterns. In localized blockages, agents improve traffic redistribution and
arrival rates. In large-scale disruptions, road constraints limit global gains, though
local congestion avoidance improves. Memory acts as a stabilizer, reducing overly
reactive behavior. Also, LLMs operate more effectively as complementary cog-
nitive layers than as replacements for routing algorithms. As decision filters,
they improve the interpretation of context and responses to unexpected events
through semantic reasoning, resulting in more realistic behaviors. However, this
raises computational overhead, as shown in execution time results, highlighting
the need for optimization in large-scale scenarios.
    Overall, the approach demonstrates the potential of LLM-based agent archi-
tectures to enhance multi-agent systems and enable more expressive urban mo-
bility modeling. Future work will address scalability, refine memory mechanisms
for greater efficiency, and extend the evaluation to additional decision-making
tasks beyond route recalculation. The findings support hybrid AI architectures
as a promising direction for data-driven intelligence in complex systems.


Acknowledgements

This study was financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de
Pessoal de Nível Superior – Brasil (CAPES) – Finance Code 001. This work was
supported by the Kunumi Institute. The authors thank the institution for its
financial support and commitment to advancing scientific research.
    Generative Artificial Intelligence tools, including Gemini and Grammarly,
were employed to refine the linguistic quality during the preparation of this
manuscript. The authors did not fabricate data, manipulate experimental results,
generate fictitious references, or misrepresent the scientific interpretation. All
content was reviewed and verified by the authors, who assume full responsibility
for the final version of the manuscript.


References

 1. Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., et al.: GPT-4 technical report
    (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774
 2. Anil, R., Borgeaud, S., Alayrac, J.B., Yu, J., Soricut, R., et al.: Gemini: A family
    of highly capable multimodal models (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11805
 Evaluating LLMs for Decision-Making in Agent-Based Mobility Simulations              15

 3. Barbosa, P.C., Macatulad, E.G., Ramos, R.V.: Escape: Evacuation simulation us-
    ing cognitive agent-based modeling on possible earthquake in gama platform for
    the case of kalayaan residence hall. The International Archives of the Photogram-
    metry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences XLVIII-4/W8-2023,
    39–46 (2024). https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLVIII-4-W8-2023-39-2024
 4. Bazzan, A., Klügl, F.: Introduction to intelligent systems in traffic and transporta-
    tion. Synthesis Lectures on Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning 7, 1–137
    (12 2013). https://doi.org/10.2200/S00553ED1V01Y201312AIM025
 5. Cascaes Alves, B., Blank Born, M., Sanchotene de Aguiar, M.: Integrating large
    language models as cognitive agents into the gama platform for urban mobility
    simulation. The International FLAIRS Conference Proceedings 39(1) (May 2026).
    https://doi.org/10.32473/flairs.39.1.141702
 6. Dorri, A., Kanhere, S.S., Jurdak, R.: Multi-agent systems: A survey. IEEE Access
    (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2831228
 7. Grignard, A., Alonso, L., Taillandier, P., Gaudou, B., Nguyen-Huu, T., Gruel, W.,
    Larson, K.: The impact of new mobility modes on a city: A generic approach using
    ABM. In: Morales, A.J., Gershenson, C., Braha, D., Minai, A.A., Bar-Yam, Y.
    (eds.) Unifying Themes in Complex Systems IX. pp. 272–280. Springer Interna-
    tional Publishing, Cham (2018)
 8. Mavlutova, I., Atstaja, D., Grasis, J., Kuzmina, J., Uvarova, I., Roga, D.: Urban
    transportation concept and sustainable urban mobility in smart cities: A review.
    Energies 16(8) (2023). https://doi.org/10.3390/en16083585
 9. Olszewski, R., Pałka, P., Turek, A., Kietlińska, B., Płatkowski, T., Borkowski,
    M.: Spatiotemporal modeling of the smart city residents’ activity with multi-agent
    systems. Applied Sciences 9(10) (2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/app9102059
10. Ozdemir, S.: Quick Start Guide to Large Language Models: Strategies and Best
    Practices for Using ChatGPT and Other LLMs. Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA,
    USA (2023)
11. Ramírez, S.: FastAPI (2018), available at: https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/
12. Russell, S., Norvig, P.: Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Pearson Edu-
    cation, Hoboken, NJ, USA, 4th edn. (2020)
13. Sachenkova, O., Andreasson, M., Tan, D., Lincke, A.: Agentic rag for maritime
    aiot: Natural language access to structured data. Sensors 26(4) (2026)
14. Sapkota, R., Roumeliotis, K.I., Karkee, M.: Ai agents vs. agentic ai: A con-
    ceptual taxonomy, applications and challenges. Information Fusion 126 (2025).
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2025.103599
15. Taillandier, P., Gaudou, B., Grignard, A., Huynh, Q.N., Marilleau, N., Caillou,
    P., Philippon, D., Drogoul, A.: Building, composing and experimenting complex
    spatial models with the GAMA platform. Geoinformatica 23(2), 299–322 (Apr
    2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10707-018-00339-6
16. Venkadesh, P., Divya, S.V., Kumar, K.S.: Unlocking AI Creativity: A multi-agent
    approach with CrewAI. Journal of Trends in Computer Science and Smart Tech-
    nology 6(4), 338–356 (2024). https://doi.org/10.36548/jtcsst.2024.4.002
17. Wooldridge, M.: An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems. Wiley, Chichester, West
    Sussex, England, 2nd edn. (2009)
18. Wu, Q., Bansal, G., Zhang, J., Wu, Y., Li, B., Zhu, E., Li, C., Zhang, L., Rowe, M.,
    Jiang, Z., et al.: AutoGen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent
    conversation framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155 (2023)
19. Zhao, W.X., Zhou, K., Li, J., Tang, T., Wang, X., Hou, Y., Min, Y., Zhang, B.,
    Zhang, J., Dong, Z., et al.: A survey of large language models. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2303.18223 1(2), 1–124 (2023)
