                                        Preprint                                                                                                         arXiv-style manuscript



                                           ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for
                                                       Repository-Level Program Repair
                                                                      Chiwang Luk1,† Matin Mohammad Najafi1 Zhifeng Jia1
                                                                             Wei Yang1 Xiuchang Li1 Jinwei Zhu1
                                                                               Yang Ren1 Lei Chen2 Gao Cong3,†
                                                                          1            2                3
                                                                              Huawei       HKUST(GZ)        Nanyang Technological University



                                                                                                       Abstract

                                               Large language model agents can repair real repository issues, but they often spend large context budgets on
                                               whole-file reads, broad searches, and long terminal outputs where useful evidence is mixed with irrelevant code
                                               and logs. This paper presents ContextSniper, AntTrail’s code-repair module for precision evidence selection in
                                               repository-level program repair, part of AntTrail’s broader agent-memory engine. AntTrail is available at https:
                                               //gitcode.com/datagallery/AntTrail. ContextSniper indexes code and action memory as three abstract levels,
                                               retrieves candidates with a hybrid ranker, filters long tool output through an intention-aware context gate, and returns




arXiv:2607.01916v3 [cs.AI] 9 Jul 2026
                                               compact evidence packets while keeping full source recoverable on demand. In a matched 50-task-per-condition
                                               comparison on SWE-bench Lite (same tasks, baseline vs. ContextSniper), ContextSniper reduces total token use by
                                               51.5% and logged cost by 36.4% for OpenClaw, and by 38.9% and 27.3% for Claude Code, with submitted-resolution
                                               rates essentially unchanged in both host-agent settings. In a separate five-task comparison, ContextSniper beats existing
                                               memory- and RAG-style integrations on token efficiency. These results suggest ContextSniper can substantially cut
                                               token and cost overhead for repository-level repair agents without a measurable loss in repair quality. The evaluation
                                               harness for this study is available at https://gitcode.com/lukchiwang/ContextSniper.


                                               Keywords: Repository-Level Program Repair, Coding Agents, Code Memory, Agentic Memory, Retrieval-Augmented
                                               Software Engineering, Token Efficiency


                                        1 Introduction
                                        1.1 Motivation
                                        When a coding agent cannot find the evidence it needs, it does not stop; it rereads. A failed patch attempt on a real
                                        repository issue often triggers another whole-file read, another broad search, another look at a stack trace already seen
                                        once, producing a read–try–fail–reread loop that spends tokens without necessarily finding the missing evidence [1, 2].
                                        This failure mode matters because large language model code agents are now evaluated and deployed for exactly this
                                        kind of repository-level work: repair benchmarks and agent systems require models to inspect codebases, execute
                                        tools, and generate source-code patches rather than only complete isolated snippets [1, 3–5], and production systems
                                        such as Claude Code apply the same inspect-edit-test loop to real development and debugging work [6]. In these
                                        workflows, context is not merely auxiliary text: it is the agent’s working record of repository state. Losing a single file
                                        path, failing-test trace, API precondition, or symbol relationship can derail localization and cause an otherwise plausible
                                        patch to target the wrong code, which mirrors recent long-horizon agent work arguing that context must preserve precise
                                        actions, observations, and evolving state rather than simply maximize length [7].
                                            The difficulty is that prevailing agents obtain this evidence through raw repository access. As illustrated in Figure 1A,
                                        a task prompt is mixed with whole-file reads, broad search results, and long terminal logs. As interactions accumulate,
                                        the active context grows with both useful evidence and stale exploration residue. This growth creates two coupled
                                        bottlenecks for repository repair. First, it raises inference cost and latency because every later reasoning step must carry
                                        more tokens. Second, it degrades decision quality because the few lines that explain the failure are diluted by unrelated
                                        helpers, repeated stack traces, build noise, and earlier failed attempts. Long-context studies show that models may fail to
                                        use relevant information reliably when it is buried inside long inputs [8]; repository repair makes this problem concrete
                                        because the evidence needed for a patch is often surrounded by unrelated code and runtime output.
                                           † Corresponding authors.




                                                                                                             1
Preprint                                   ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



     Naive context reduction is not enough. Simple truncation can remove the only test assertion or import edge that
explains a bug, while generic summarization can blur provenance, line numbers, and editability. Effective context
management for coding agents must reduce aggressively while retaining heterogeneous repair signals: issue intent, code
structure, symbol definitions, failing observations, command outcomes, and the updated state after edits. Retrieval-
augmented generation and repository-memory systems motivate a separation between knowledge storage and prompt
construction [2, 9, 10], but repository repair also requires control over what read and command output is allowed to
enter the active context in the first place.
     This paper builds on a different view of context: evidence, not ballast. AntTrail is a general agent-memory engine for
durable task context, designed to store, index, retrieve, and budget the information an agent may need instead of leaving
it buried in raw transcripts, whole artifacts, or unfiltered tool output [11]. ContextSniper is AntTrail’s module specialized
for repository-level program repair. Figure 1B shows the resulting workflow. Instead of passing raw repository and
runtime output directly to the LLM, ContextSniper first treats it as candidate evidence. We describe this evidence-capture
process as sniping: the system keeps task-relevant code and runtime signals, removes surrounding low-value regions,
and assembles the surviving material into a compact evidence packet for the agent.
     The intended operating point is shown in Figure 1C. More context can help when it adds missing evidence, but after
the agent has enough information, additional files and logs mostly add cost and distraction. ContextSniper therefore does
not try to maximize context size or compress everything uniformly. It tries to keep the agent near the useful-evidence
region: enough code and runtime evidence to localize and repair the issue, but little enough surrounding noise to reduce
tokens, turns, and confusion. Rather than replacing the host coding agent, ContextSniper targets the context-access layer
between the agent and the repository. It maintains local code memory, retrieves compact task-relevant code, suppresses
noisy read and command outputs, and synchronizes memory with repository edits, so the prompt carries the current
evidence packet rather than the entire exploration history.
1.2 Problem Statement
Repository-level program repair requires an agent to connect an issue description to the relevant implementation, tests,
interfaces, and execution behavior of a codebase [3]. This is difficult because the necessary evidence is rarely isolated in
one function. It may be distributed across multiple files, imported dependencies, class hierarchies, configuration logic,
and failing tests. Before an agent can generate a correct patch, it must first localize the code that matters, a bottleneck
also targeted by localization and repository-graph methods [5, 12, 13].
    Existing agents usually acquire this context through raw repository tools. They read files directly, run search
commands, inspect command outputs, and then decide what to read next [1, 4]. This workflow is general, but it treats
context accumulation as the default path to evidence. It provides little memory across repeated exploration steps, little
control over the amount of irrelevant output entering the context window, and limited support for keeping retrieved
context aligned with files that change during the repair process. Recent codebase-memory and graph-based systems
address parts of this problem by giving agents structured repository access, but context selection and runtime output
control remain important practical concerns [2, 10].
    This paper studies the following problem: how can existing repository-level code agents transform raw repository
and runtime context into compact repair evidence while leaving the agent’s core reasoning and editing loop intact? The
problem has two coupled objectives. The first is to reduce waste: fewer irrelevant tokens, fewer repeated exploration
turns, lower cost, and shorter latency. The second is to reduce confusion: cleaner evidence packets that preserve code
localization, patch reasoning, and validation quality while removing surrounding noise.
    ContextSniper connects to three lines of prior work that target the same context bottleneck from different angles: agent
tools and agent-computer interfaces for repository-level software engineering, prompt and retrieval compression, and
output-side filtering for agent tools. Agent-tool work shapes how models navigate, search, and edit repositories, but the
active context it produces remains tightly coupled to raw exploration output. Prompt- and retrieval-compression methods
operate on text or chunks already selected for a prompt, after the selection decision has been made. Output-filtering
systems trim noisy tool output but do not maintain a synchronized code memory across a repair run. ContextSniper is
distinguished from all three: it gates raw repository and runtime output at the point where it would otherwise enter the
model’s context, while keeping that gating synchronized with a task-time code memory, rather than compressing an
already-assembled prompt or replacing the host agent’s tool loop. We position ContextSniper against specific systems in
each of these three lines in Section 2.
1.3 Contributions
We make the following contributions:


                                                              2
Preprint                                                                          ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



                                                                                      useful evidence          neutral context     noise

                                            (A) Prevailing code agents                                                                            (B) ContextSniper

                                                        User task                                                                                      User task
                                                     issue + prompt                                                                                 issue + prompt


                   Native repository tools                                                                               ContextSniper insertion                               suppress noisy outputs

                                      Grep               Read              Bash                                                   search code            Read                Bash


                   Unfiltered context                                             low signal-to-noise                    Compact evidence packet                                 high signal-to-noise
                                    path.py:1--110                                                                               path.py:42--58
                                                                         context window: full                                                              context window: headroom remaining



                                           Host agent: reason → edit → test                                                                Host agent: reason → edit → test


                                            On failure: reread similar files;                                                                       Patch submitted;
                                           duplicate context keeps growing                                                                        no redundant rereads


                                                 (C) Useful-evidence operating point                                                                        Avg. tokens per task
                                                  ContextSniper                   Raw access (grep/ls)                                                            lower is better
                                                                                                                                                              Baseline            ContextSniper
                                                                operating point


                                                                                                                                                              −38.9%                  −51.5%




     Usefulness for repair
                                                                                                                                               1.5M            1.45M
                                                                                                                                                                                         1.36M



                                                                                                                                                  1M
                                                                                                                                                                0.79M
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.66M




                                                                                                        Context cost (tokens)
                                                                                                                                                    0
                                 task             evidence               sufficient                         noisy
                             instruction           search                evidence                          context                                        Claude Code                OpenClaw
Figure 1. ContextSniper turns noisy repository context into compact repair evidence. (A) and (B) share the same host-agent
workflow; only the context-acquisition module differs. (A) Native Grep, Read, and Bash outputs accumulate into an unfiltered
prompt context, and failed attempts reread similar files. (B) A ContextSniper insertion layer replaces broad discovery with
search code excerpts and gates long Read/Bash output before the same host agent assembles a compact prompt. (C) A conceptual
illustration, not measured data, of the intended operating point: context acquisition passes through four stages, instruction, retrieval
and edits, sufficient evidence, and context flooding, with ContextSniper reaching the operating point early and stopping while raw
grep/ls access keeps spending tokens through redundant reads and only loses accuracy once context floods. The bars give the
measured average token use per task (Table 2).




                                                                                                               3
Preprint                                       ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



Table 1. Positioning ContextSniper relative to repository-level repair systems.
   Family                     Examples                        Primary optimization target             Context-access boundary
   Benchmark setting          SWE-bench [3]                   Real issue-to-patch tasks over full     Defines the task and validation setting,
                                                              repositories.                           but does not prescribe how evidence
                                                                                                      should be retrieved or bounded.
   Autonomous repair agents   SWE-agent and AutoCodeRover Tool use, repository navigation,       Context selection is largely coupled to
                              [1, 4]                      search, edit, test, and agent-computer the host agent’s exploratory tool loop
                                                          interface design.                      and the raw outputs that loop observes.
   Pipeline-style repair      Agentless [5]                   A simpler decomposition into            Localization is a pipeline stage;
                                                              localization, repair, and validation.   reusable task-time memory,
                                                                                                      runtime-output gating, and edit
                                                                                                      synchronization are not the main
                                                                                                      abstraction.
   Context-access layer       ContextSniper (AntTrail)        Evidence retrieval, budgeting,          The repair agent remains responsible
                                                              filtering, and synchronization for an   for reasoning and editing; the context
                                                              existing host agent.                    layer controls which repository and
                                                                                                      runtime evidence enters the prompt.

     • We introduce ContextSniper, AntTrail’s code-repair module. It sits between a host agent and a target repository,
       converting noisy repository access into compact evidence packets while leaving the agent’s core reasoning and
       editing loop intact.
     • We propose a two-family memory hierarchy backed by AGFS (Agent File System), in which code memory and
       action memory are each indexed as three views: L0 compact abstract, L1 structured overview, and L2 full content.

     • We develop adaptive top-k retrieval that fuses semantic embeddings, BM25 lexical scoring, ctags-style symbolic
       metadata (symbol names, kinds, and locations), and graph relations through weighted reciprocal rank fusion
       (RRF), with a ripgrep-based text-search fallback [14] when the index misses a query.
     • We add an intention-aware context gate and a two-phase memory-repository synchronization that snipe noisy tool
       output and keep local code memory aligned with the working tree after agent edits.
     • We evaluate ContextSniper on SWE-bench Lite with Claude Code and OpenClaw as host agents, comparing
       host-agent baselines against ContextSniper in terms of token usage, tool behavior, and repair outcomes [3, 6, 15].
       ContextSniper reduces total token use by 51.5% for OpenClaw and 38.9% for Claude Code, with submitted-
       resolution rates essentially unchanged in both settings.

2 Background and Related Work
2.1 Repository-Level Program Repair
Repository-level program repair asks a model or agent to modify an existing codebase in response to a natural-language
issue report, rather than solving an isolated programming exercise. SWE-bench made this setting a standard evaluation
target by collecting real GitHub issues and pull requests from Python repositories; its tasks require models to inspect a
repository, understand issue-specific behavior, and coordinate edits across files, tests, and execution environments [3].
This benchmark shifted automated repair from single-function generation toward interactive repository work, where
finding the right evidence can be as important as generating the final patch.
    Recent systems can be separated along four dimensions: how autonomous the model is, how localization is performed,
whether memory persists across interactions or tasks, and whether raw repository or runtime output is filtered before
entering the prompt. SWE-agent studies the agent-computer interface, showing that repository navigation, file editing,
and test execution tools can strongly affect software-engineering agent behavior [1]. AutoCodeRover uses a more
software-engineering-oriented autonomous workflow, combining LLM reasoning with structured code search and
test-aware fault localization [4]. Agentless, by contrast, separates localization, repair, and patch validation into a simpler
pipeline rather than giving the model a fully autonomous tool loop [5]. Table 1 summarizes the resulting boundary.
    This distinction is central to the paper’s contribution. ContextSniper is not a new standalone repair agent and does not
replace the host model’s reasoning loop. Instead, it targets the context-access layer used by repair agents: how repository
evidence is retrieved, bounded, selected, filtered, and kept synchronized with edits. This makes it complementary to
autonomous systems such as SWE-agent and AutoCodeRover and pipeline-style systems such as Agentless.


                                                                   4
Preprint                                   ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



2.2 Code Memory and Agentic Memory
Retrieval-augmented generation introduced a general pattern for combining a parametric language model with explicit
non-parametric memory, allowing retrieved passages to condition generation without retraining the model [9]. Software-
engineering agents extend this idea because useful knowledge may include source code, documentation, prior fixes,
execution traces, project conventions, and failure histories. The important distinction for this paper is not only whether
memory exists, but what scope the memory covers and when it is updated.
    One line of work stores cross-task repair experience. SWE-Exp distills concise knowledge from prior agent trajectories
into an experience bank for issue resolution [16]. ExpeRepair uses episodic and semantic memories to retrieve concrete
repair demonstrations and higher-level repair insights [17]. MemGovern expands the source of experience to governed
human issue-tracking data, aiming to move agents beyond local context alone [18]. A second line studies memory
granularity: structurally aligned subtask-level memory argues that whole-instance memories can be too coarse and stores
or retrieves experience at the level of functional subtasks [19]. A third line studies domain adaptation, as in MEMCoder,
which evolves memory for private-library-oriented code generation where the model must learn internal API usage
patterns and constraints over time [20].
    These systems show that memory is becoming central to software agents, but their main emphasis is experience
reuse across tasks, histories, or domains. ContextSniper focuses on task-time local code memory. Its memory is built
from the current repository snapshot, queried during the current repair run, refreshed as files change, and used to control
not only code retrieval but also what read, search, and shell outputs enter the active context. This narrower scope is
intentional: it addresses repeated exploration and noisy context within a single issue-resolution process, while leaving
room for future integration with cross-task experience memory.
2.3 Repository Structure, Localization, and Context Management
Repository-level repair depends on localization before generation. If the agent reads the wrong files or misses the right
symbol, later patch reasoning is likely to fail regardless of model size. Prior work therefore uses repository structure,
history, or graphs to narrow the search space. RepoGraph provides a repository-level code graph as a plug-in module
for AI software-engineering systems [10]. KGCompass uses repository-aware knowledge graphs over artifacts such
as issues, pull requests, files, classes, and functions to guide fault localization and repair [12]. Repository-memory
localization work builds non-parametric memory from historical commits and linked issues, showing that a project’s
change history can help agents identify likely fix locations [13]. Learning to Commit similarly studies online repository
memory for generating pull requests that respect project-specific conventions and architectural patterns [21].
    Persistent codebase memory systems address a closely related practical bottleneck: LLM coding agents often explore
repositories through repeated file reads and broad search commands. Codebase-Memory constructs a Tree-Sitter-based
knowledge graph exposed through the Model Context Protocol and reports large token reductions for codebase exploration
tasks [2]. This line of work supports the central premise of ContextSniper: repository agents need structured access to
code, not only larger context windows. ContextSniper differs by treating the final prompt as a budgeted evidence packet
that must preserve source provenance, filter runtime noise, and remain synchronized with the repository after edits.
    Long-context models do not remove this selection problem. Empirical work on long-context language models shows
that performance can degrade when relevant information is buried in the middle of long inputs, even for models designed
to accept long contexts [8]. This result is not a direct evaluation of repository repair, but it motivates caution: adding
more files, logs, and command output is not equivalent to making repair evidence easier to use. The gap left by prior
work is therefore a context-management problem with four requirements: select task-relevant local repository evidence
under a budget, preserve provenance so the host agent can inspect and edit the source, suppress low-value runtime output
without losing diagnostic anchors, and keep retrieved memory aligned with changes made during the repair run.
2.4 Prompt and Retrieval Compression
A separate line of work optimizes prompt and retrieval compression once content has already been selected for a prompt.
LLMLingua and LongLLMLingua drop low-information tokens via a small LM, achieving up to 20× compression
with small quality loss and explicit mitigation of the lost-in-the-middle failure mode [22, 23]. RECOMP inserts a learned
compressor between retrieval and the LM and ships both extractive and abstractive variants for retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG) settings [24]. COMPACT makes the compression rate query-dependent, deciding per retrieved
document how aggressively to shorten it [25]. Selective Context filters tokens by self-information [26], while
AutoCompressor trains the model to emit summary vectors that compress earlier context into the KV cache [27].
Open-source engineering tools in this layer include ctxbudgeter, which compiles, audits, governs, and visualizes
context packs before model calls with token budgets, policy checks, provenance, and cache planning [28], and Token


                                                              5
Preprint                                      ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair




Figure 2. ContextSniper architecture. The upper path shows the baseline interaction loop, where broad search, long file reads,
repeated actions, and raw command output accumulate noisy context before reaching the model’s context window. The lower path
shows the ContextSniper insertion layer. Repository and action evidence are stored in an AGFS-backed memory hierarchy,
synchronized with the current working tree, retrieved through hybrid code search, and sniped by intention-aware context gates before
compact evidence returns to the same host-agent loop.

Reducer, a Claude Code-oriented local pipeline that combines BM25 and vector retrieval, abstract syntax tree (AST)
chunking, reranking, and TextRank-style compression for codebase context [29]. These methods operate on text or
retrieved chunks already selected for a prompt; ContextSniper operates one layer earlier for repository repair, deciding
which tool outputs and code excerpts are allowed to enter that text at all.
2.5 Agent-Tool Output Filtering
A third line filters agent-tool outputs before they enter the model context. RTK rewrites shell commands through a Rust
CLI proxy and reports 60–90% token savings on common development commands by filtering, grouping, truncating,
and deduplicating outputs [30]. Headroom generalizes this idea beyond shell commands to tool outputs, logs, files,
RAG chunks, and conversation history through a library, proxy, and MCP server, reporting 60–95% fewer tokens on
real agent workloads while retaining local-first operation and reversible retrieval of originals [31]. Bearing addresses
context growth at the workflow level: it separates planning from execution, runs tasks in fresh agent processes, and
passes forward task summaries and relevant-file hints rather than an entire accumulated conversation [32]. ContextSniper
is closest to this family, but specializes the output gate for repository-level repair: it combines tool-output filtering with
synchronized local code memory, so the host agent receives compact, task-relevant repair evidence without changing its
outer workflow. Existing agent tools, prompt compressors, and output filters each improve one link of the evidence chain;
to our knowledge, none of them gates raw repository and runtime output for repair while maintaining synchronized code
memory. ContextSniper combines these ideas into a single context-access layer and is evaluated against the prevailing
raw-access workflow on a repository-level repair benchmark [3], rather than against an abstract compression ratio on a
synthetic long-context task.

3 ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Code-Oriented Memory Module
3.1 System Overview
Within AntTrail, ContextSniper is the module specialized for repository-level program repair. It is inserted between a
host coding agent and a target repository, but it does not replace the agent’s planning loop, editor, shell, or validation
procedure. Instead, it changes the evidence path. In the baseline path in Figure 2, the agent explores the repository through


                                                                 6
Preprint                                        ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



                                             Action                                                   Memory
                                                 L0                                                           L0
                                             sniped view                                               code abstract


                                                 L1                                                           L1
                                        tool, path, status, type                                   paths, symbols, graph



                                                 L2                                                           L2
                                    original read / command output                             source chunks with line spans


                                                      AGFS-backed views: abstract → overview → full content

Figure 3. Two-family L0-L2 memory hierarchy. Action memory stores compact action views, action metadata, and recoverable
original tool output. Code memory stores code abstracts, structured routing metadata, and source-grounded chunks.

broad search, whole-file reads, and command outputs. These outputs often contain the needed repair evidence, but they
also carry unrelated functions, repeated logs, and stale exploratory context into the model window. ContextSniper keeps
the same outer workflow while changing what the model receives from each interaction.
    The core principle is to retrieve broadly but expose narrowly. ContextSniper stores full repository and action evidence
outside the prompt, searches that evidence with multiple retrieval signals, and returns only the snippets and runtime
facts that are likely to support localization, patch construction, or validation. This is different from generic compression:
the system is not trying to summarize everything the agent saw. It is trying to remove unwanted context while preserving
source-grounded evidence. Every returned code excerpt keeps its repository path and line region, and every retained
runtime signal is tied to the tool call, command, or edit that produced it.
    After this overview, the architecture has five implementation components. Section 3.2 describes the AGFS-backed
memory hierarchy used to store code and action evidence. Section 3.3 describes synchronization between memory and
the working repository. Section 3.4 describes code search and adaptive top-k retrieval, including semantic embeddings,
BM25 lexical scoring, symbol ranking, graph evidence, reciprocal-rank fusion, and ripgrep fallback [14, 33, 34].
Section 3.5 describes the context gate that snipes, or removes low-value regions from, long reads and command outputs
before they enter the model prompt. Section 3.6 defines the host-agent boundary; the concrete pilot adapters are described
in Section 4.1.
3.2 Memory Hierarchy
For code repair, the memory layer is organized into two families: code memory for repository evidence and action
memory for evidence produced during the repair run. Both are stored outside the prompt in an AGFS-backed local
memory service [35]. AGFS (Agent File System) stores each memory node as a directory with three text views: an
abstract, an overview, and full content. ContextSniper indexes these views as three retrieval levels: L0, L1, and L2.
    L0 is the compact abstract level: a short model-facing view used for broad recall and, for long reads or shell output,
as the returned sniped view. L1 is the structured overview level, storing routing and ranking metadata such as paths, line
ranges, symbols, signatures, ctags-style symbol kinds, BM25 lexical documents, graph relations, tool names, command
status, and output type [36]. L2 is the recoverable full-content level. For code memory, L2 contains source-grounded
chunks with path and line headers; Python files use an abstract syntax tree (AST) chunker for top-level classes, functions,
and async functions, while other files fall back to overlapping line windows. For action memory, L2 stores the original
unfiltered read or command output. Thus L0 gives compact recall, L1 gives structured routing, and L2 preserves editable
or recoverable source evidence.
3.3 Memory-Repository Synchronization
Memory-repository synchronization keeps code memory aligned with the current working tree. A repair run starts from
a checked-out repository, but the repository does not stay fixed: the agent edits files, executes tests, reads new regions,
and may trigger generated artifacts or logs. If retrieval returns an old version of a function after an edit, the compact
context becomes actively harmful. ContextSniper therefore treats memory freshness as part of source grounding.
    Synchronization happens in two phases. The first phase runs after agent actions through runtime hooks. When the
host agent searches code, reads a file, edits source, or runs a command, ContextSniper records touched paths, returned
regions, command status, failure output, and modified files. For edits made through the ContextSniper tool surface, the
edit operation validates the target path, applies the source change, and dispatches a memory refresh for the edited file.
For long reads and command outputs, the hook writes both the sniped view and the recoverable original into action
memory.
    The second phase runs at conversation or task boundaries. When a new user prompt arrives, ContextSniper reconciles
the indexed state with the working tree, for example by inspecting repository diffs since the previous turn. Changed


                                                                               7
Preprint                                         ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



    Input: query q, scope S, memory M , state R, action memory A, ceiling k0 , budget B.
    Output: ranked L2 evidence packet E.


    function SearchCode(q, S, M, R, A, k0 , B)
      intent ← InferIntent(q, A)
      k∗ ← min(k0 , BudgetToK(B))
      routes ← PlanRoutes(intent, A, k∗ )
      for r ∈ routes do
         Cr ← ExpandToL2(Retrieve(r, q, S, M, r.budget), M )
      end for
      F ← Deduplicate(WeightedRRF({Cr }r∈routes , intent), path, lineSpan)
      if WeakRecall(F, S, k∗ ) then
         F ← MergeAndRank(F, Backfill({Cr }, k∗ ), Ripgrep(q, S, R, k∗ ))
      end if
      E ← Prune(F, B, k∗ , scoreGap, duplicateText)
      return FillL2Content(E, M )
    end function


Figure 4. Pseudocode for code search with adaptive top-k retrieval. The query planner controls retrieval depth and route budgets,
while the final response remains a compact set of source-grounded L2 snippets.

files are re-chunked or refreshed, deleted snippets are invalidated, and newly relevant regions become available for
subsequent searches. This phase catches changes that did not pass through a tool hook and prevents the next repair
request from starting from a stale memory image.
     The result is a memory hierarchy that is both compact and auditable. Returned snippets cite concrete paths and line
regions in the current workspace. Runtime signals cite the command, read, or edit that produced them. Synchronization
is therefore not an auxiliary bookkeeping feature; it is the mechanism that makes context sniping trustworthy after the
agent starts changing the repository.
3.4 Code Searching with Adaptive Top-k Retrieval
Code search is the main entry point from the host agent into code memory. Given a focused natural-language or keyword
query, search code returns a small list of L2 snippets with path and line headers rather than raw grep output. Formally,
it computes an evidence packet E = {e1 , . . . , em } from a query q, scope S, memory hierarchy M = {L0, L1, L2},
repository state R, requested top-k value k0 , and context budget B. The adaptive part is the choice of effective return
size m ≤ k ∗ and route budgets: traceback-like queries emphasize paths, symbols, and grep terms; behavioral queries
allocate more budget to semantic and graph routes; and stateful debugging turns can promote recently touched files
from action memory.
    The retrieval path is layer aware. A planner assigns the query type and route budgets; seed retrieval searches
L0/L1/L2 records; promising L0/L1 nodes expand into L2 leaves; and the final ranker deduplicates by URI, sorts by
score, and returns source-grounded L2 evidence. Figure 4 gives the pseudocode.
    The hybrid ranker combines semantic embeddings, BM25 lexical documents [33], ctags-style symbol metadata
[36], and graph relations over imports, calls, containment, and neighboring-file evidence. ContextSniper fuses route
rankings with weighted reciprocal rank fusion by default, or weighted score summation when configured [34]. If indexed
retrieval is weak, it falls back to ripgrep-based workspace search [14]. The important contract is that L0 and L1 help
find evidence, but the agent sees precise code regions rather than every file or line that matched the query.
3.5 Intention-Aware Filtering and Context Gate
The context gate controls what reaches the model after retrieval or tool execution. For file reads, it preserves relevant
local definitions, imports, class or function bodies, and nearby code. For test and shell output, it preserves command
lines, exit status, assertion messages, tracebacks, failing paths, and concise success signals. For state, it preserves
changed files, touched symbols, repository status, and paths that connect the current turn to earlier evidence. Long
boilerplate, repeated logs, unrelated file regions, and uninformative tails are removed from the prompt-facing view.
    The gate is conservative because removing evidence can be worse than spending extra tokens. When a read or
command is shortened, ContextSniper stores the original output in action memory and returns a marker indicating that
sniping occurred, so the host agent can request broader context if the compact view is insufficient. Figure 5 gives the
pseudocode.




                                                                     8
Preprint                                        ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



    Input: action a, raw output o, intent query q, state R, action memory A, budget B.
    Output: prompt-facing view v, sniping marker m, recoverable action-memory record u.


    function ContextGate(a, o, q, R, A, B)
      intent ← InferPreservationIntent(a, q, A)
      meta ← ClassifyOutput(a, o)
      switch meta.type do
         case FileRead: K ← RequestedRegion(a, o) ∪ LocalDefs(o, intent) ∪ Neighbors(o, intent)
         case CommandOutput: K ← CommandStatus(a, o) ∪ Failures(o) ∪ Validation(o)
         otherwise: K ← StateSignals(a, o, R, A)
      end switch
      v ← RenderCompactView(K, B)
      risk ← LowConfidence(v, intent) ∨ MissingCriticalSignal(v, meta)
      u ← StoreActionMemory(L0 = v, L1 = meta, L2 = o)
      if Shortened(v, o) ∨ risk then
         m ← SnipedMarker(u, risk)
         v ← AttachRecoveryHint(v, m)
      else
         m ← NoSniping
      end if
      return (v, m, u)
    end function


Figure 5. Pseudocode for intention-aware filtering and the context gate. The gate keeps action-relevant evidence, records the
recoverable original output, and marks shortened views so the host agent can request broader context when needed.

3.6 Host-Agent Boundary
ContextSniper is designed as an insertion layer for existing coding agents. The host agent chooses the plan, decides
what to edit, and runs validation; the insertion layer controls how repository and runtime evidence are searched, sniped,
synchronized, and returned. This boundary lets the same mechanism be tested through different host-agent adapters
without changing the host agent’s core reasoning loop. The concrete Claude Code and OpenClaw pilot adapters used in
this paper are described in the experimental setup.

4 Evaluation
4.1 Experimental Setup
We evaluate ContextSniper on repository-level program repair using SWE-bench Lite [3]. The evaluation uses 50
randomly sampled tasks per host-agent comparison. For each benchmark instance, the runner checks out the target
repository at the benchmark-provided base commit, constructs a task prompt from the issue description, and asks the
host agent to generate a source-code patch. Generated patches are evaluated against the benchmark’s FAIL TO PASS and
PASS TO PASS tests when official validation completes successfully.
     The main comparison is each host agent’s baseline versus the ContextSniper pilot implementation. The baseline
condition uses the host agent’s default repository tools without the ContextSniper insertion layer. ContextSniper adds
local code-memory search, compact evidence assembly, context control for long file-read and command-output results,
and source editing through the same memory-aware interface.
     We choose Claude Code and OpenClaw to cover two common deployment settings. Claude Code represents a
production-oriented coding workflow, where token cost and latency directly affect developer experience. In this pilot
setting, ContextSniper is exposed to Claude Code through Model Context Protocol (MCP) tools [2, 6]. The key tool
is search code, which is presented as the preferred replacement for broad grep and exploratory reads; a paired
edit file tool validates workspace paths, applies exact source replacements, and refreshes memory for the edited
file. OpenClaw provides an open-source agent setting, where ContextSniper exposes comparable functions through
OpenClaw plugin tools and runtime hooks [15]. We report OpenClaw and Claude Code separately because they use
different host-agent implementations, model interfaces, token accounting, and pricing schemes. Token usage is the
primary efficiency metric, including total tokens and, when available, cost and tool/action counts. Validation outcomes
are reported cautiously because solve-rate claims require comparable official validation coverage across conditions. The
public repository contains the pilot testing scripts and evaluation harnesses used for these experiments, rather than the
full AntTrail memory engine.




                                                                   9
Preprint                                                      ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



Table 2. Main efficiency and validation results. OpenClaw and Claude Code are reported separately because they use different
models, token accounting, and pricing. ‘Ctx. Act.’ counts context-acquisition actions from native read/search commands and
ContextSniper retrieval calls.
                Host      Method      Res. Res. Rate Input Tok. Output Tok. Total Tok. Cost Avg. Act. Ctx. Act. Rel. Tok.
             OpenClaw     Baseline     13 26.0%       67.19M     0.618M      67.80M $0.635    32.1      572         –
             OpenClaw ContextSniper 12 24.0%          32.57M     0.341M      32.91M $0.404    17.2      461      -51.5%
             OpenClaw Rel. change -1 -2.0 pp           -51.5%    -44.7%      -51.5% -36.4% -46.4% -19.4%            –
            Claude Code   Baseline     16 32.0%           –         –        85.97M $15.09    29.9      791         –
            Claude Code ContextSniper 15 30.0%            –         –        52.55M $10.97    19.2      522      -38.9%
            Claude Code Rel. change -1 -2.0 pp            –         –        -38.9% -27.3% -35.7%        –          –

4.2 Main Results
The current results support an efficiency claim rather than a solve-rate improvement claim. On the 50-task OpenClaw
SWE-bench Lite comparison, both the OpenClaw baseline and ContextSniper completed 50 task runs and submitted 50
patches. ContextSniper reduces average token use from 1.36M to 0.66M tokens per task, a 51.5% reduction in total
tokens. It also reduces logged cost by 36.4% and tool/action count by 46.4% compared with the OpenClaw baseline.
Official validation gives comparable submitted-resolution rates, 24.0% for ContextSniper versus 26.0% for the OpenClaw
baseline, but the validation-error imbalance prevents a strong repair-success conclusion.
    The Claude Code experiment provides a second host-agent setting. On 50 completed SWE task runs using Claude
Haiku 4.5 pricing [37], ContextSniper reduces average token use from 1.45M to 0.79M tokens per task. This corresponds
to a reduction in total tokens from 85.97M to 52.55M, or 38.9%, and lowers estimated cost from $15.09 to $10.97,
a 27.3% reduction. Because this run uses a different host agent, model, tokenizer, and pricing scheme, we report it
separately rather than pooling it with the OpenClaw totals.

                                                                  Within-Host Efficiency Reduction

                                               60




                  Reduction vs. baseline (%)
                                                    51.5


                                               40                                                              38.9
                                                           36.4

                                                                                                                      27.3

                                               20



                                               0
                                                    OpenClaw                                                 Claude Code
                                                                              Host agent
                                                                    Token reduction      Cost reduction
Figure 6. Within-host efficiency reduction relative to each host agent’s baseline setting. Absolute token and cost values are reported
in Table 2.

     The OpenClaw comparison is the most complete setting because it includes matched task runs, submitted patches,
official validation status, token totals, cost, and action counts. The Claude Code comparison tests whether the same
efficiency pattern appears in a production-oriented host agent; its validation and action-count measurements are reported
separately because they come from a different model interface and tool surface. A five-task Django pilot with additional
retrieval and memory systems is useful as exploratory evidence, but it is not used as a main competitor claim because it
does not yet match the 50-task protocol.




                                                                                10
Preprint                                                                                         ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



                                                                                                             Per-Task Token Usage
                                                       7M




             ContextSniper total tokens
                                                       6M
                                                       5M
                                                       4M
                                                       3M
                                                       2M
                                                       1M
                                                        0
                                                            0                 1M                 2M              3M            4M                     5M                 6M                    7M
                                                                                                               Baseline total tokens
                                                                                      OpenClaw tasks Claude Code tasks                            Equal token use
Figure 7. Per-task token-usage comparison on matched SWE-bench Lite tasks for OpenClaw and Claude Code. Each point compares
the host-agent baseline and ContextSniper for one task. Points below the diagonal indicate tasks where ContextSniper uses fewer
tokens.


                                                                                                           Token Change by Repository




                       Token change vs. baseline (%)
                                                            0

                                                       −20

                                                       −40

                                                       −60

                                                       −80
                                                                                                       f        y                   t                    y        ts                       t
                                                                   ng
                                                                     o
                                                                           hin
                                                                              x             rn      ps        mp         om     lin         ata       rop      lle             lib      tes
                                                                dja      sp              lea               sy         ask     py        py
                                                                                                                                           d
                                                                                                                                                   ast       pa             lot      py
                                                                                      it-                                                                                 tp
                                                                                  scik                              mw                                                 ma

                                                                                                                    Repository
                                                                                                               OpenClaw     Claude Code
Figure 8. Repository-level token change on the matched SWE-bench Lite task sets for OpenClaw and Claude Code. Values aggregate
total tokens by repository before computing relative change against each host-agent baseline. Negative values indicate token savings
from ContextSniper.

4.3 Task-Level Failure Analysis
The matched OpenClaw comparison shows the intended behavior on most tasks: ContextSniper uses fewer tokens on 45
of 50 matched tasks. The remaining 5 cases are more informative than the aggregate average because they show when a
context-access layer can add overhead rather than remove it. Trace inspection separates these increases into two patterns.
    First, some increases are dominated by fixed retrieval and tool-interface overhead. On pylint-dev pylint-7228,
pallets flask-5063, and matplotlib matplotlib-24265, ContextSniper uses the same number of total actions
as the OpenClaw baseline, but adds two to four code-search calls. The resulting token increases are modest, between
9.6% and 17.3%. These are not cases where the agent spirals into much longer exploration; rather, the task is short
enough that the retrieval layer’s setup and search turns are not fully amortized by shorter later context.
    Second, larger increases occur when retrieval does not quickly end exploration or when the baseline run is unusually
short. The clearest retrieval-overhead failure is mwaskom seaborn-3407: ContextSniper uses six code-search calls
and 32 actions, compared with 21 baseline actions, raising token use by 152.3%. This suggests a retrieval miss or
insufficiently decisive evidence packet that caused the host agent to continue searching. In pytest-dev pytest-7168,


                                                                                                                       11
Preprint                                                                         ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



ContextSniper retrieves the relevant saferepr.py region early, but the baseline completes the task in only five actions;
even after rerun, the ContextSniper path uses nine actions and two search calls, making the relative token increase 104.6%.
This is an overhead-on-short-task case rather than a pure localization failure. Separately, pytest-dev pytest-7220
was a large pre-rerun increase, but after rerun it becomes a token reduction; the accepted trace still records backend
startup warnings, so we exclude it from the current token-increase set.
     Figure 9 complements this task-level analysis by measuring whether the retriever surfaces the eventual target file
within the first returned paths. Low-recall repositories identify where the first failure pattern is more likely: if the
target file is absent from the early results, the host agent must either issue more ContextSniper searches or fall back to
broader native exploration. The token-increase cases therefore do not overturn the efficiency result, but they calibrate
it: ContextSniper is strongest when early retrieval replaces broad exploration, and weakest when retrieval overhead is
added to an already short baseline run or when the first evidence packet misses the decisive file.

                                                                                           Retrieval Recall by Repository

                                       100




              Target-file recall (%)
                                       80

                                       60

                                       40

                                       20

                                         0
                                                   y          o            lib                            sts         ay        t         t                      x       y
                                                rop        ng          lot          bo
                                                                                      rn
                                                                                             fla
                                                                                                sk      ue          rr       lin       tes            arn     hin      mp
                                             ast       dja                                                       xa        py       py           le         sp       sy
                                                                     tp          sea                 req                                      sk
                                                                  ma

                                                                                                          Repository
                                                                                       Recall@1                 Recall@3            Recall@5
Figure 9. Retrieval recall by repository from actual ContextSniper search samples labeled with benchmark patch target files. The
denominator is search attempts per repository; Recall@k reports whether a target file appears in the top-k returned paths.

4.4 Comparison with Memory and RAG Systems
To contextualize ContextSniper against related memory-style integrations, we run a five-task Django pilot using the same
OpenClaw host setting. The pilot compares the OpenClaw baseline, ContextSniper, and several memory or retrieval
integrations, including mem0, Letta/MemGPT, OpenViking, TencentDB Memory, Serena, and a LlamaIndex-style RAG
baseline [38–43]. All methods complete five task runs and are evaluated with official SWE-bench validation reports.
    Figure 10 should be read as exploratory evidence rather than the main benchmark because its five-task size is much
smaller than the matched OpenClaw comparison in Table 2. Task outcomes are similar: all methods resolve four of
five pilot tasks except OpenViking, which resolves five of five. We therefore use the figure to compare token-efficiency
patterns, not to make a final solve-rate claim.




                                                                                                         12
Preprint                                       ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



                                                        Five-Task Memory/RAG Pilot

       OpenClaw Baseline

             ContextSniper

           LlamaIndex RAG

      TencentDB Memory

                   Serena

               OpenViking

            Letta/MemGPT

                    mem0

                             0                 250                       500                      750                      1,000
                                                           Average tokens per task (K)
Figure 10. Five-task Django pilot comparison with memory and RAG-style integrations. Bar length shows average logged tokens per
task. The pilot is exploratory and smaller than the main 50-task OpenClaw comparison; task-resolution counts are reported in the text.

5 Discussion
5.1 ContextSniper as AntTrail Infrastructure
ContextSniper treats code memory and context control as infrastructure for coding agents. Its central design choice is
to retrieve broadly, expose narrowly, and preserve recoverable context outside the prompt. Placing this memory layer
outside the host agent’s reasoning loop lets the same substrate support different tool interfaces, as shown by the Claude
Code and OpenClaw pilot adapters.
     This positioning also clarifies the role of the ”sniper” metaphor. ContextSniper is not simply a larger index or
a summarizer for entire repositories. Its job is to remove unwanted context before the LLM spends attention on it:
irrelevant file regions, redundant exploration, noisy command output, stale snippets, and broad repository dumps. The
system is useful when it keeps the concrete evidence that matters for a repair while preventing surrounding noise from
filling the context window.
     The result is a division of labor between agent and infrastructure. The host agent decides what problem to solve and
what patch to write. ContextSniper decides how to expose repository evidence under a limited context budget. This
makes context management an explicit systems layer rather than an implicit side effect of file reads and shell commands.
5.2 Deployment
ContextSniper can be deployed through host-agent plugins because its boundary is intentionally narrow: it mediates
context access while leaving planning, editing, and validation with the host agent. The pilot adapters in this paper
instantiate that boundary for two tool surfaces, but the released repository is best understood as the testing and evaluation
harness around the specialization rather than as the full memory engine.
    The AntTrail framing matters for scope. This paper evaluates the repository-level repair setting, while the parent
memory engine targets broader cross-domain retrieval and context management. The results therefore characterize the
coding specialization, not the complete AntTrail system.
5.3 Practical Implications
The most direct implication is lower token cost. If the agent receives fewer irrelevant file regions and shorter command
outputs, it pays for less input context and often needs fewer exploratory turns. This matters for repository-level repair
because the expensive part of many runs is not only patch generation, but the repeated process of finding the files,
symbols, and tests that matter.
    ContextSniper also makes the agent’s working context more predictable. Raw file reads and shell commands can vary
widely in size, and a single broad output can dominate a turn. Context control gives the system a place to enforce budgets
and remove output that is unlikely to help. The same logs can make debugging easier: developers can inspect which
snippets were retrieved, which outputs were suppressed, and whether the final patch touched files that ContextSniper
surfaced early.


                                                                 13
Preprint                                    ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



    For local-codebase workflows, this design preserves the agent’s normal interaction style. Developers do not need to
manually curate a prompt for each issue, and the agent does not need to ingest an entire repository. Instead, ContextSniper
provides a local memory layer that can be queried and refreshed as the repository changes. This is especially useful for
private or evolving codebases where relevant evidence is spread across implementation files, tests, configuration, and
runtime output.
5.4 Limitations and Future Work
Broader conclusions about repair success require more standardized validation, more tasks, and more repositories. A
SWE-bench Verified evaluation would strengthen the evidence, and future work should report confidence intervals so
token reductions can be separated from benchmark and validation noise. The present results should also not be read as
an evaluation of the full cross-domain AntTrail engine.
    ContextSniper also depends on retrieval and indexing quality. Embedding models, chunking strategies, symbol
extraction, and structural links all affect which snippets are surfaced. If the relevant evidence is weakly signaled, spread
across unusual files, or visible only after running tests, retrieval may miss it. Better hybrid retrieval, subtask-aware recall,
and failure-aware reranking are natural extensions.
    Context control introduces its own risk. The system can remove useful evidence if the sniping policy is too aggressive
or if the task requires broad architectural context. Agents may need an explicit way to request broader output, expand a
shortened region, or mark a file as important. Future work should study learned sniping policies, budget sweeps, and
human-inspectable traces that explain why particular snippets were kept or removed. Commit-history memory is another
promising direction because prior changes and linked issues may reveal repair-relevant files that current-source retrieval
alone misses.

6 Conclusion
ContextSniper makes repository code-context access more token-efficient by removing unwanted context and preserving
repair-relevant evidence. Across Claude Code and OpenClaw, the results show substantial reductions in context cost
while keeping the host agent’s normal workflow. More broadly, the paper argues that coding agents should treat code
memory and context control as explicit infrastructure, not as incidental byproducts of raw file reads and shell commands.


References
 [1] J. Yang, C. E. Jimenez, A. Wettig, K. Lieret, S. Yao, K. R. Narasimhan, and O. Press, “SWE-agent: Agent-computer
     interfaces enable automated software engineering,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15793
 [2] M. Vogel, F. Meyer-Eschenbach, S. Kohler, E. Grünewald, and F. Balzer, “Codebase-memory: Tree-sitter-based
     knowledge graphs for LLM code exploration via MCP,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.27277
 [3] C. E. Jimenez, J. Yang, A. Wettig, S. Yao, K. Pei, O. Press, and K. R. Narasimhan, “SWE-bench: Can language
     models resolve real-world GitHub issues?” in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
     [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06770
 [4] Y. Zhang, H. Ruan, Z. Fan, and A. Roychoudhury, “AutoCodeRover: Autonomous program improvement,” 2024.
     [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.05427
 [5] C. S. Xia, Y. Deng, S. Dunn, and L. Zhang, “Agentless: Demystifying LLM-based software engineering agents,”
     2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01489
 [6] Anthropic, “Claude code documentation: Overview.” [Online]. Available: https://code.claude.com/docs/en/
     overview
 [7] M. Kang, W.-N. Chen, D. Han, H. A. Inan, L. Wutschitz, Y. Chen, R. Sim, and S. Rajmohan, “ACON: Optimizing
     context compression for long-horizon LLM agents,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.00615
 [8] N. F. Liu, K. Lin, J. Hewitt, A. Paranjape, M. Bevilacqua, F. Petroni, and P. Liang, “Lost in the middle: How
     language models use long contexts,” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 12, pp.
     157–173, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03172
 [9] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. Küttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih,
     T. Rocktäschel, S. Riedel, and D. Kiela, “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks,”
     in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, 2020, pp. 9459–9474. [Online]. Available:
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401


                                                              14
Preprint                                  ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



[10] S. Ouyang, W. Yu, K. Ma, Z. Xiao, Z. Zhang, M. Jia, J. Han, H. Zhang, and D. Yu, “RepoGraph: Enhancing AI
     software engineering with repository-level code graph,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.14684
[11] DataGallery, “AntTrail: Agent memory engine,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://gitcode.com/datagallery/AntTrail
[12] B. Yang, J. Ren, S. Jin, Y. Liu, F. Liu, B. Le, and H. Tian, “Enhancing repository-level software repair via
     repository-aware knowledge graphs,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.21710
[13] B. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Li, M. Gao, Y. Xie, H. Sun, and D. Chen, “Improving code localization with repository
     memory,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.01003
[14] A. Gallant, “ripgrep.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep
[15] OpenClaw Contributors, “OpenClaw: Personal AI assistant.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/openclaw/
     openclaw
[16] S. Chen, S. Lin, Y. Shi, H. Lian, X. Gu, L. Yun, D. Chen, L. Cao, J. Liu, N. Xia, and Q. Wang, “SWE-Exp:
     Experience-driven software issue resolution,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.23361
[17] F. Mu, J. Wang, L. Shi, S. Wang, S. Li, and Q. Wang, “EXPEREPAIR: Dual-memory enhanced LLM-based
     repository-level program repair,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.10484
[18] Q. Wang, Z. Cheng, S. Zhang, F. Liu, R. Xu, H. Lian, K. Wang, X. Yu, J. Yin, S. Hu, Y. Hu, S. Zhang,
     Y. Liu, R. Chen, and H. Wang, “MemGovern: Enhancing code agents through learning from governed human
     experiences,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.06789
[19] K. Shen, J. Zhang, C. Sun, W. Zeng, and Y. Yue, “Structurally aligned subtask-level memory for software
     engineering agents,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.21611
[20] M. Li, T. Chen, G. Yang, and J. Li, “MEMCoder: Multi-dimensional evolving memory for private-library-oriented
     code generation,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.24222
[21] M. Li, L. H. Xu, Q. Tan, T. Cao, and Y. Liu, “Learning to commit: Generating organic pull requests via online
     repository memory,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.26664
[22] H. Jiang, Q. Wu, C.-Y. Lin, Y. Yang, and L. Qiu, “LLMLingua: Compressing prompts for accelerated inference of
     large language models,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05736
[23] ——, “LongLLMLingua: Extending LLMs’ context windows without tuning,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.12957
[24] F. Xu, W. Shi, and E. Choi, “RECOMP: Improving retrieval-augmented LMs with compression and selective
     augmentation,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.04408
[25] C. Yoon, T. Lee, H. Hwang, M. Jeong, and J. Kang, “COMPACT: Compressing retrieved documents actively for
     question answering,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.09014
[26] Selective Context Contributors, “Selective Context: Compress input to ChatGPT or other LLMs,” 2023. [Online].
     Available: https://github.com/liyucheng09/Selective Context
[27] A. Chevalier, A. Wettig, A. Ajith, and D. Chen, “Compressing context to enhance inference efficiency of large
     language models,” in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
     2023, pp. 6322–6333. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.391/
[28] ctxbudgeter Contributors, “ctxbudgeter: ContextOps toolkit for production AI agents.” [Online]. Available:
     https://github.com/Kayariyan28/ctxbudgeter
[29] Token Reducer Contributors, “Token Reducer: Local-first context compression for Claude Code.” [Online].
     Available: https://github.com/Madhan230205/token-reducer
[30] RTK Contributors, “RTK: Rust token killer.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/rtk-ai/rtk
[31] Headroom Contributors, “Headroom: The context compression layer for AI agents.” [Online]. Available:
     https://github.com/headroomlabs-ai/headroom
[32] Bearing Contributors, “Bearing: Task runner for directing AI coding agents.” [Online]. Available:
     https://github.com/rocketvish/bearing
[33] S. Robertson and H. Zaragoza, “The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and beyond,” in Foundations and
     Trends in Information Retrieval, 2009, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 333–389.
[34] G. V. Cormack, C. L. A. Clarke, and S. Buettcher, “Reciprocal rank fusion outperforms condorcet and individual
     rank learning methods,” in Proceedings of the 32nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
     Development in Information Retrieval, 2009, pp. 758–759.



                                                            15
Preprint                                ContextSniper: AntTrail’s Token-Efficient Code Memory for Repository-Level Program Repair



[35] AGFS Contributors, “AGFS: Agent file system.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/c4pt0r/agfs
[36] Universal Ctags Contributors, “Universal ctags.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/universal-ctags/ctags
[37] Anthropic, “Claude models overview.” [Online]. Available: https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/about-claude/
     models/overview
[38] mem0 Contributors, “mem0: Universal memory layer for AI agents.” [Online]. Available: https:
     //github.com/mem0ai/mem0
[39] Letta Contributors, “Letta: Stateful agents and MemGPT.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/letta-ai/letta
[40] OpenViking Contributors, “OpenViking: Context database for AI agents.” [Online]. Available:
     https://github.com/volcengine/OpenViking
[41] TencentDB Agent Memory Contributors, “TencentDB Agent Memory.” [Online]. Available: https:
     //github.com/TencentCloud/TencentDB-Agent-Memory
[42] Serena Contributors, “Serena: Semantic coding toolkit for agents.” [Online]. Available: https:
     //github.com/oraios/serena
[43] LlamaIndex Contributors, “LlamaIndex: Framework for agentic applications and retrieval-augmented generation.”
     [Online]. Available: https://github.com/run-llama/llama index




                                                          16
