MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                   1


        The Micro-Randomized Trial for Developing Digital Interventions:

             Experimental Design and Data Analysis Considerations



                  Tianchen Qian1, University of California, Irvine

                      Ashley E. Walton2, Dartmouth College

                  Linda M. Collins3, Pennsylvania State University

                     Predrag Klasnja4, University of Michigan

                Stephanie T. Lanza5, Pennsylvania State University

                    Inbal Nahum-Shani6, University of Michigan

                       Mashfiqui Rabbi7, Harvard University

                 Michael A. Russell8, Pennsylvania State University

                   Maureen A. Walton9, University of Michigan

                       Hyesun Yoo10, University of Michigan

                      Susan A. Murphy11, Harvard University
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            2


                                 Author Note

Each of the micro-randomized trials presented here have been partially presented in other papers

including experimental design papers, statistical methodology papers and papers with partial data

analysis results (see cites). High-level schematics of these micro-randomized trials can be found

at http://people.seas.harvard.edu/~samurphy/JITAI_MRT/mrts4.html.



1Tianchen Qian, University of California, Irvine. Dr. Qian was supported by National Institutes


of Health grants P50DA039838, R01AA023187, U01CA229437, and U54EB020404.
2Ashley E. Walton, Department of Philosophy, Dartmouth College.      Dr. Walton was supported

by National Institutes of Health grants RF1MH117813, P50DA039838, R01AA023187, and

U54EB020404
3Linda M. Collins, The Methodology Center and Department of Human Development & Family


Studies, The Pennsylvania State University. Dr. Collins was supported by National Institutes of

Health grants P50DA039838, R01AA022931, P01CA180945, and R01DA040480. Dr. Collins is

now at the Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, School of Global Public Health, New

York University.
4Predrag Klasnja, School of Information, University of Michigan.   Dr. Klasnja was supported by

National Institutes of Health grants R01HL125440, U01CA229445, and R01LM013107.
5Stephanie T. Lanza, Edna Bennett Pierce Prevention Research Center and Department of


Biobehavioral Health, The Pennsylvania State University. Dr. Lanza was supported by National

Institutes of Health grant P50DA039838.
6Inbal Nahum-Shani, Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan.   Dr. Nahum-Shani

was supported by National Institutes of Health grants: U01 CA229437, R01 DA039901, R01
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                          3


CA224537, R01 AA026574, R01 DK108678; and by Patient-Centered Outcomes Research

Institute grant PCS-2017C2-7613
7Mashfiqui Rabbi, Department of Statistics, Harvard University.   Dr. Rabbi was supported by

National Institutes of Health grants P50DA039838, R01AA023187, U01CA229437,

and U54EB020404.
8Michael A. Russell, The Methodology Center and Department of Biobehavioral Health, The


Pennsylvania State University. Dr. Russell was supported by National Institutes of Health grant

P50DA039838.
9Maureen A. Walton, Department of Psychiatry and Injury Prevention Center, University of


Michigan. Dr. Walton was supported by funding from the University of Michigan Injury

Prevention Center (CDC R49CE002099).
10Hyesun Yoo, Department of Statistics, University of Michigan. Dr. Yoo was funded by


National Institutes of Health grant R01AA023187.
11Susan A. Murphy, Departments of Statistics and Computer Science, Harvard University. Dr.


Murphy was supported by National Institutes of Health grants P50DA039838, R01AA023187,

U01CA229437, P41EB028242 and U54EB020404.



The corresponding author is Susan A. Murphy, Science Center 400 Suite, Harvard University,

One Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138-2901

The authors thank Amanda Applegate for helpful comments.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                         4


                                            Abstract

     Just-in-time adaptive interventions (JITAIs) are time-varying adaptive interventions that use

frequent opportunities for the intervention to be adapted—weekly, daily, or even many times a

day. The micro-randomized trial (MRT) has emerged for use in informing the construction of

JITAIs. MRTs can be used to address research questions about whether and under what

circumstances JITAI components are effective, with the ultimate objective of developing

effective and efficient JITAI.

     The purpose of this article is to clarify why, when, and how to use MRTs; to highlight

elements that must be considered when designing and implementing an MRT; and to review

primary and secondary analyses methods for MRTs. We briefly review key elements of JITAIs

and discuss a variety of considerations that go into planning and designing an MRT. We provide

a definition of causal excursion effects suitable for use in primary and secondary analyses of

MRT data to inform JITAI development. We review the weighted and centered least-squares

(WCLS) estimator which provides consistent causal excursion effect estimators from MRT data.

We describe how the WCLS estimator along with associated test statistics can be obtained using

standard statistical software such as R (R Core Team, 2019). Throughout we illustrate the MRT

design and analyses using the HeartSteps MRT, for developing a JITAI to increase physical

activity among sedentary individuals. We supplement the HeartSteps MRT with two other

MRTs, SARA and BariFit, each of which highlights different research questions that can be

addressed using the MRT and experimental design considerations that might arise.

Keywords: Micro-randomized trial (MRT); health behavior change; digital intervention; just-in-

time adaptive intervention (JITAI); causal inference; intensive longitudinal data
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            5


                                     Translational Abstract

     With the development of smartphone and wearable sensors, we have unprecedented

opportunity to use mobile devices to facilitate healthy behavior change. Mobile health

interventions, such as push notifications containing helpful suggestions have the potential to

make an impact as people go about their day-to-day lives. However, delivering too many push

notifications or delivering these notifications at the wrong time could be irritating and

burdensome, making the intervention less effective. Therefore, it is crucial to find out when, in

what context, and what intervention content to deliver to each person to make the intervention

the most effective.

     In this paper we review the micro-randomized trial (MRT), a study design that can be used

to improve mobile health interventions by answering the above questions. In an MRT, each

person is repeatedly randomized to receive or not receive an intervention, often hundreds of

thousands of times throughout the trial. We review the key elements of MRTs and provide three

case studies of real-world MRTs in various application realms including physical activity and

substance abuse. We also provide an accessible review of data analysis methods for MRTs..
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                              6


             The Micro-Randomized Trial for Developing Digital Interventions:

                    Experimental Design and Data Analysis Considerations

       Just-in-time adaptive interventions (JITAIs), which are receiving a tremendous amount of

attention in many areas of behavioral science (Nahum-Shani et al., 2018), are time-varying

adaptive interventions delivered via digital technology. JITAIs use a high intensity of adaptation;

in other words, there are frequent opportunities for the intervention to be adapted (i.e., to change

based on information about the individual)—weekly, daily, or even many times a day. This high

intensity of adaptation is facilitated by the ability of digital technology to continuously collect

information about an individual’s current context and use this information to make treatment

decisions. A JITAI may constitute an entire digital intervention, or it may be one of multiple

components in an intervention.

       JITAIs typically include “push” intervention components, in which the intervention

content is delivered to individuals via system-initiated interactions, such as push notifications via

a smartphone or smart speaker or haptic feedback on a smart watch. In addition to push

components, digital interventions may also include “pull” intervention components, which

provide content that individuals can access any time, at will. The effectiveness of pull

components rests on the assumption that the individual will recognize a need for support and

actively decide to access the pull component (Nahum-Shani et al., 2018). By contrast, push

intervention components do not require that the participant recognize when support is needed—

or even remember that support is available on the digital device. Instead, sensors on smart

devices continuously monitor an individual’s context, enabling intervention content to be

delivered when needed, irrespective of whether the individual is aware of this need.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                             7


       Push components are a potentially powerful and versatile intervention tool, but they have

an inescapable downside: they may interrupt individuals as they go about their daily lives. If

these interruptions become overly burdensome or irritating, there is a risk of disengagement with

the intervention (Rabbi et al., 2018). Furthermore, repeated notifications used to provide push

interventions can lead to habituation (Dimitrijević et al., 1972)—the reduced level of

responsiveness resulting from frequent stimulus exposure. When habituation occurs, the

individual’s attention to the push stimulus deteriorates, possibly to the point at which the

individual no longer notices the stimulus. Thus, it is good practice to limit content delivered by

push intervention components to the minimum needed to achieve the desired effect. This can be

accomplished by strategically developing JITAI push components that deliver content only in the

contexts in which they are most likely to be effective and eliminating any low-performing push

components that do not result in enough behavior change to compensate for the effort required

by the participant.

       The above considerations justify optimizing, that is, developing effective and efficient

JITAI components prior to evaluation in an RCT and subsequent implementation. The micro-

randomized trial (MRT; Klasnja et al., 2015; Liao et al., 2016) has emerged for use in informing

the construction of JITAIs. MRTs operate in, and take advantage of, the rapidly time-varying

digital intervention environment. MRTs can be used to address research questions about whether

push intervention components are effective and in which time-varying states they are effective,

with the ultimate objective of developing effective and efficient JITAI components.

       The purpose of this article is to clarify why, when, and how to use MRTs; to highlight

elements that must be considered when designing and implementing an MRT; to review the data

analysis methods for conducting primary and secondary analyses using data from MRTs; and to
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                                            8


discuss the possibilities this emerging optimization trial design offers for future research in the

behavioral sciences, education, and other fields. Throughout we use the HeartSteps project, in

which an MRT was conducted to inform the design of a JITAI aimed at increasing physical

activity among sedentary individuals, to illustrate the MRT design and the data analysis methods.

This is supplemented with two other case studies, SARA and BariFit, each of which highlights

different research questions that can be addressed using the MRT and experimental design

considerations that might arise. This article lies in between the high-level overview of the MRT

for health scientists provided by Klasnja et al. (2015) and the statistical articles, by Liao et al.

(2016) and Boruvka et al. (2018) that are primarily focused on methods for primary and

secondary analyses and sample size calculations. As compared to these articles, this one provides

a more in-depth and updated discussion of considerations that inform the design of an MRT

based on our experiences conducting MRT studies, along with a more detailed and accessible

review of the data analysis methods.



                  Elements of Just-in-Time Adaptive Intervention Components

        To consider the experimental MRT design it is necessary to first consider the design

elements of JITAI components1. While reading this article one should be mindful of the

distinction between experimental design and intervention design. For example, the MRT is a

type of experimental design, and the JITAI is a type of intervention design. Here we briefly

review key elements of the JITAI design (in italics) that will be discussed in more detail later.

        Like most interventions, digital interventions are typically developed with the objective

of improving one or more long-term health outcomes, which we will call distal outcomes. The


1
  As described below, these design elements may be considered components of a JITAI if they are separated out for
study; see Collins (2018). Thus, in this article we are using the term component broadly.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            9


strategy for improving the distal outcomes involves the provision of one or more intervention

components (or components for short). We focus on JITAIs here, but we emphasize that digital

interventions may be a mix of JITAI components and other types of components, such as

components that might be delivered to all individuals. Each JITAI may have two or more

component options (e.g., deliver an SMS message saying “The weather forecast says it will be a

beautiful day for a walk!” or do not deliver an SMS message). Ideally the components and

component options of all evidence-based interventions are conceived based on a conceptual

model that has been informed by theory and empirical evidence (Collins, 2018; Nahum-Shani et

al., 2018). A conceptual model specifies how each component of an intervention is designed to

affect distal outcomes via one or more specific mediators, or proximal outcomes, that are part of

the hypothesized causal process through which the intervention is intended to work. These

proximal outcomes may, in turn, directly affect the distal outcomes; or they may be part of a

longer causal chain in which proximal outcomes affect subsequent proximal outcomes until the

distal outcome is reached.

       The high intensity of adaptation that characterizes JITAI components means interventions

may be varied frequently by providing individuals with different component options at

prespecified times called decision points; decision points are pre-determined times at which it

might be useful to deliver a component option. Tailoring variables, which are observations of

context such as aspects of the individual’s current external and intrapersonal environments and

the individual’s history, are often used to decide which component options to deliver. Note that

the component options themselves may include content that is tailored to observations of context

(e.g., an SMS message would present different content depending on the weather or the person’s

location). However, here, the term tailoring variable is used to describe observations of context
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                                           10


which are used to decide which component option to deliver to an individual. At each decision

point, a decision rule links the tailoring variables with the component options, specifying which

component option to provide based wholly or partially on observations of context available to the

smart device.



                                          Introduction to the MRT

        The MRT is an optimization trial design that can be used to assess the performance of

JITAI components and component options. For example, an MRT can be used to address

questions, such as in which time-varying context each component option is best and in which

time-varying context it is best to provide no intervention. In short, an MRT is used to optimize

the JITAI decision rules, with the ultimate goal of developing an effective and efficient JITAI.

Below we review the essential features of an MRT. In the section that follows we will illustrate

these features through three case studies.

        Components and component options: An MRT can be used to investigate one or more

components, each of which includes two or more options. Not all JITAI components are

necessarily investigated in a single MRT. Components that are included in the intervention, but

are not randomized in an optimization trial, are called constant components 2 (Collins, 2018).

        Decision points: In an MRT the decision points may be specific to a particular JITAI

component; that is, each component may have its own set of decision points. The discussion of

the case studies highlights that this specification must be made carefully because the frequency

and timing of decision points can be critical for intervention effectiveness.




2
  The term “constant” means the options of a component are not being manipulated in the trial; constant does not
refer to time-invariant. A constant component may or may not be time-varying and may or may not be adaptive.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                          11


       Randomization facilitates the estimation of causal effects. A primary rationale for

randomization in any experimental design is that it enhances balance in the distribution of

unobserved variables across groups receiving different treatments, reducing the number of

alternative explanations for why a group assigned one treatment has better outcomes than a

group assigned a different treatment. In an MRT participants are sequentially randomized to the

different component options at hundreds or even thousands of decision points over the course of

the experiment. These repeated randomizations in an MRT play essentially the same role: the

randomization enhances balance in the distribution of unobserved variables between decision

points assigned to different intervention options. This enables the investigator to use the results

as a basis for answering causal questions concerning whether a component option has the desired

effect on the proximal outcome and whether this effect varies with time and context.

       Randomization probabilities: These are the pre-specified probabilities of randomly

assigning participants to the options of a particular component. As will be shown in the case

studies, the randomization probabilities associated with the component options in an MRT

(unlike most classical factorial experiments) are not necessarily equal. For example, because

participant burden is an important consideration when selecting randomization probabilities,

burden may be reduced strategically by assigning larger randomization probabilities to less

burdensome options.

       Observations of context: These can be variables of practical or scientific interest recorded

at a particular decision point, or summaries of variables observed prior to the decision point.

Observations of context may be gathered by means of self-report measures; recorded as part of

the treatment (e.g., number of coaching sessions attended in the past week); or captured by

mobile devices (e.g., location, weather, movement), wearable sensors (e.g., heart rate, step
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                         12


count), and other electronic devices (e.g., wireless scales participants use to weigh themselves).

In the design of an MRT, observations of context play two key distinct roles.

       First, observations of context may serve to restrict feasible intervention component

options to contexts in which the component options are appropriate based on scientific grounds,

practical and ethical considerations. For example, the scientific team may decide a priori that in

certain contexts (e.g., when the person is driving a car) deployment of a specific component

option, such as a push notification suggesting physical activity, would be unsafe for the

participant. Hence, randomization to component options in an MRT, such as a push notification

vs. “do nothing”, will not occur when the participant is driving a car, and the “do nothing” option

will be selected automatically. In this case, the resulting MRT data will only inform the

development of future JITAIs in which information about driving is a tailoring variable in the

JITAI—namely, JITAIs in which if observations of context indicate that the individual is driving

a car, only the “do nothing” option will be possible.

       Second, observations of context may be collected in an MRT because they are potential

moderators that can be used to identify which option performs best in which context, thus

informing the development of decision rules in the optimized JITAI. We will illustrate a few

moderation analyses in the section “Illustrative Analysis for the HeartSteps MRT.”



                                           Case Studies

       In this section, we review three case studies of MRTs; each case study highlights research

questions that can be addressed using the MRT and experimental design considerations that

might arise. Case Study 1 describes HeartSteps. The goal of the HeartSteps project was to

develop JITAI components to increase physical activity among sedentary individuals (Klasnja et
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                         13


al., 2015, 2018). This case study will be used to illustrate the essential features of an MRT

reviewed above as well as the data analysis. Case Study 2 describes the Substance Abuse

Research Assistant (SARA), a project to develop an app to collect data on substance use and

related factors among at-risk adolescents and young adults. This case study highlights how

MRTs can be used to optimize a JITAI aimed at improving data collection (Rabbi et al., 2018).

Case Study 3 describes BariFit, an intervention to support weight maintenance for individuals

who have undergone bariatric surgery (Ridpath, 2017). This case study demonstrates how it can

be appropriate to include both baseline-randomized components and micro-randomized

components in an optimization trial. Figures giving gestalt overviews of each study can be found

at http://people.seas.harvard.edu/~samurphy/JITAI_MRT/mrts4.html.

Case Study 1: HeartSteps

        The long-range objective of the HeartSteps project is to improve the outcome of heart

health in adults by helping individuals with heart disease achieve and maintain recommended

levels of physical activity.

Intervention Components and Their Options. The HeartSteps intervention included several

components. Here we focus on two push components investigated by the MRT. Figure 1

provides the conceptual model for how the two components should impact the distal outcome,

long-term physical activity, through impacting proximal outcomes.

        The first component, Activity Suggestions, consisted of contextually tailored suggestions

intended to increase opportunistic physical activity, in which brief periods of movement or

exercise are incorporated into daily routines. Activity suggestions were provided as push

notifications delivered to the participant’s smartphone. There were three different options for this

component: participants could receive either a walking suggestion (instructing a walking
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                             14


activity) that took 2-5 minutes to complete, an anti-sedentary suggestion (instructing brief

movements) that took 1-2 minutes to complete, or no suggestion. HeartSteps illustrates that

intervention components can, and in fact often do, include an option of “do nothing.”

       The second component, Planning Support, consisted of support for planning how to be

active the next day. This component had three options. Participants could receive either a prompt

asking them to select a plan from a list containing their own past activity plans (structured

planning); a prompt asking them to type their plan into a text box (unstructured planning); or no

prompt.

       HeartSteps project also included several constant components, for example a self-

monitoring component that assisted participants in tracking their activity and a library of

previously sent activity suggestions. Thus, HeartSteps illustrates how it is possible to select only

a subset of the components in a digital intervention for experimentation in an MRT.

Decision Points. Originally the investigative team planned to have a decision point every minute

of the waking day to allow the Activity Suggestions component to arrive in real time. However,

prior data on employed individuals indicated that the greatest within-person variation in step

counts occurred around the morning commute, lunch time, mid-afternoon, evening commute,

and after dinner times (Klasnja et al., 2015), indicating that at these times there is greater

potential to increase activity. In HeartSteps, the actual times of these decision points were

specified by each individual at the start of the study, and thus varied by participant. These five

times were the decision points for the Activity Suggestions component. On the other hand,

because the Planning Support component involved planning the following day’s activity, the

natural choice of a decision point was every evening at a time specified by each participant at the

beginning of the study.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                              15


The HeartSteps Optimization Trial.

This 42-day MRT focused on investigating the Activity Suggestions and the Planning Support

components. Each component included three options.

Proximal Outcomes. Both components focused primarily on increasing daily physical activity

through walking; therefore, step count was used to form the proximal outcomes. Minute-level

step counts were passively recorded using a wristband activity tracker. The proximal outcome for

the Planning Support component was the total number of steps taken on the subsequent day

because the planning was for the next day’s physical activity. Deciding how to operationalize the

proximal outcome for the Activity Suggestions component was more challenging. A 5- or even

15-minute duration for the total step count following a decision point would be too short, as the

individual might not have enough time to act on the suggestion. On the other hand, since some

activity suggestions only asked participants to engage in a short bout of activity to disrupt their

sedentary behavior, the research team was concerned that a proximal outcome that was longer,

like an hour, would be too noisy to detect the impact of the anti-sedentary suggestions.

Ultimately, the team settled on the total number of steps taken in the 30 minutes following each

decision point.

Observations of Context. In HeartSteps, several observations of context were used to restrict the

feasible options of the Activity Suggestions component. First, the “do nothing” option was

always employed if sensors on the phone indicated that the individual might be operating a

vehicle. Second, because the contextually tailored activity suggestions asked participants to

walk, the research team felt it would be inappropriate to send one of these suggestions if sensors

indicated that the participant was already walking or running or just finished an activity bout in
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            16


the previous 90 seconds. Third, participants could turn off the activity notifications for 1, 2, 4, or

8 hours, to enable them to exert some control over the delivery of the suggestions.

       Several additional observations of context were collected in HeartSteps for exploratory

moderation analyses after study completion. For example, current location, weather, and number

of days in the study were potential moderators for use in understanding when and in which

context it is best to provide an activity suggestion in a future HeartSteps JITAI.

       Further HeartSteps illustrates how observations of context can inform the content of an

intervention component: the content of the suggestion in the Activity Suggestions component

was tailored according to the participant’s current location, current weather conditions, time of

day, and day of the week. This was intended to make the suggestions immediately actionable and

more easily incorporated into a participant’s daily routine (Rabbi et al., 2018).

Primary and Secondary Research Questions. The HeartSteps MRT was conducted to address

the following primary research question:

       1. Is there an overall effect of Activity Suggestions? On average across time, does

           delivering activity suggestions increase physical activity in the 30 minutes after the

           suggestion is delivered, compared to no suggestion?

                   a. If so, does the effect deteriorate with time (day in study)?

Examples of secondary research questions include

       2. Is there an overall effect of Planning Support? On average across time, does

           delivering a daily activity planning support prompt increase physical activity the

           following day compared to no prompt?

                   a. If so, does the effect deteriorate with time (day in study)?
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            17


       3. Concerning the Activity Suggestions component: On average across time, is there an

           overall difference between the walking activity suggestion and the anti-sedentary

           activity suggestion on the subsequent 30-minute step count?

Additional exploratory analyses were planned with the objective of understanding whether

context moderated the effects of either of the components. For example, the team was interested

in whether location moderated the effectiveness of the Activity Suggestions component and

whether day of week moderated the effectiveness of the Planning Support component. These

moderation analyses are for use in developing decision rules informing the delivery of the

components (e.g., perhaps the activity suggestion is effective only when the individual is at home

or work, indicating that the next iteration of HeartSteps should deliver the activity suggestions

only in these locations).

Randomization. Figure 2 provides a schematic to illustrate the randomization for the Activity

Suggestions component. During pilot testing to prepare for the HeartSteps MRT, the

randomization probabilities for the Activity Suggestions component were initially selected to

deliver an average of two activity suggestions per day across the five decision points. Two

suggestions per day was deemed the appropriate frequency to minimize burden and reduce the

risk of habituation. However, it became clear that, on average, approximately one suggestion per

day was never seen because individuals left their phones in a bag or coat pocket. The

investigators decided that to increase the likelihood of at least two activity suggestions being

seen, it was necessary to deliver more than two suggestions. Therefore, the randomization

probabilities were adjusted before beginning the MRT so that, on average, three activity

suggestions would be delivered per day. As Figure 2 illustrates, the randomization probabilities

assigned to the options of the Activity Suggestions component were walking activity suggestion,
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                          18


0.3; anti-sedentary suggestion, 0.3; no suggestion, 0.4. Thus the probability of receiving a

suggestion (as opposed to no suggestion) was 0.6, resulting in an expected average of three

suggestions delivered per day, with two out of the three seen per day.

       Because for the Planning Support component there was one decision point per day, in the

evening, at a convenient time selected by the participant, the feasible options of the Planning

Support component were not restricted based on observations of context; the randomization

probabilities assigned were structured planning prompt, .25; unstructured planning prompt, .25;

no prompt, .5.

Case Study 2: Substance Abuse Research Assistant (SARA)

       The goal of the Substance Abuse Research Assistant (SARA) project is to develop a

mobile application to collect self-report data about the time-varying correlates of substance use

among youth reporting recent binge drinking and/or marijuana use. Every day between 6 pm and

midnight, participants were to complete a survey to report their feelings and experiences for that

day. On Sundays, the survey included additional questions about their substance use that week,

such as frequency of use.

       The prospect of using mobile technology for this type of data collection is exciting. Most

youth own smartphones, so mobile technology can be a powerful tool to collect data on the

moment-to-moment influences on their substance use. However, this technology is useless if

they will not enter data. The aim of the SARA MRT was to examine several engagement

components designed to sustain or improve rates of self-reporting via the SARA app (distal

outcome).

Intervention Components and Their Options. Here, we focus on two of the four components

aimed at increasing and maintaining engagement in the SARA MRT (Rabbi et al., 2018). The
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                         19


Reciprocity Notification component consisted of a push notification sent 2 hours before the daily

data collection period (6pm to 12 midnight). There were two component options: a reciprocity

notification containing an inspirational message in the form of youth-appropriate song lyrics or

celebrity quote, or no notification. The Post-Survey Reinforcement component was delivered

immediately after completion of the survey. The two component options were a notification

containing a reward in the form of a meme or gif or no post-survey reinforcement. Only

individuals who completed the survey were eligible to receive the reward.

Decision Points. The two components had one decision point per day. For the Reciprocity

Notification component decision points were daily at 4 pm, after school but before the data

collection period. Post-Survey Reinforcement decision points immediately followed completion

of the survey.

The SARA Optimization Trial.

This 30-day MRT investigated multiple components including Reciprocity Notification and

Post-Survey Reinforcement. Each component had two options.

Measures of Proximal Outcomes. Because the Reciprocity Notification component was

intended to impact that evening’s data collection, the proximal outcome was whether or not

participants completed either the survey on that same day. By contrast, the Post-Survey

Reinforcement was intended to increase data collection on the following day; therefore, the

proximal outcome for this component was whether or not participants completed the survey on

the next day.

Observations of Context. In SARA, there was no practical or scientific justification for using

observations of context to restrict the feasible options of the Reciprocity Notification component.

This notification was programmed to be available for participants to read any time between
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                         20


delivery and midnight and hence could be attended to at the participant’s convenience. However,

feasible options of the Post-Survey Reinforcement component was restricted based on scientific

grounds. Specifically, because this component was intended to reward self-reporting via the

mobile app, participants were randomized to options of these components only if they completed

the survey.

       Observations of context were also collected in the SARA MRT for exploratory

moderation analyses after study completion. These observations included the day of the week,

the prior day’s self-reporting, as well as use of the SARA app unrelated to survey completion.

Primary and Secondary Research Questions. Research questions motivating the SARA MRT

included:

       1. Is there an overall effect of Reciprocity Notification? On average across time, does

              providing an inspirational message two hours before data collection result in

              increased completion of the daily survey on that same day compared to no

              inspirational message?

       2. Is there an overall effect of Post-Survey Reinforcement? On average across time,

              does providing a reward in the form of a meme or gif to those who completed the

              survey increase their survey completion on the next day compared to not providing a

              reward?

Additional exploratory analyses were planned with the objective of understanding whether

effects varied over time and whether observations of context, such as weekend/weekday or rating

of a meme or life insight, moderated effects.

Randomization. For both components, the randomization probabilities were .5 for deploy

notification and .5 for do not deploy notification.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                           21


Case Study 3: BariFit

        The goal of the BariFit project is to develop a digital intervention to provide low-burden

lifestyle change support to facilitate ongoing weight loss following bariatric surgery. The distal

outcome was achievement and maintenance of weight loss after bariatric surgery. As will be

shown below, the BariFit trial includes both micro-randomized and baseline-randomized

components and, therefore, is a hybrid of the classical factorial experiment and the MRT.

Intervention Components and Their Options. Four components of BariFit were examined in

the trial. The first two, Rest Days and Adaptation Algorithm, pertain to adaptive daily step goals.

Part of the BariFit intervention involved texting a suggested step goal for the day to each

participant each morning to provide guidance for progressively increasing physical activity. The

Rest Days component had two options: to have a day without a step goal on average one day per

week, or to have no rest days and receive the goal every day. The Adaptation Algorithm

component concerned how the suggested step goal was computed each day. The options of this

component were two different adaptation algorithms based on a participant’s recorded daily step

count over the previous ten days: one, the fixed percentile algorithm, provided less variability in

the goal suggestions, and the other, the variable percentile algorithm, provided more.

       The remaining two components were Activity Suggestions and Reminder to Track Food.

The Activity Suggestions component was similar to that described above in HeartSteps, except

that the suggestions were delivered via text messages instead of smartphone notifications. As in

HeartSteps, there were three component options for the Activity Suggestions: walking

suggestion; anti-sedentary suggestion; or no suggestion. The Reminder to Track Food component

consisted of a text message, delivered at the start of the day, reminding participants to record
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                           22


their food intake. This component had two options: send the reminder text message or do not

send the text message.

Decision Points. The Adaptation Algorithm and Rest Days components have one decision point

at the beginning of the use of the intervention. For Activity Suggestions, there were five daily

decision points, pre-specified by participants as times they thought they would be most likely to

have opportunities to be physically active. For Reminder to Track Food, there was one decision

point every morning.

The BariFit Optimization Trial.

The 120-day BariFit optimization trial investigated the four intervention components described

above; the Rest Days, Adaptation Algorithm, and Reminder to Track Food components had two

options, and the Activity Suggestions component had three options. This trial used a hybrid

experimental design that included two baseline-randomized components, in which randomization

occurred once at the outset, and two micro-randomized components. The Rest Days and

Adaptation Algorithm components were baseline-randomized, and the Contextually Tailored

Activity Suggestions and Reminder to Track Food components were micro-randomized.

       The decision about whether to use baseline randomization or micro-randomization for a

particular component depends on the research question being addressed. For the Rest Days and

Adaptation Algorithm components, the research question concerned which strategy for

delivering a time-varying treatment produced the better outcome; here the strategy was used

from the beginning and implemented in the same manner across the entire study. For the Rest

Days component, the investigators wanted to learn whether a strategy that involved having an

occasional rest from receiving the daily goal suggestion, as opposed to receiving the suggestion

daily, would result in a higher step count across the entire four-month study. Because the two
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            23


strategies were fixed across the entire study—in other words, a participant either received the

suggestions daily across the entire study or had an occasional rest day across the entire study—

baseline randomization was called for. For the Adaptation Algorithm component, the research

question concerned comparison of two different JITAIs for step goals. Each JITAI represents a

different component option. Thus, participants were randomized at baseline between the two

options.

Measures of Proximal Outcomes. For the Adaptation Algorithm and Rest Days components, the

proximal outcome was average daily step count across the 120-day study. For Contextually

Tailored Activity Suggestions, the proximal outcome was number of steps participants took in

the 30 minutes following randomization. For Reminder to Track Food, the proximal outcome

was the use of the Fitbit application to record food intake at any time on that day.

Observations of Context. In this study, there were no scientific or practical grounds to restrict

the feasible component options based on observations of context. The activity suggestions and

reminders were delivered via text message, which then remained on the participant’s phone

indefinitely and could be attended to at the participant’s convenience.

       Observations of context were collected primarily for use in subsequent exploratory

moderation analyses. Variables included time of day, daily weather conditions at the home

location, and prior step counts.

Primary and Secondary Research Questions. The research questions motivating the BariFit

MRT included:

       1. Is there an overall effect of Adaptation Algorithm? Does delivering a step goal

           computed using a variable percentile algorithm result in a greater average daily step

           count, compared to the fixed percentile algorithm?
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                         24


       2. Is there an overall effect of Contextually Tailored Activity Suggestions? On average

           across time, does delivering a text message with an activity suggestion tailored to the

           user’s context increase physical activity in the 30 minutes after the suggestion is

           delivered compared to no suggestion?

In addition, exploratory analyses were planned to examine how contextual variables, such as

time of day or prior step count, might moderate any observed effects.

Randomization. Randomization to options of the Adaptation Algorithm and Rest Days

components occurred once, before the start of the experiment, using randomization probabilities

of .5 for each of the two component options. For Contextually Tailored Activity Suggestions the

randomization probabilities were walking suggestion, .15; anti-sedentary suggestion, .15; no

suggestion, .70. For Reminder to Track Food the randomization probabilities were .5 for each of

the two component options.



                 Key Considerations When Planning and Designing an MRT

       In this section we discuss a variety of considerations that go into planning and designing

an optimization trial that involves micro-randomization, using the case studies as examples. A

summary of the key considerations is included in Table 1.

Importance of a Conceptual Framework

       Creation of a scientifically sound and well-specified conceptual model of an intervention

is an essential foundation for selection of both the intervention components and their respective

proximal outcomes (Collins, 2018; Nahum-Shani et al., 2018). Evaluation of a component in

terms of a proximal outcome rests on the assumption that success in affecting the proximal

outcomes will translate into success in affecting the distal outcomes. In other words, digital
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                           25


interventions, like most interventions, are based on mediation models, in which proximal

outcomes mediate the effect of the intervention components on distal outcomes. The idea is that

these proximal outcomes either directly affect the distal outcome (e.g., Planning Support leads to

increased activity in the form of the next day’s step-count, which leads to higher daily average

steps over the study duration) or form part of a causal chain in which proximal outcomes affect

subsequent proximal outcomes until the distal outcome is reached (e.g., Reminder to Track Food

leads to tracking food intake, which leads to better control of caloric intake, which leads to

weight maintenance). Therefore, the conceptual model must articulate all hypothesized mediated

paths.

         Note, however, that it is possible for an intervention component to be effective at

changing its intended proximal outcome, yet this change in the proximal outcome may not lead

to a desired change in a distal outcome. This can happen for a number of reasons, including that

the achieved effect on the proximal outcome is too weak to alter the distal outcome; the

hypothesized causal path was incorrectly specified; or the conceptual model is incomplete, for

example, it fails to specify that change in the proximal outcome can lead to some form of

compensatory behavior (e.g., a person who walked in response to Activity Suggestions walked

less at other times) that offsets its effect on the distal outcome.

Deciding Which Components to Examine Experimentally

         An investigator designing an MRT can broadly define the term “intervention component”

to suit the research questions at hand (Collins, 2018). In both BariFit and HeartSteps, the

intervention components were designed to have a health benefit, whereas in SARA the

intervention components were strategies to improve engagement in data collection. Note that an

intervention component might represent any aspect of an intervention that can be separated out
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                          26


for study, such as the delivery mechanism (e.g., delivering a message via a notification on

smartwatch or via a SMS text). There are limits on the number of intervention components that

can be experimentally examined due to (i) the likelihood that app software development cost

increases with the number of intervention components and (ii) the importance of ensuring that

combinations of intervention components and their options make sense from the participant’s

point of view.

       The case studies demonstrate that when conducting an optimization trial, it is not always

necessary or advisable to examine every component experimentally. Some components may be

considered necessary to implement the rest of the intervention. Examples include components

that provide foundational information or maintain interest in the intervention. Others may

already be supported by a sufficient body of empirical evidence or represent current standard of

care, so that further experimentation is unnecessary. Such components may be treated as

constants in the optimization trial; that is, they are provided to all participants in the same

manner. For example, in the SARA app involved a game-like aquarium environment, which in

the SARA MRT was a constant component. A constant component may in fact be a JITAI; the

aquarium environment is adaptive—badges and rewards are adapted to the participant’s

adherence over time. When constant components are included in an optimization trial, any

results concerning experimental components are conditional on the presence of the constant

components. Therefore, it is necessary to assume that any constant components are “givens” in

the intervention.

Approach to Randomization

       A decision requiring careful consideration on the part of the investigator is whether a

particular intervention component should be examined via micro-randomization or baseline
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                             27


randomization. As the BariFit case study illustrates, the MRT and the factorial experiment are

not mutually exclusive; an optimization trial can use hybrid designs that include a mix of micro-

randomized components and baseline randomized components. Each of these forms of

randomization addresses different kinds of research questions.

       The motivation for micro-randomizing an intervention component is to gather

information needed to optimize the design of a JITAI component. For example, the investigator

may wish to assess whether specific options of a component are more effective in some contexts

(where context includes recent exposure to the same or other push components), while other

options are more effective in other contexts. Micro-randomization is suitable only for a

component for which the goal is to develop a JITAI component. By contrast, baseline

randomization maybe used for all types (JITAI, non-adaptive, time-varying, non-time-varying)

of components. Indeed, baseline randomization of JITAI components can make practical sense if

the investigator is trying to choose between two well defined JITAI options for a component. For

example, recall that the Adaptation Algorithm component of BariFit involved two options. The

two options are both JITAIs that differ with respect to how the treatment would be varied across

time. Scientific interest lay in ascertaining which of the two pre-specified, fixed decision rules

for adapting step goals over time was more effective, not in developing the decision rules. Thus

the Adaptation Algorithm component was randomized at baseline. Unlike micro-randomization,

baseline randomization is not intended to enable causal inferences about how the relative effects

of intervention options vary by time-varying context.

       Once an investigator has decided to use micro-randomization with a particular

component, it is necessary to identify how often randomization can occur and to determine the

randomization probabilities. Taken together, these are an important determinant of participant
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                           28


burden. To obtain the most helpful scientific information, the investigator should do everything

possible to ensure that the level of burden associated with being a participant in the MRT does

not appreciably exceed that associated with the final design of the JITAI. In contrast to other

optimization trial experimental designs such as the factorial, in which randomization

probabilities are typically kept equal across all component options (i.e., if there are two options,

probabilities of .5 are used), in an MRT randomization probabilities often differ across options of

a component. This is because thoughtful selection of the randomization probabilities assigned to

each option is one way to minimize burden and habituation. For example, in BariFit the

expectation for the Activity Suggestions component was that participants would tolerate

approximately 1.5 activity suggestions per day. To achieve this rate, randomization probabilities

of .15 were used for each of the two activity suggestions and .7 for the option of no suggestion.

On the other hand, the two options for the Reminder to Track Food component were randomized

with probability .5 because an average of one reminder over each two-day period was seen as

tolerable.

How MRT Design Can Impact JITAI Design

        Any observations of context used to restrict the randomization will constrain the design

of the resulting JITAI. Recall that based on scientific and/or practical considerations the MRT

may be designed such that randomizations to specific component options occur only in pre-

specified contexts in which these component options are considered appropriate. For example,

given ethical and practical considerations, the HeartSteps MRT was designed such that in a

particular context (e.g., when the person is driving a car) only the do-nothing option is

appropriate. Hence, the experimental data from this trial will not provide information on the

effect of the Activity Suggestions component options in this context and consequently decision
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                        29


rules in the JITAI developed based on this MRT will provide only the do-nothing option in this

context. Similarly, based on scientific grounds, the SARA MRT was designed such that the

randomization to the options of the Post-Survey Reinforcement component did not occur if the

individual did not complete the daily survey. It follows that the decision rules in the JITAI

developed based on this MRT will provide only the do-nothing option if individuals did not

complete the survey.

       Which and how many decision points are selected for randomization in an MRT also may

have an impact on the design of the intervention. Sometimes it is not necessary to use an MRT to

establish the time of a decision point. For example, in SARA the decision point for the

Reciprocity Notification component was daily at 4 pm, as adolescents would likely be out of

school by then and this time is prior to the data collection period. Existing data can be

informative in identifying decision points; in HeartSteps and BariFit, this approach was used to

identify time points at which adults might be more responsive to an activity suggestion.

Sometimes, however, there are neither natural decision points nor indications from existing data.

In this case it may make sense to establish decision points as frequently as possible for the

purpose of the MRT, paired with low randomization probabilities to keep the overall number of

provided interventions manageable. Then, the resulting data can be analyzed to inform selection

of a subset of decision points for the intervention.

Measurement of Outcomes

       As the case studies illustrate, in an MRT the components are typically evaluated in terms

of time-varying proximal outcome variables. Different components in an intervention will likely

target different proximal outcomes, even though the distal outcome is the same for all

components in a particular digital intervention. Sometimes the proximal outcome is a short-term
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            30


measure of the distal outcome. For example, in SARA the distal outcome was overall survey

completion during the 30-day study. The proximal outcomes were short-term measures of survey

completion. For the Post-Survey Reinforcement component, this was completion on the same

day, and for the Reciprocity Notification component, this was completion on the next day. Other

times the proximal outcome is not a short-term measure of the distal outcome, but a different

variable entirely. In BariFit the distal outcome is weight loss, but the proximal outcome for the

Activity Suggestions component is the number of steps participants took in the 30 minutes

following randomization, and the proximal outcome for the Reminder to Track Food component

is use of the Fitbit application to record food intake. Because in an MRT the effectiveness of

intervention components is typically expressed in terms of measures of impact on proximal

outcomes, different components can be evaluated in terms of different outcomes, which represent

the mediators through which those components are hypothesized to influence the distal outcome.

       In any MRT it is necessary to determine not only how each outcome will be measured,

but when. If several components are being examined in a single MRT, this may differ across

components. It is necessary to select the timing of measurement of each outcome carefully

because effect size can vary over time. For example, in HeartSteps the Activity Suggestions

component was expected to have its greatest effect in the 30 minutes immediately following the

prompt, whereas the Planning Support component was expected to have its greatest effect over

the next 24 hours. Choosing the time frame for measuring the proximal outcome in an MRT can

be challenging and requires careful thought because a poor choice of timing of outcome

measurement has consequences for the scientific results. MRTs are conducted as individuals go

about their lives, and the complexities and contingencies of life can introduce noise. If an

outcome is measured too early, the effect may not yet have reached a magnitude that is
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                           31


detectable against this noisy background. If it is measured too late, any effect may have decayed

to an undetectable level. In either case, the investigator may mistakenly conclude that an

effective component was ineffective. It should be noted that the general issue of measurement

timing is not specific to MRTs; it arises in all longitudinal research, even panel studies (Collins,

2006; Collins & Graham, 2002).

       Decisions about the timing of measurement in the case studies reported here were based

primarily on domain expertise. Although behavioral theory could help inform such decisions, at

this writing it is largely silent on behavioral dynamics, such as the timing and duration of effects

on time-varying variables. More detailed, comprehensive, and sophisticated theories about

behavioral dynamics, informed by empirical intensive longitudinal data, are urgently needed in

behavioral science. Until such theories are available to provide guidance, we recommend

measuring the proximal outcome as close to the delivery of a component, as often, and for as

long a duration as is reasonable without being overly burdensome; for example, in HeartSteps a

minute level step count is obtained, enabling exploratory analyses examining the choice of 30-

minute duration for the proximal outcome. Frequent measurement affords the best chance of

observing time-varying effects when they are at their peak.

Sample Size for an MRT

       When planning any experiment, it is necessary to identify which research questions are

primary and which are secondary, and then make the primary research questions the priority

when sizing the study. The case studies illustrate that sometimes a research question directly

addressed by one of the components in the experiment is considered secondary. For example, in

HeartSteps, the question of whether Planning Support has an overall effect is considered

secondary. In many traditional factorial designs, power is identical for all components under
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            32


investigation with a given expected effect size, making it common for all components to

correspond to primary research questions. By contrast, even with alternatives that assume the

same expected effect size, it is not unusual for power to vary considerably among components in

an MRT, because different components may have different numbers of decision points,

randomization probabilities, and restrictions to feasible component options. Furthermore, it is

common to consider alternative hypotheses with different expected effect sizes for different

components, as informed by the domain science. Finally, baseline components may have lower

power compared to micro-randomized components due to the inability to take advantage of

alternatives that permit accumulation of information within a person across time. Thus, when

planning an MRT to investigate multiple components, it is often convenient to size the study

based on one or two primary research questions and consider the remaining research questions

secondary. For detailed information on power, sample size calculation and MRTs, see Liao et al.

(2016); Qian et al. (2021). Sample size calculators can be accessed online at

https://statisticalreinforcementlearninglab.shinyapps.io/mrt_ss_continuous/ for continuous

outcomes and https://tqian.shinyapps.io/mrt_ss_binary/ for binary outcomes.



                                          Causal Effects

In this section, we define the causal excursion effect, a causal effect useful in the optimization of

JITAI components (e.g., Klasnja et al., 2018; Rabbi et al., 2020). We relate these causal effects

to potential primary and secondary hypotheses using HeartSteps.

Causal Excursion Effect

       The causal excursion effect can be precisely stated using the potential outcomes

framework (Robins, 1986, 1987; Rubin, 1978). For expositional clarity, we focus on the effect of
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                           33


a single intervention component with two intervention options, denoted by treatment 1 and

treatment 0. For the activity suggestions component in the HeartSteps MRT, they would be

delivering activity suggestion (treatment 1) and not delivering activity suggestion (treatment 0).

First, we briefly review the definition of a causal effect using a hypothetical setting with a single

time point treatment. Then we define the causal excursion effect of a time-varying intervention

component on a time-varying outcome. Throughout, upper case letters denote random variables

and lower case letters denote particular values of the random variables.

       In the potential outcomes framework for the setting where there is only a single time

point for possible treatment (see review by Rubin (2005)), the ideal but usually unattainable goal

is to determine the individual-level causal effect; that is, the difference between the outcome

under treatment 1 [denoted by 𝑌(1)] and the outcome under treatment 0 [denoted by 𝑌(0)] for

each individual. As an illustration, consider the first decision point in the HeartSteps MRT. At

this decision point individuals are randomly assigned to receive an activity suggestion or no

suggestion. The step count in the 30-minute window following this decision point is the

outcome. For each individual, the treatment effect at this decision point is the difference between

(a) the 30-minute step count had treatment been assigned to the individual (𝑌(1)) and (b) the 30-

minute step count had the treatment not been assigned to the individual (𝑌(0)). 𝑌(1) and 𝑌(0)

are called potential outcomes, because only one of the potential outcomes can be observed on

each individual, as both treatment and no treatment cannot be assigned to an individual at the

same time—this is the “fundamental problem of causal inference” (Holland, 1986). That is, for
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                                        34


𝐴 denoting the treatment assignment (𝐴 = 1 if treatment 1; 𝐴 = 0 if treatment 0) only 𝑌 =

𝐴𝑌(1) + (1 − 𝐴)𝑌(0) is observed.3

        A widely adopted solution to this fundamental problem is to estimate either an average

causal effect (i.e., 𝐸[𝑌(1)] − 𝐸[𝑌(0)]) or the average effect conditional on a pre-treatment

variable 𝑆. The latter effect is defined as the difference between the expected outcome for those

with 𝑆 = 𝑠 had they received the treatment (𝐸[𝑌(1)|𝑆 = 𝑠]) and the expected outcome for those

with 𝑆 = 𝑠 had they not received the treatment (𝐸[𝑌(0)|𝑆 = 𝑠]), namely, 𝐸[𝑌(1)|𝑆 = 𝑠] −

𝐸[𝑌(0)|𝑆 = 𝑠]. In the example for the first decision point in the HeartSteps MRT, 𝑆 might be the

individual’s current location (home, work or other), current weather, gender, and/or baseline

activity level. An interesting scientific question would be whether the value of 𝑆 modifies the

treatment effect. If 𝐴 is randomized, then the above difference in terms of potential outcomes can

be written in terms of expectations with respect to the distribution of the observations (𝑆, 𝐴, 𝑌). In

particular, if treatment is randomly assigned with a probability depending at most on 𝑆, the

causal effect, 𝐸[𝑌(1)|𝑆 = 𝑠] − 𝐸[𝑌(0)|𝑆 = 𝑠], is equal to 𝐸[𝑌|𝐴 = 1, 𝑆 = 𝑠] − 𝐸[𝑌|𝐴 = 0, 𝑆 =

𝑠] (see Rubin (2005)).

        To define the causal excursion effect of a time-varying intervention component on a

time-varying outcome, notation is needed to accommodate time. Consider HeartSteps. Recall the

HeartSteps MRT is a 42-day study and there are 5 decision points per day for the activity

suggestion component; thus, there are 𝑇 = 210 decision points overall. Let 𝑋𝑡 represent all



3
 This equality holds under the causal consistency assumption often made in causal inference literature, which
essentially requires that there are not multiple “versions” of the same treatment. In the example of activity
suggestions, to properly define “delivering an activity suggestion” as treatment 1 and “not delivering an activity
suggestion” as treatment 0, one would consider the walking suggestion and the anti-sedentary suggestion, as well as
various framings and contents of the suggestions, as a “compound treatment.” However, if one wishes to distinguish
between the effect of different versions of the suggestions in the analysis, then instead it would be necessary to
define the treatment to have more than two levels.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                                                 35


observations of context from decision point 𝑡 − 1 up to and including decision point 𝑡.4 In

HeartSteps, 𝑋𝑡 includes time in treatment, location, minute by minute step count after decision

point 𝑡 − 1 and prior to decision point 𝑡, and whether planning support was provided on the prior

evening. Let 𝐼𝑡 be the indicator of whether feasible options at decision point 𝑡 are restricted due

to the observations of context: 𝐼𝑡 = 1 means that the feasible options are not restricted—i.e., both

the “do nothing” option and the activity suggestion option are appropriate; 𝐼𝑡 = 0 means the

feasible options are restricted—i.e., the only component option to be employed at that decision

point is “do nothing”. Let 𝐴𝑡 represent the treatment indicator at decision point 𝑡, where 𝐴𝑡 = 1

means treatment is delivered and 𝐴𝑡 = 0 means treatment is not delivered (i.e., “do nothing” is

employed). Let 𝑌𝑡+1 represent the proximal outcome—here, the number of steps in the 30

minutes after decision point 𝑡. Denote by 𝐻𝑡 the individual’s history of data observed up to

decision point 𝑡 (excluding 𝐴𝑡 ): 𝐻𝑡 = (𝑋1 , 𝐼1 , 𝐴1 , 𝑌2 , … , 𝑋𝑡−1 , 𝐼𝑡−1 , 𝐴𝑡−1 , 𝑌𝑡 , 𝑋𝑡 , 𝐼𝑡 ). We denote

potential moderators by 𝑆𝑡 , which may be a subset of 𝐻𝑡 or summaries of variables in 𝐻𝑡 . In

HeartSteps, a potential moderator of the effect of the activity suggestion is the number of days in

treatment. As in the single time point setting, the inclusion of potential moderators, 𝑆𝑡 , means

that the desired causal excursion effect is conditional on these variables.

           To define the causal excursion effect, we use an extension of the potential outcomes

framework to the setting of intensive longitudinal data (Robins, 1986, 1987). Lower case letters

such as 𝑎𝑡 represent particular values of a random variable, here a possible value of the treatment

𝐴𝑡 . We use the overbar to represent present and past values, that is, 𝐴̅𝑡 = (𝐴1 , … , 𝐴𝑡 ) and 𝑎̅𝑡 =




4
    For simplicity, we omit the subscript i for the ith individual in 𝑋𝑖𝑡 and in all other variables unless necessary.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                                                  36


{𝑎1 , 𝑎2 , … , 𝑎𝑡 }5. The potential outcomes for 𝑌𝑡+1 , 𝑋𝑡 , 𝐼𝑡 , 𝐻𝑡 , 𝑆𝑡 are

𝑌𝑡+1 (𝑎̅𝑡 ), 𝑋𝑡 (𝑎̅𝑡−1 ), 𝐼𝑡 (𝑎̅𝑡−1 ), 𝐻𝑡 (𝑎̅𝑡−1 ), 𝑆𝑡 (𝑎̅𝑡−1 ), respectively. For example, 𝑌𝑡+1 (𝑎̅𝑡 ) is the 30-

minute step count outcome after decision point 𝑡 that would have been observed if the individual

had been assigned treatment sequence 𝐴̅𝑡 = 𝑎̅𝑡 . (For binary treatments, there could be 2𝑡

different potential outcomes, 𝑌𝑡+1 (𝑎̅𝑡 ).) This notation encodes the reality that an individual’s 30-

minute step count outcome after decision point 𝑡 may be impacted by all prior treatments, as well

as the current treatment. Note that unlike the potential proximal outcome 𝑌𝑡+1 (𝑎̅𝑡 ), potential

outcomes for 𝑋𝑡 , 𝐼𝑡 , 𝐻𝑡 and 𝑆𝑡 are indexed only by treatments, 𝑎̅𝑡−1, prior to decision point 𝑡. This

is because they are observed prior to 𝐴𝑡 .

         The causal excursion effect of activity suggestions on subsequent 30-minute step count

for individuals with 𝑆𝑡 = 𝑠 at decision point 𝑡 is defined as (Boruvka et al., 2018; Liao et al.,

2016)

               𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) = 𝐸[𝑌𝑡+1 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 , 1) − 𝑌𝑡+1 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 , 0) | 𝐼𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ) = 1, 𝑆𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ) = 𝑠].                 (1)

This formula contains the following information.

1. The effect, 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠), is causal because it is the expected value of the contrast in step counts in

    the 30 minutes following a decision point 𝑡 if the treatment were delivered at 𝑡 (i.e., the

    potential outcome 𝑌𝑡+1 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 , 1), where 1 inside the parentheses denotes 𝐴𝑡 = 1) versus if

    treatment were not delivered at 𝑡 (i.e., the potential outcome 𝑌𝑡+1 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 , 0), where 0 inside

    the parentheses denotes 𝐴𝑡 = 0).




5
  Note that the overbar in 𝐴̅𝑡 is not an abbreviation for the average; rather, it stands for the entire vector of treatment
assignment (𝐴1 , … , 𝐴𝑡 ) and similarly for 𝑎̅𝑡 . We use this notation to main consistency with the causal inference
literature (e.g., Robins, 1986, 1987).
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            37


2. The effect, 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠), is conditional. This effect is only among decision points at which the

   feasible component options are not restricted (𝐼𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ) = 1) and among individuals for

   whom the potential moderators take on the value of (𝑆𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ) = 𝑠) at decision point 𝑡.

3. The effect, 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠), is marginal in the following sense. In HeartSteps, the effect of the activity

   suggestions component at decision point 𝑡 is marginal (i.e., averaged) over potential

   moderators not contained in 𝑆𝑡 , the effects of interventions from prior decision points,

   observations from prior decision points, and the planning support component. This is

   especially important when interpreting the excursion aspect of the causal excursion effect;

   see the next bullet point. A special case, which is commonly encountered in practice, is that

   𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) will be replaced by 𝛽(𝑡) if estimation of the average causal effect of delivering an

   activity suggestion compared to no activity suggestion is desired; in this case 𝑆𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ) is

   omitted from (1), that is, 𝑆𝑡 is an empty set.

4. The effect, 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠), is an excursion from the “treatment schedule” prior to 𝑡. In an MRT the

   treatment schedule prior to 𝑡 is a set of probabilistic decision rules for treatment assignment

   at all decision points from the beginning of the intervention up to the previous decision point;

   that is, for assignments of 𝐴1 , … , 𝐴𝑡−1. In the case of an MRT, the treatment schedule will

   always involve some randomization, but may include non-random assignment as well. For

   example, in the HeartSteps MRT the treatment schedule included, at five decision points per

   day, the following: if observations of the context indicate that the feasible options are not

   restricted, deliver an activity suggestion with probability .6 and no suggestion with

   probability .4; otherwise, do not deliver an activity suggestion. Suppose the HeartSteps

   intervention also included a component that was not examined in the MRT—for example, a

   brief motivational video sent to all individuals every Monday morning at 8 am. In this case,
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                             38


   although there is no experimentation on this component, this component would be considered

   as part of the treatment schedule when interpreting the excursion.

       The causal excursion effect concerns the effect if the intervention delivery followed the

   current treatment schedule up to time 𝑡 − 1 and then deviated from the schedule to assign

   treatment 1 at decision point 𝑡, versus deviated from the schedule to assign treatment 0 at

   decision point 𝑡. In other words, the definition of 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) implicitly depends on the schedule

   for assigning 𝐴1 , … , 𝐴𝑡−1. Technically this excursion can be seen from (1), in that the

   expectation, 𝐸, is averaging over all prior treatments not contained in 𝑆𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ). For example,

   if 𝑆𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ) contains only current weather, then the excursion effect is averaging over all the

   variables other than current weather, including the schedule for assigning the prior

   treatments, 𝐴1 , … , 𝐴𝑡−1, as well as all prior treatments for other components such as the

   planning component.

       To understand the excursion effect better, consider two very different treatment

   schedules. In the first schedule, the treatment is provided on average once every other day; in

   the second schedule, the treatment is provided on average 4 times per day. Excursions from

   these two rather different schedules could result in very different effects, 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠). Indeed, in

   the latter schedule individuals may experience a great deal of burden and disengage with the

   result that 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) would be close to 0, whereas in the former schedule individuals may still

   be very engaged, resulting in a larger 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠). This dependence on the schedule for treatment

   assignment is different from the types of effects typically discussed in the causal inference

   literature (e.g., Robins, 1994; Robins, Hernán, & Brumback, 2000).

       A primary hypothesis test might focus on inference about the average excursion effect,

that is, (1) with 𝑆𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ) equal to an empty set. A secondary analysis might consider treatment
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                                        39


effect moderation by including in 𝑆𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ) potential moderators, such as location, or number of

days in treatment. Note that 𝑆𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ) does not need to include all true moderators for (1) to be a

scientifically meaningful causal effect; instead, it is appropriate to choose any 𝑆𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ) (or set it

to be the empty set), provided that (1) is interpreted as the causal excursion effect marginal over

all variables in 𝐻𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ) that are not included in 𝑆𝑡 (𝐴̅𝑡−1 ).

        Under the assumptions that (i) the treatment is sequentially randomized (which is

guaranteed by the MRT design) and (ii) the treatment delivered to one individual does not affect

another individual’s outcome6, the causal excursion effect 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) in (1) can be written in terms

of expectations over the distribution of the data as (proof in Boruvka et al., 2018)

        𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠)
                                                                                                             (2)
        = 𝐸[𝐸( 𝑌𝑡+1 ∣ 𝐴𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 , 𝐼𝑡 = 1 ) − 𝐸( 𝑌𝑡+1 ∣ 𝐴𝑡 = 0, 𝐻𝑡 , 𝐼𝑡 = 1 )|𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝑆𝑡 = 𝑠].

As equation (2) connects the causal excursion effect defined through potential outcomes with the

observed outcomes from an MRT, it provides the foundation for statistical methods such as the

WCLS estimator described in the estimation section below.

A Primary Research Question for HeartSteps

        As discussed above, a natural primary research question that can be addressed in the

HeartSteps MRT is whether there is an average causal excursion effect of delivering an activity

suggestion on the subsequent 30-minute step count of the user, compared to not delivering any

message. To express this average causal excursion effect, let 𝑆𝑡 be an empty set in (2) so that




6 This assumption is part of the commonly used SUTVA (Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption) and is
sometimes called “non-interference” in causal inference. If there are social network components in the digital
intervention, this assumption may be violated and an extension of the potential outcomes framework to incorporate
interference is needed (Hong & Raudenbush, 2006; Hudgens & Halloran, 2008).
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                              40


            𝛽(𝑡)
                                                                                                (3)
            = 𝐸[𝐸( 𝑌𝑡+1 ∣ 𝐴𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 , 𝐼𝑡 = 1 ) − 𝐸( 𝑌𝑡+1 ∣ 𝐴𝑡 = 0, 𝐻𝑡 , 𝐼𝑡 = 1 )|𝐼𝑡 = 1].

The outer expectation on the right-hand side in (3) represents an average across all possible

values of 𝐻𝑡 across individuals (except that it is still conditional on 𝐼𝑡 = 1). For example, 𝛽(𝑡) is

averaged over weather on that day and on previous days, and over all previous treatment

assignments. The average causal excursion effect, 𝛽0, is the average of 𝛽(𝑡) over 𝑡 with weights

equal to 𝑃(𝐼𝑡 = 1):

                                          ∑𝑇𝑡=1 𝑃(𝐼𝑡 = 1)𝛽(𝑡)
                                     𝛽0 =                     .                                 (4)
                                             ∑𝑇𝑡=1 𝑃(𝐼𝑡 = 1)

Here 𝑃(𝐼𝑡 = 1) denotes the probability of the feasible options being not restricted—i.e., both an

activity suggestion and “do nothing” are appropriate at decision point 𝑡. Thus 𝛽0 is a weighted

average (over time) of the average effects, 𝛽(𝑡), in which the weights are the probabilities of

both options being appropriate at each decision point. In the section “Illustrative Analysis for the

HeartSteps MRT,” we will conduct inference about a variety of causal excursion effects

including this average causal excursion effect, 𝛽0 .

A Selection of Secondary Research Questions for HeartSteps

       Secondary research questions may concern moderation of the causal excursion effect (by

a non-empty 𝑆𝑡 ). For example, one question might be whether the causal excursion effect

deteriorates with day in the MRT. In this case 𝑆𝑡 would include day𝑡 , the number of days in the

MRT for the decision point 𝑡. An example of a linear model for the causal excursion effect in

terms of how 𝛽(𝑡, day𝑡 ) is related to 𝑡 and day𝑡 is:

𝛽(𝑡, day𝑡 ) = 𝐸[𝐸( 𝑌𝑡+1 ∣ 𝐴𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ) − 𝐸( 𝑌𝑡+1 ∣ 𝐴𝑡 = 0, 𝐻𝑡 )|𝐼𝑡 = 1, day𝑡 ] = 𝛽int1 + 𝛽day day𝑡 .
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            41


Note that it is helpful to code day𝑡 = 0 for all decision points 𝑡 on the first day of MRT, in

which case 𝛽𝑖𝑛𝑡1 represents the causal excursion effect on the first day and 𝛽𝑑𝑎𝑦 represents the

change in the causal excursion effect with each additional day.

        Other examples of secondary research questions might be whether there is effect

moderation by other time-varying observations such as the current location of the user, or by

another intervention component being examined in the MRT such as the planning support

component in HeartSteps. In the latter example, let 𝑆𝑡 denote the indicator of whether a planning

support prompt was delivered on the evening prior to decision point 𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 = 1 if delivered, 𝑆𝑡 =

0 if not). (𝐴𝑡 still denotes the assignment of activity suggestion at decision point 𝑡.) A linear

model for the effect moderation by a planning support prompt on the previous evening is:

              𝛽(𝑡, 𝑆𝑡 ) = 𝐸[𝐸( 𝑌𝑡+1 ∣ 𝐴𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ) − 𝐸( 𝑌𝑡+1 ∣ 𝐴𝑡 = 0, 𝐻𝑡 )|𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝑆𝑡 ]

                              = 𝛽int2 + 𝛽prior−day−planning 𝑆𝑡 .

Here 𝛽int2 represents the causal excursion effect (of the activity suggestion) when the individual

did not receive planning support on the prior evening, and 𝛽int2 + 𝛽prior−day−planning represents

the causal excursion effect (of the activity suggestion) when the individual received planning

support on the prior evening.

        We can also include multiple moderators in 𝑆𝑡 at the same time. For example, if 𝑆𝑡 =

(𝑆𝑡,1 , … , 𝑆𝑡,𝑚 ) is a vector consisting of m variables, a linear model on the effect moderation

would be

                                𝛽(𝑡, 𝑆𝑡 ) = 𝛽int + 𝛽1 𝑆𝑡,1 + ⋯ + 𝛽𝑚 𝑆𝑡,𝑚 .

One may also include interaction terms between different entries of 𝑆𝑡 .

Additional Types of Causal Effects
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                                        42


         This paper focuses on the immediate causal excursion effect of a time-varying digital

intervention (“immediate” in the sense that the treatment, 𝐴𝑡 , and the corresponding proximal

outcome of interest, 𝑌𝑡+1 , are temporally next to each other without additional treatments in

between). One may also be interested in inference about a delayed causal excursion effect. For

example, when assessing the effect of the planning support component, it may be of interest to

assess the effect of a planning support prompt on the total step count over the next x days with

some x value chosen by the researcher. The generalization of the WCLS estimation method to

assess such delayed effects is given in Boruvka et al. (2018). This delayed causal excursion

effect averages over, in addition to the history information observed up to that decision point,

future treatments and future covariates up to when the corresponding outcome of interest is

observed.

        Other more familiar causal effects might also be estimated, but additional assumptions

are necessary. For example, suppose it can be safely assumed that the treatments prior to the

current decision point will not impact subsequent outcomes (i.e., these prior treatments do not

have delayed positive or negative effects). Then the potential outcomes such as

(𝐼𝑡 (𝑎̅𝑡−1 ), 𝑆𝑡 (𝑎̅𝑡−1 ), 𝑌𝑡+1 (𝑎̅𝑡 )) are actually (𝐼𝑡 (𝑎𝑡−1 ), 𝑆𝑡 (𝑎𝑡−1 ), 𝑌𝑡+1 (𝑎𝑡 )) and inference might

focus on the effect 𝐸[𝑌𝑡+1 (1) − 𝑌𝑡+1 (0)| 𝐼𝑡 (𝐴𝑡−1 ) = 1, 𝑆𝑡 (𝐴𝑡−1 )]. In terms of the primary

analysis of data from an MRT, we opt to make inference about causal excursion effects due to

both its interpretation and the minimal causal inference assumptions it requires. Of course, in

secondary and hypothesis-generating analyses, a variety of statistical assumptions would be

made to draw inferences about other causal effects.



               Methods for Estimating Causal Excursion Effects from MRT Data
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                                             43


         Generalized estimating equations (GEE; Liang & Zeger, 1986) and multi-level models

(MLM; Laird & Ware, 1982; Raudenbush & Bryk, 2002) have been used with great success to

analyze data from intensive longitudinal studies; at first glance they appear to be a natural choice

for conducting primary and secondary data analysis for MRTs. However, these methods can

result in inconsistent7 causal effect estimators for the causal excursion effect when there are

endogenous time-varying covariates—covariates that can depend on previous outcomes or

previous treatments (Qian et al., 2020). For example, in HeartSteps, the prior 30-minute step

count is likely impacted by prior treatment and is thus endogenous. We illustrate this

inconsistency in Appendix A.

         Here we review the WCLS estimator, developed by Boruvka et al. (2018), that provides a

consistent estimator for the causal excursion effect, 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠). For clarity, we provide an overview

of the estimation method used when the randomization probabilities are constant over time, as is

the case in HeartSteps, SARA, and BariFit. Recall that in HeartSteps a primary analysis might be

an assessment of the marginal causal excursion effect of the activity suggestions on the

subsequent 30-minute step count. Below we use the superscript T to denote the transpose of a

vector or a matrix.

         Suppose the model for the causal excursion effect is linear: 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) = 𝑠 T 𝛽 with 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠)

defined in (2) and for possibly vector-valued 𝑠 and 𝛽. For notational clarity, we always include

an intercept in 𝑠 T 𝛽, thus for a scalar 𝑆𝑡 , 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑆𝑡 ) = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑆𝑡 , and 𝛽 = (𝛽0 , 𝛽1 ). When 𝑆𝑡 in (2)

is the empty set, 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) = 𝛽0 , in which case 𝛽 = 𝛽0 . The goal is to make inference about 𝛽.




7
 An estimator is consistent if, roughly speaking, with large sample size it is very close to the true parameter value.
Even with a large sample size, an inconsistent estimator can be very different from the true parameter value. A
precise definition can be found in, for example, Lehmann & Casella (1998).
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                                       44


Note that the model for 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) characterizes the treatment effect (i.e., how the difference

between two potential proximal outcomes depends on 𝑆𝑡 ).

        The WCLS estimation procedure also requires a model for the main effect,

𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1|𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ), which characterizes the conditional mean of 𝑌𝑡+1 among individuals given

history 𝐻𝑡 and 𝐼𝑡 = 1. For concreteness, suppose the proposed model on the main effect is of the

form 𝑍𝑡T 𝛼, where 𝑍𝑡 is a vector of summaries of the observations made prior to decision point 𝑡

(i.e., summaries constructed from 𝐻𝑡 ), which are chosen by the researcher. We call 𝑍𝑡T 𝛼 a

working model8, as it will turn out that the estimator for 𝛽 will be consistent regardless of how

good (or bad) the proposed model for the main effect is (i.e., how well 𝑍𝑡T 𝛼 approximates the

true, unknown 𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1|𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 )). See Remarks 1 and 2 below.

        With a model for the causal excursion effect, 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) = 𝑠 T 𝛽, and a working model for the

main effect, 𝑍𝑡T 𝛼, the WCLS estimator is calculated as follows. Suppose (𝛼̂, 𝛽̂) is the (𝛼, 𝛽)

value that solves the following estimating equation
                       𝑛    𝑇
                    1                                                   𝑍𝑖𝑡
                      ∑ ∑ 𝐼𝑖𝑡 [𝑌𝑖,𝑡+1 − 𝑍𝑖𝑡T 𝛼 − (𝐴𝑖𝑡 − 𝑝)𝑆𝑖𝑡T 𝛽] [             ] = 0,                       (5)
                    𝑛                                              (𝐴𝑖𝑡 − 𝑝)𝑆𝑖𝑡
                      𝑖=1 𝑡=1


where 0 < 𝑝 < 1 is the constant randomization probability and 𝑖 is the index for the 𝑖-th

participant. The resulting 𝛽̂ is the WCLS estimator for 𝛽. Its standard error can be obtained

through standard software that implements GEE, as we will see in the next subsection.

Remarks.

    1. Even though it might appear to be so based on (5), the consistency of the WCLS

        estimator 𝛽̂ actually does not rely on a model such as 𝐸( 𝑌𝑡+1 ∣ 𝐴𝑡 , 𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ) = 𝑍𝑡T 𝛼 +


8
 A working model is a model that is adopted “for particular purposes with the knowledge that it may be flawed in
some other aspects” (Meng, 2016). Here we will not assume that the working model is the correct model that
generates the data.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                          45


     (𝐴𝑡 − 𝑝)𝑆𝑡T 𝛽 being correct. Apart from a few technical assumptions, the primary

     requirement needed for the consistency of 𝛽̂ , as shown in Boruvka et al. (2018), is that

     the causal excursion effect model is correct; i.e., 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) = 𝑠 𝑇 𝛽 holds for some 𝛽. This

     property is a robustness property of the WCLS estimator, and it justifies the statement

     earlier that the choice of the working model 𝑍𝑡𝑇 𝛼 does affect the validity of the inference.

     In the digital intervention context, this is of practical importance because vast amounts of

     data (i.e., high-dimensional 𝐻𝑡 ) on the participant have usually been collected prior to

     later decision points 𝑡. As a result, it is virtually impossible to construct a correct working

     model for 𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1|𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ). For example, in HeartSteps there are 210 decision points

     (210 = 42 days × 5 times/day) for each participant; 𝐻𝑡 can include the outcome,

     treatment, and covariates from all the past 𝑡 − 1 decision points, which means hundreds

     of variables at a later decision point 𝑡. In addition, 𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1 |𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ) may depend on

     variables in 𝐻𝑡 in a nonlinear way that is unknown to the researcher. Therefore, it is

     reassuring that the validity of the analysis result does not rely on the correctness of a

     model for a term, namely, 𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1 |𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ), that does not involve the treatment effect.

  2. While the choice of 𝑍𝑡 does not affect the consistency of 𝛽̂ , a better working model for

     𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1|𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ) has the potential to reduce the variance of 𝛽̂ . We recommend

     including in 𝑍𝑡 variables from 𝐻𝑡 that are likely to be highly correlated with 𝑌𝑡+1 . In

     HeartSteps a natural variable to include in 𝑍𝑡 is the step count in the 30 minutes prior to

     the decision point, as it is likely highly correlated with 𝑌𝑡+1. In Appendix C we illustrate

     through a simulation study that including variables in 𝑍𝑡 that are correlated with 𝑌𝑡+1 can

     reduce the variance of 𝛽̂ .
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                           46


  3. The estimation procedure produces an 𝛼̂ in addition to the WCLS estimator 𝛽̂ . We

     recommend not interpreting 𝛼̂, unless it is safe to assume that 𝑍𝑡𝑇 𝛼 is a correct model for

     𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1|𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ).

  4. For clarity we have focused on the setting where the randomization probability, 𝑝, is

     constant over time and across individuals. There are also practical settings where the

     randomization probability may change over time. For example, in a stratified micro-

     randomized trial, different micro-randomization probabilities are used depending on a

     time-varying variable such as a prediction of risk. If a prediction of high-risk occurs

     much less frequently than a prediction of low-risk, and the scientific team aims to provide

     an equal number of treatments at high-risk and low-risk times, then a higher

     randomization probability may be used when the individual is categorized as high-risk,

     and a lower randomization probability may be used when the individual is categorized as

     low-risk. See Dempsey, Liao, Kumar, & Murphy (2019) for details. The WCLS estimator

     presented here can be generalized to this setting and was studied in Boruvka et al. (2018).

     We include in Appendix B a generalized version of the WCLS estimator that allows the

     randomization probability to depend on the individual’s history, 𝐻𝑡 .

  5. The term (𝐴𝑖𝑡 − 𝑝) in (5) is a centered treatment indicator, where 𝐴𝑖𝑡 is centered by 𝑝,

     the known randomization probability. One can show that as long as 𝑝 does not depend on

     𝐻𝑡 , the same estimator 𝛽̂ results regardless of centering; in particular, centering is not

     necessary for providing the robustness described in 1. above. In the more general setting

     in which the randomization probability can be time-varying and dependent on an

     individual’s past, the centering provides this robustness (Boruvka et al., 2018). We

     included centering here to ease the transition to the general setting.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                          47

                    ̂ Using Standard Statistical Software
Estimating the WCLS 𝜷

       When the randomization probabilities are constant, standard statistical software that

implements GEE (Liang & Zeger, 1986), such as SAS (SAS Institute Inc., 2019), Stata

(StataCorp, 2019), and SPSS (IBM Corp., 2019), can be “tricked” into providing the WCLS

estimator 𝛽̂ and its standard error. Consider the SAS procedure PROC GEE (SAS Institute Inc.,

2019) and suppose the assumed causal excursion effect model is (6) and the working model for

𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1|𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ) is 𝑍𝑡𝑇 𝛼. Then the WCLS estimator 𝛽̂ and its standard error can be obtained by

the following steps: (i) set 𝐼𝑡 as the “weight,” (ii) choose a working independence correlation

structure, and (iii) fit GEE with dependent variable 𝑌𝑡+1 and independent variables 𝑍𝑡 and

(𝐴𝑡 − 𝑝)𝑆𝑡 . Then the estimated coefficient for (𝐴𝑡 − 𝑝)𝑆𝑡 is the WCLS estimate 𝛽̂ . Note that 𝑍𝑡

should contain the variables in 𝑆𝑡 . See Appendix F for example SAS code.

       This estimation procedure uses the GEE software to output the WCLS estimator, and, as

noted in the previous subsection, the WCLS estimator has the robustness property that a GEE

estimator does not typically have. Technically, this procedure works because the estimating

equation used by the GEE under (i), (ii), (iii) above is algebraically equivalent to (5), the

estimating equation of WCLS. To obtain appropriate standard errors for the estimator 𝛽̂ through

the above GEE fit, one needs to use the robust standard error (in SAS this is called “empirical

standard error” (SAS Institute Inc., 2019) and is the default output of PROC GEE). The robust

standard error accounts for the correlations among the proximal outcomes, 𝑌2 , 𝑌3 , … , 𝑌𝑇+1 , even

though we are using a working independence correlation structure. When the sample size is

small (e.g., 𝑛 < 50), we recommend the additional use of small sample corrections for both the

standard error and the degrees of freedom in the critical value for constructing confidence

intervals (Boruvka et al., 2018). R code (R Core Team, 2019) for the implementation with the
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                          48


small sample correction is available at

https://github.com/StatisticalReinforcementLearningLab/HeartstepsV1Code/blob/master/xgeepa

ck.R. See Appendix E for a synthetic data set for use in trying out R code for the WCLS

estimator.



                         Illustrative Analysis for the HeartSteps MRT

       Recall that the HeartSteps project involved a 6-week MRT for optimizing JITAI

components of a digital intervention to promote physical activity (n=37; Klasnja et al. (2018)). In

the illustrative analysis below, we focus on the activity suggestion component, which was

randomized at 5 decision points each day. We first address the primary research question by

estimating the marginal causal excursion effect of an activity suggestion versus no suggestion.

The primary analysis for HeartSteps is published in Klasnja et al., (2018); for completeness we

include this analysis as well as results of additional secondary analyses. As discussed before,

secondary research questions might include how the excursion effect changes over time and

whether the excursion effect is moderated by current location. We use the following variables in

the analysis:

   •   𝑌𝑡+1: log-transformed 30-minute step count following decision point 𝑡. This is the

       proximal outcome.

   •   𝐴𝑡 : indicator of whether an activity suggestion is delivered at decision point 𝑡. The

       randomization probability is .6 at decision points where delivering an activity suggestion

       is appropriate/feasible.

   •   𝑋𝑡,1: log-transformed 30-minute step count preceding decision point 𝑡. Because this

       variable is expected to be correlated with 𝑌𝑡+1, we will include 𝑋𝑡,1 in 𝑍𝑡 to reduce noise.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            49


   •   𝑋𝑡,2: day in the study, coded as 0, 1, 2, …, 41.

   •   𝑋𝑡,3: participant’s location at decision point t; coded as 1 if at home or at work, and 0 if at

       any other location.

   •   𝐼𝑡 : indicator of whether at decision point 𝑡 the feasible component options are restricted;

       𝐼𝑡 = 1 if delivering an activity suggestion is appropriate/feasible and 0 otherwise.

       Step count data are highly skewed; the log-transformation is used to make its distribution

more symmetric (and we added .5 to the step count before taking log to avoid log(0)). Although

the consistency of the WCLS estimator does not require 𝑌𝑡+1 to be symmetrically distributed,

symmetry improves the accuracy of the Normal approximation to the distribution of the test

statistic in small samples. R code (R Core Team, 2019) for the analysis can be downloaded at

https://github.com/tqian/paper_mrt_PsychMethods.

Question 1: On average across time, does delivering activity suggestions increase physical

activity in the 30 minutes after the suggestion is delivered, compared to no suggestion?

       We address this question using the WCLS estimator with 𝑆𝑡 equal to the empty set,

𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) = 𝛽0 , working model 𝛼0 + 𝛼1 𝑋𝑡,1 , and weight 𝐼𝑡 . Table 2 lists the results. The causal

effect of delivering an activity suggestion versus no suggestion on the log-transformed

subsequent 30-min step count, averaged over all decision points and all covariates, is 𝛽̂0 = 0.131

(p = 0.060, 95% CI = -0.006 to 0.268). This corresponds roughly to a 14% (= 𝑒 0.131 − 1)

increase in the average 30-minute step count (on its original scale), for sending an activity

suggestion versus no sending an activity suggestion.

Question 2: Does the effect of activity suggestions change with each additional day in

treatment?
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                             50


        This question is motivated by the hypothesis that the longer a person is in treatment, the

more they may habituate to the suggestions or become overburdened, leading them to become

less responsive. We set 𝑆𝑡 = 𝑋𝑡,2 (day in study), 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑡,2 , working model 𝛼0 +

𝛼1 𝑋𝑡,1 + 𝛼2 𝑋𝑡,2 , and weight 𝐼𝑡 . 𝑋𝑡,2 is included in 𝑆𝑡 to assess the effect moderation by day in the

study. Because 𝑋𝑡,2 is coded to start from 0, 𝛽0 represents the causal excursion effect on the first

day. Table 3 lists the results. There is a significant interaction between the activity suggestion

and day in the study: the causal effect of the activity suggestion changes by 𝛽̂1 = −0.018 with

each additional day in the study (p = 0.005, 95% CI = -0.031 to -0.006). Combining this with

𝛽̂0 = 0.507, the analysis indicates that sending an activity suggestion results in about 66% (=

𝑒 0.507 − 1) increase in the 30-minute step count on the first day of the study and only a 16% (=

𝑒 0.507−0.018×20 − 1) increase by midway through the 6 week study. A sensitivity analysis to the

linearity assumption (that the causal excursion effect changes linearly by day in the study) is

provided in Appendix D.

Question 3: Does the effect of delivering each type of activity suggestion versus no

suggestion depend on the individual’s current location (home/work, or other)?

        The activity suggestion involves suggestions for new physical activities; therefore, it is of

interest to examine whether its effect depends on the individual’s location, which might be a

proxy for interruptibility. Recall that on average half of the activity suggestions are walking

suggestions (instructing a walking activity that took 2-5 minutes to complete) and the remaining

half are anti-sedentary suggestions (instructing brief movements, such as stretching one’s arms).

Suppose we conjecture that effect moderation by location may differ between walking

suggestions and anti-sedentary suggestions. Therefore, here we assess whether the effect of

delivering each type of activity suggestion versus no suggestion is modified by the individual’s
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                         51


current location (home/work or other). We set 𝑆𝑡 = 𝑋𝑡,3 (indicator of being at home or work),

working model 𝛼0 + 𝛼1 𝑋𝑡,1 + 𝛼2 𝑋𝑡,3, and weight 𝐼𝑡 . We use two treatment indicators (indicator

of whether a walking suggestion is delivered, and indicator of whether an anti-sedentary

suggestion is delivered). In particular, the causal excursion effect for the walking suggestion is

modeled as 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑡,3, and the causal excursion effect for the anti-sedentary suggestion is

modeled as 𝛽2 + 𝛽3 𝑋𝑡,3. Table 4 lists the result. The causal excursion effect moderation by

location (home/work or other) is statistically significant for walking suggestions (𝛽̂1 = 0.377, p

= 0.049, 95% CI = 0.001 to 0.753). The effect moderation is not statistically significant for anti-

sedentary suggestions (𝛽̂3 = −0.142, p = 0.472, 95% CI = -0.540 to 0.256).



                                            Discussion

MRTs and the Meaning of Optimization

       MRTs fit naturally within the multiphase optimization strategy (MOST; e.g., Collins

(2018)), a framework for development, optimization, and evaluation of behavioral,

biobehavioral, and biomedical interventions. Collins (2018) defined intervention optimization as

“the process of identifying an intervention that provides the best expected outcome obtainable

within key constraints imposed by the need for efficiency, economy, and/or scalability” (p. 12).

In optimization of JITAI components, the key constraints typically are centered on efficiency,

which Collins defined as “the degree to which the intervention produces a good outcome while

avoiding wasting money, time, or any other valuable resource” (p. 14). Here efficiency primarily

means conserving participant time, energy, and attention and minimizing intrusiveness and

burden. An efficient JITAI component has a detectable effect in the desired direction, while

demanding the least of participants.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                               52


        MOST is made up of three phases: preparation, optimization, and evaluation. The

optimization phase includes one or more optimization trials that are conducted to assess the

performance of components and component options. This information is used to choose the best

components and component options and to eliminate those that perform poorly. The term

optimization trial does not refer to a single experimental design; instead, any of a wide variety of

experimental designs may be used for an optimization trial, including, in addition to the MRT,

the factorial (e.g., Collins, 2018); fractional factorial (e.g., Collins, 2018); the sequential,

multiple assignment, randomized trial (SMART; Nahum-Shani et al., 2012); and the system

identification experiment (Rivera et al., 2018). The selection of the design of the optimization

trial, like the selection of the design of any experiment, is driven by the nature of the scientific

questions to be addressed and the level and type of resources available to support

experimentation. Once the optimization phase of MOST has been completed, the investigator

may move to the evaluation phase, in which the performance of the digital intervention involving

JITAI components is compared to that of a suitable control treatment in an RCT.

        Inference concerning causal excursion effects fits naturally within the overall conceptual

framework of MOST. In this framework optimization is an ongoing process of intervention

improvement, in which each optimization trial provides information useful in generating

hypotheses about how to improve the intervention further and, therefore, informs the design of

the next optimization trial. For example, the following question can be characterized by the

causal excursion effect: If the treatment schedule for the activity suggestions were altered to use

individuals’ current location, would this improve subsequent 30-minute step count? In digital

interventions this inferential goal makes sense even in implementation as the team must

continually monitor and update the digital application software. Similarly, continually
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                             53


monitoring performance and assessing how to best improve the current schedule for assigning

treatments is natural. The causal excursion effect is useful for this purpose.

The Efficiency of MRTs

       MRTs offer considerable efficiency for two reasons. First, because each individual is

repeatedly randomized, statistical tests can trade bias and variance to test for treatment effects

based on a combination of between-person contrasts and within-person contrasts. This usually

enables statistical power to be maintained using far fewer subjects than would be needed in a

completely between-subjects experiment. Second, as the case studies illustrate, MRTs can be

(although are not necessarily) used to manipulate multiple components simultaneously, enabling

examination of several components in one efficient experiment. In this case, just as in the

traditional factorial experiment, a given level of statistical power can be maintained with a much

smaller sample size than would be required if a separate individual trial were conducted to

examine each component (Collins et al., 2009).

Using Moderation Effect Analysis to Inform JITAI Development

       Conducting moderation analyses, as well as exit interviews with participants, can be

useful both in formulating decision rules and in generating hypotheses to be tested in subsequent

optimization trials. For example, exit interviews might reveal that participants found that the

activity suggestions begin to appear similar as the trial progressed. This combined with the

evidence of moderation by day in study might motivate the development of different types of

activity suggestions that could be introduced after, say, intervention week 3. The moderating

effect of location is an early indication that the decision rules might specify no delivery of

activity suggestions when an individual is at the “other” location. In the case of HeartSteps,

findings from analyses such as those above, along with other moderation analyses and exit
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                                         54


interviews, informed a second MRT in which a personalization algorithm was used to reduce the

probability of receiving an activity suggestion when there is evidence of a decreasing effect. The

conjecture is that intervention effects will stop decaying if the probability of delivering an

activity suggestion to an individual is decreased whenever this individual is showing evidence of

a decreasing effect. This algorithm also used location as a moderator.

Internal and External Validity in MRTs

        Internal validity concerns the ability of the MRT to provide evidence for attributing the

estimated effects to the manipulation of the intervention component and not some systematic

error (Jüni et al., 2001). It is well known that in a two-arm randomized controlled trial, internal

validity may be harmed if the randomization, by chance, did not achieve balance in baseline

covariates between the two arms. One way to check for deviations that indicate a lack of internal

validity is to check whether the distribution of the baseline variables is dissimilar across the two

arms. For the MRT, because the randomization occurs sequentially over time, to check internal

validity one can check for balance in any covariates occurring prior to each decision point. In the

HeartSteps example, one can check whether, for participants at decision point 𝑡 at which the

feasible component options are not restricted (𝐼𝑡 = 1), the fraction of participants who are at

home (𝑆𝑡 = 1) is roughly the same among those randomized to an activity suggestion (𝐴𝑡 = 1),

compared to those randomized to no activity suggestion (𝐴𝑡 = 0). Other time-varying variables

observed prior to decision point 𝑡 besides location might be considered as well. 9 Because the

causal excursion effect is defined only for individuals at decision points where both “deliver a




9
 Note that this only applies to MRTs with constant randomization probability (such as the HeartSteps MRT). For
MRTs where the randomization probability may change depending on the individual’s history information, the
aforementioned covariate imbalance may no longer be indicative of lack of internal validity.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                             55


suggestion” and “do nothing” options are appropriate, these checks concern only these decision

points.

          External validity concerns the extent to which the estimated causal excursion effect in the

MRT provides a basis for generalization to a target population (Jüni et al., 2001). As is well

known, in randomized controlled trials external validity is enhanced by striving to enroll

participants who are representative of the target population. The same considerations hold in an

MRT. One way to assess the extent of external validity (to a defined target population) is to

check whether the distribution of the baseline variables is similar or dissimilar to that in the

target population. If some baseline variables are likely prognostic for the outcome or predictive

for the causal excursion effect, then a distributional imbalance in these variables between the

target population and the MRT sample raises concerns that the causal excursion effect estimated

from the MRT might not generalize to the target population. If such imbalances are not evident,

then greater confidence in the generalizability of the estimated causal excursion effect is

justified. In addition to the proximal outcome, 𝑌𝑡+1, an MRT can involve other outcomes, such as

the indicator of when only the “do nothing” intervention option is appropriate, 𝐼𝑡 , and the

potential moderators, 𝑆𝑡 . Therefore, any baseline variable that might be related to any of these

outcomes should be considered in checking for imbalance.

          The “excursion” aspect of the causal excursion effect is also important when considering

generalizability of the findings. The excursion aspect explicitly acknowledges that, prior to

decision point 𝑡, the individual was provided a particular treatment schedule as used in the MRT

(rather than some other fixed treatment assignment); the interpretation of the causal excursion

effect is the causal effect of excursions from the existing treatment schedule. In the case of the

HeartSteps MRT, the existing treatment schedule is “deliver activity suggestion with probability
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                           56


0.6, if the feasible component options are not restricted at the current decision point” and the

excursion effect is a contrast between sending activity message now and not sending activity

message now, assuming the user had experienced the existing treatment schedule up to now. The

excursion aspect makes it overt that the comparison of two excursions at time 𝑡 might depend on

how treatments were assigned prior to that time, which, in turn, depends on the treatment

schedule of the MRT. Therefore, the causal excursion effect estimated from an MRT with one

treatment schedule may differ from the causal excursion effect estimated from an MRT with a

different treatment schedule. Recall that the main goal of an MRT is to inform intervention

development by identifying ways to improve the existing treatment schedule (see the subsection

“Using Moderation Effect Analysis to Inform JITAI Development”); focusing on the causal

excursion effect allows the investigator to do exactly that.

        Another consideration related to generalizability is due to the rapid evolution of sensors.

For example, HeartSteps application was designed so that if the tracker indicated that the

individual is moving rapidly (thus the individual might be operating a vehicle) at a decision

point, the only feasible component option is “do nothing”. The rationale was to avoid distracting

the individual and potentially causing an accident. However, it might be that the individual is in

the passenger seat or is in a bus, in which case it may have been acceptable to send an activity

suggestion. As sensors improve, we may eventually be able to discriminate between instances in

which the individual is operating a vehicle and instances in which this is not the case. The

HeartSteps MRT data does not provide information about the usefulness of the activity

suggestions in this latter case.

Limitations and Future Directions
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            57


       More work is needed to integrate MRTs into the general MOST framework. In this article

we discussed the role of the MRT in optimization of decision rules for individual components of

a digital intervention. However, in MOST the ultimate goal is optimization of the intervention as

a whole, rather than optimization of individual intervention components (although the latter may

be a useful step along the way). This is because the costs and effects associated with individual

intervention components may not be strictly additive. For example, there may be economies of

scale that provide cost savings when two components are delivered together; or the combined

effect of two components may be less than the sum of their individual effects. Further research is

needed to determine how best to use the results of an MRT in optimization of the whole

intervention.

       One principle of the MOST framework is continual optimization (Collins, 2018), which

states that optimization is an ongoing process of continual improvement of interventions. In the

ever-changing digital environment, particularly when the intervention goes to scale, continual

optimization on a rapid timetable is essential. One way to accomplish this would be to conduct

MRTs on one or more experimental components in a digital intervention in deployment, in much

the same way experimental items are included in each graduate record exam (Educational

Testing Service, 2017) to inform development of future exams. As new knowledge is gained, the

digital intervention will incrementally improve, and updated versions can be pushed out to users.

We see this as an intriguing idea that has the potential to maintain and increase the effectiveness

of a digital intervention in an efficient and economical manner.

       In the introduction to this article, we mentioned that MRTs are predominantly used to

examine push intervention components, but they could be used to examine pull components as

well. For example, consider the setting in which an individual requests content to help manage a
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                             58


cigarette craving; in this case the device could respond in a variety of ways, such as providing

different ordered lists of strategies. It might be useful to experiment with the different orderings

of the list so that individuals can more quickly access a strategy that is useful in their current

context. In this case, the decision point for the intervention is the user’s request for craving

strategies, which then, in an MRT, leads to the randomization of the order in which those

strategies are presented.

       In the three case studies presented here, the objective of the study was to inform the

development of decision rules; once formed these decision rules would be constant across

individuals. Thus, although the intervention options delivered to different individuals at different

times and in different contexts varies, the way the decision is made about which intervention

option to deliver is identical for all participants. An exciting future direction is personalized

interventions, in which the decision rules are person-specific. Personalized interventions have the

potential to be highly engaging, responsive, and effective. Currently, methods for developing

personalized interventions are being developed in the reinforcement learning field (Liao et al.,

2020; Zhou et al., 2018).

                                            Conclusions

       Digital interventions, which offer the potential to reach unprecedented numbers of

individuals with convenient and engaging behavioral interventions, represent an exciting new

direction in intervention science. The MRT is an optimization trial design that is particularly

useful for JITAIs because it operates in, and takes advantage of, the rapidly changing

environments in which JITAIs are implemented. The MRT fits well within the MOST

framework, which calls for conducting one or more optimization trials to obtain the information

needed to optimize an intervention prior to evaluation. In this article, we reviewed three case
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                           59


studies to illustrate a number of considerations that arise when planning and implementing

MRTs. MRTs are a rigorous and efficient way to gain the scientific information needed to select

the right tailoring variables, decision rules, and decision points to make up a JITAI. Using the

potential outcomes framework, we defined the causal excursion effect for use in optimizing a

JITAI component. We discussed primary and secondary hypotheses concerning causal excursion

effects based on MRT data. We reviewed the WCLS estimator, which is a consistent estimator

for the causal excursion effect, and we describe how to obtain the WCLS estimator via standard

statistical software. We illustrated WCLS by analyzing the marginal and moderated causal

excursion effects using data from the HeartSteps MRT and discussed how the results of these

analyses can inform the optimization of a JITAI intervention component. We hope this article

will be a helpful resource for investigators who are developing digital interventions that involve

JITAIs.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                                             60


Figure 1. A conceptual model for the two push components in HeartSteps: Activity Suggestions and Planning Support.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                                                            61


Figure 2. Schematic of randomization for the Activity Suggestions component in the Heart Steps micro-randomized trial (MRT). In
each of the 42 days of the experiment, at each prespecified time of randomization, tm, where m=1 to 5, an assessment was made of
whether the intervention was disabled, or the participant was driving or walking. If any of these was “yes,” no randomization was
performed. Otherwise, the individual was randomized to be shown a walking activity suggestion (p=.30), anti-sedentary suggestion
(p=.30), or no suggestion (p=.40).
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                      62


     Table 1. Key Considerations When Designing an MRT.
      Conceptual framework:
         • Specify how each intervention component is designed to affect distal outcomes
              via the proximal outcomes; the proximal outcomes are part of the hypothesized
              causal process through which the intervention is intended to work.
      Components to Examine Experimentally:
         • An experimental component can represent any aspect of an intervention that
              can be separated out for study.
         • Constant components are components that do not require experimentation.
      Randomization:
         • Micro-randomization. Suitable when the goal is to optimize a JITAI (construct
              decision rules, ascertain tailoring variables).
                   o Randomization probabilities may reflect burden considerations. For
                       example, in implementation over x months, if around y push
                       interventions per day/month would constitute an acceptable level of
                       burden for individuals, then the choice of the randomization probability
                       will be informed by this consideration.
         • Baseline randomization. Suitable for already constructed component options of
              all types (JITAI, non-adaptive, time-varying, non-time-varying). For example,
              randomization at baseline between two well defined JITAI options (each with
              prespecified decision rules and tailoring variables).
      MRT Design Impacts JITAI Design:
         • If observations of context are used to restrict the feasible intervention
              component options (e.g., if the individual is driving, then the only feasible
              option is “do nothing”) then data from the MRT is only useful for developing
              JITAIs that incorporate the same restrictions.
         • The decision points in the MRT should include all possible decision points
              considered in the JITAI design.
      Measurement of Outcomes:
         • The duration over which the proximal outcome is measured is an important
              consideration: too long a duration and the effect of the options will have
              decayed; too short a duration and the effect may not have yet occurred.
      Sample size:
         • Size the study according to the primary research questions.
         • Sample size calculator can be accessed online at
              https://statisticalreinforcementlearninglab.shinyapps.io/mrt_ss_continuous/ for
              continuous outcomes and https://tqian.shinyapps.io/mrt_ss_binary/ for binary
              outcomes.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                    63


Table 2. Estimated main effect of activity suggestions on proximal outcome

 Variable                       Estimate 95% LCL 95% UCL               SE Hotelling t        p
 Intercept                 𝛼0      1.783        1.537       2.029 0.121         217.3 <0.001
 Past 30-min step count    𝛼1      0.414        0.351       0.476 0.031         181.2 <0.001
 Activity suggestion       𝛽0      0.131       -0.006       0.268 0.067          3.79  0.060

Note. LCL (UCL) represents lower (upper) confidence limit. SE represents standard error. LCL,

UCL, SE, and p are corrected for small sample size using method in (Liao et al., 2016; Mancl &

DeRouen, 2001). The degrees of freedom for the Hotelling t test is (1, 34).
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                       64


Table 3. Estimated effect of activity suggestion on proximal outcome as a linear function of time

in study

                                                95%        95%
 Variable                           Estimate    LCL        UCL       SE   Hotelling t  p
 Intercept                    𝛼0       2.003     1.765      2.240   0.117      294.7 <0.001
 Past 30-minute step count    𝛼1       0.412     0.351      0.473   0.030      189.6 <0.001
 Time (in days)               𝛼2      -0.011    -0.020     -0.001   0.005        5.09 0.031
 Activity suggestion          𝛽0       0.507     0.201      0.814   0.151      11.37 0.002
 Activity suggestion x Time
                               𝛽1     -0.018    -0.031     -0.006 0.006            9.19    0.005
 (in days)

Note. LCL (UCL) represents lower (upper) confidence limit. SE represents standard error. LCL,

UCL, SE, and p are corrected for small sample size using method in (Liao et al., 2016; Mancl &

DeRouen, 2001). The degrees of freedom for the Hotelling t test is (1, 32).
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                     65


Table 4. Estimated effect of walking suggestion / anti-sedentary suggestion on proximal outcome,

moderated by location (home/work or other)

 Variable                                Estimate 95% LCL        95% UCL         SE Hotelling t         p
 Intercept                       𝛼0         1.715    1.461          1.968     0.124     191.3      <0.001
 Past 30-minute step count       𝛼1         0.414    0.351          0.477     0.031     182.0      <0.001
 At home/work                    𝛼2         0.143   -0.083          0.368     0.110       1.67      0.205
 Walking Suggestion              𝛽0         0.050   -0.167          0.267     0.106       0.22      0.640
 Walking Suggestion x At
                                 𝛽1          0.377       0.001        0.753   0.184        4.18     0.049
 home/work
 Anti-sedentary Suggestion       𝛽2          0.092      -0.166        0.351   0.127        0.53     0.472
 Anti-sedentary Suggestion
                                 𝛽3         -0.142      -0.540        0.256   0.195        0.53     0.472
 x At home/work

Note. LCL (UCL) represents lower (upper) confidence limit. SE represents standard error. LCL,

UCL, SE, and p are corrected for small sample size using method in (Liao et al., 2016; Mancl &

DeRouen, 2001). The degrees-of-freedom for the Hotelling t test is (1, 30).
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                      66


Table 5. Estimated effect of activity suggestion on proximal outcome, moderated by whether

activity planning support was received on previous evening

 Variable                                Estimate 95% LCL        95% UCL         SE Hotelling t          p
 Intercept                       𝛼0         1.764    1.511          2.017     0.124     201.3       <0.001
 Past 30-minute step count       𝛼1         0.414    0.351          0.476     0.031     180.5       <0.001
 Planning on previous day        𝛼2         0.050   -0.106          0.205     0.076       0.43       0.518
 Activity suggestion             𝛽0         0.113   -0.035          0.261     0.073       2.43       0.129
 Activity suggestion x
                                 𝛽1         0.046       -0.228        0.320   0.134          0.12    0.734
 Planning on previous day

Note. LCL (UCL) represents lower (upper) confidence limit. SE represents standard error. LCL,

UCL, SE, and p are corrected for small sample size using method in (Liao et al., 2016; Mancl &

DeRouen, 2001). The degrees-of-freedom for the Hotelling t test is (1, 32).
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                          67


Reference

Boruvka, A., Almirall, D., Witkiewitz, K., & Murphy, S. A. (2018). Assessing time-varying

     causal effect moderation in mobile health. Journal of the American Statistical Association,

     113(523), 1112–1121.

Collins, L. M. (2006). Analysis of longitudinal data: The integration of theoretical model,

     temporal design, and statistical model. In Annual Review of Psychology (Vol. 57).

     https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.57.102904.190146

Collins, L. M. (2018). Optimization of Behavioral, Biobehavioral, and Biomedical Interventions

     - The Multiphase Optimization Strategy (MOST). In Springer.

Collins, L. M., Dziak, J. J., & Li, R. (2009). Design of experiments with multiple independent

     variables: A resource management perspective on complete and reduced factorial designs.

     Psychological Methods, 14(3), 202–224. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0015826

Collins, L. M., & Graham, J. W. (2002). The effect of the timing and spacing of observations in

     longitudinal studies of tobacco and other drug use: Temporal design considerations. Drug

     and Alcohol Dependence, 68(SUPPL.). https://doi.org/10.1016/s0376-8716(02)00217-x

Dempsey, W., Liao, P., Kumar, S., & Murphy, S. A. (2019). The stratified micro-randomized

     trial design: Sample size considerations for testing nested causal effects of time-varying

     treatments. ArXiv: 1711.03587.

Dimitrijević, M. R., Faganel, J., Gregorić, M., Nathan, P. W., & Trontelj, J. K. (1972).

     Habituation: effects of regular and stochastic stimulation. Journal of Neurology,

     Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 35(2). https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.35.2.234

Educational Testing Service. (2017). The official guide to the GRE General Test (3rd ed.).

     McGraw-Hill.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                            68


Holland, P. W. (1986). Statistics and causal inference. Journal of the American Statistical

     Association, 81(396), 945–960.

Hong, G., & Raudenbush, S. W. (2006). Evaluating kindergarten retention policy: A case study

     of causal inference for multilevel observational data. Journal of the American Statistical

     Association, 101(475), 901–910. https://doi.org/10.1198/016214506000000447

Hudgens, M. G., & Halloran, M. E. (2008). Toward causal inference with interference. Journal

     of the American Statistical Association, 103(482), 832–842.

     https://doi.org/10.1198/016214508000000292

IBM Corp. (2019). IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows.

Jüni, P., Altman, D., & Egger, M. (2001). Assessing the quality of controlled clinical trials. BMJ,

     323(7303), 42–46.

Klasnja, P., Hekler, E. B., Shiffman, S., Boruvka, A., Almirall, D., Tewari, A., & Murphy, S. A.

     (2015). Microrandomized trials: An experimental design for developing just-in-time

     adaptive interventions. Health Psychology, 34(S), 1220.

Klasnja, P., Smith, S., Seewald, N. J., Lee, A., Hall, K., Luers, B., Hekler, E. B., & Murphy, S.

     A. (2018). Efficacy of contextually tailored suggestions for physical activity: A micro-

     randomized optimization trial of HeartSteps. Annals of Behavioral Medicine : A Publication

     of the Society of Behavioral Medicine, 53(6), 573–582. https://doi.org/10.1093/abm/kay067

Laird, N. M., & Ware, J. H. (1982). Random-effects models for longitudinal data. Biometrics,

     38(4), 963–974.

Lehmann, E. L., & Casella, G. (1998). Theory of Point Estimation. In Design (Vol. 41, Issue 3).

     Springer.

Liang, K.-Y., & Zeger, S. L. (1986). Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear models.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                         69


     Biometrika, 73(1), 13–22.

Liao, P., Greenewald, K., Klasnja, P., & Murphy, S. (2020). Personalized heartsteps: A

     reinforcement learning algorithm for optimizing physical activity. Proceedings of the ACM

     on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, 4(1).

     https://doi.org/10.1145/3381007

Liao, P., Klasnja, P., Tewari, A., & Murphy, S. A. (2016). Sample size calculations for micro-

     randomized trials in mHealth. Statistics in Medicine, 35(12), 1944–1971.

Mancl, L. A., & DeRouen, T. A. (2001). A covariance estimator for GEE with improved small-

     sample properties. Biometrics, 57(1), 126–134. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0006-

     341X.2001.00126.x

Meng, X. L. (2016). Discussion: Should a Working Model Actually Work? In International

     Statistical Review (Vol. 84, Issue 3). https://doi.org/10.1111/insr.12180

Nahum-Shani, I., Qian, M., Almirall, D., Pelham, W. E., Gnagy, B., Fabiano, G. A.,

     Waxmonsky, J. G., Yu, J., & Murphy, S. A. (2012). Experimental design and primary data

     analysis methods for comparing adaptive interventions. Psychological Methods, 17(4).

     https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029372

Nahum-Shani, I., Smith, S. N., Spring, B. J., Collins, L. M., Witkiewitz, K., Tewari, A., &

     Murphy, S. A. (2018). Just-in-time adaptive interventions (JITAIs) in mobile health: Key

     components and design principles for ongoing health behavior support. Annals of

     Behavioral Medicine, 52(6), 446–462.

Qian, T., Cohn, E., & Murphy, S. A. (2021). Statistical Designs For Developing Personalized

     Mobile Treatment Interventions. In O. Sverdlov & J. van Dam (Eds.), Digital Therapeutics:

     Scientific, Statistical, Clinical, and Regulatory Development Aspects. Chapman &
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                        70


     Hall/CRC.

Qian, T., Klasnja, P., & Murphy, S. A. (2020). Linear mixed models under endogeneity:

     Modeling sequential treatment effects with application to a mobile health study. Statistical

     Science, 35(3), 375–390.

R Core Team. (2019). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. https://www.r-

     project.org

Rabbi, M., Philyaw-Kotov, M., Li, J., Li, K., Rothman, B., Giragosian, L., Reyes, M., Gadway,

     H., Cunningham, R., Bonar, E., Nahum-Shani, I., Walton, M., Murphy, S., & Klasnja, P.

     (2020). Translating Behavioral Theory into Technological Interventions: Case Study of an

     mHealth App to Increase Self-reporting of Substance-Use Related Data. ArXiv:2003.13545.

Rabbi, M., Philyaw Kotov, M., Cunningham, R., Bonar, E. E., Nahum-Shani, I., Klasnja, P.,

     Walton, M., & Murphy, S. (2018). Toward Increasing Engagement in Substance Use Data

     Collection: Development of the Substance Abuse Research Assistant App and Protocol for a

     Microrandomized Trial Using Adolescents and Emerging Adults. JMIR Research

     Protocols, 7(7). https://doi.org/10.2196/resprot.9850

Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. (2002). Hierarchical linear models: Applications and data

     analysis methods (Vol. 1). Sage.

Ridpath, J. (2017). How can we use technology to support patients after bariatric surgery?

     Retrieved from Https://Www.Kpwashingtonresearch.Org/News-and-Events/Recent-

     News/News-2017/How-Can-We-Use-Technology-Support-Patients-after-Bariatric-

     Surgery/.

Rivera, D. E., Hekler, E. B., Savage, J. S., & Downs, D. S. (2018). Intensively Adaptive

     Interventions Using Control Systems Engineering: Two Illustrative Examples.
MRT FOR DEVELOPING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS                                                         71


     https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91776-4_5

Robins, J. M. (1986). A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with a sustained

     exposure period—application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect. Mathematical

     Modelling, 7(9–12), 1393–1512.

Robins, J. M. (1987). Addendum to “a new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with

     a sustained exposure period—application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect.”

     Computers & Mathematics with Applications, 14(9–12), 923–945.

Robins, J. M. (1994). Correcting for non-compliance in randomized trials using structural nested

     mean models. Communications in Statistics - Theory and Methods, 23(8), 2417–2421.

     https://doi.org/10.1080/03610929408831394

Robins, J. M., Hernán, M. Á., & Brumback, B. (2000). Marginal structural models and causal

     inference in epidemiology. Epidemiology, 11(5), 550–560.

     https://doi.org/10.1097/00001648-200009000-00011

Rubin, D. B. (1978). Bayesian inference for causal effects: The role of randomization. The

     Annals of Statistics, 34–58.

Rubin, D. B. (2005). Causal inference using potential outcomes: Design, modeling, decisions.

     Journal of the American Statistical Association, 100(469), 322–331.

SAS Institute Inc. (2019). SAS/STAT Software, Version 9.4. http://www.sas.com/

StataCorp. (2019). Stata Statistical Software: Release 16.

Zhou, M., Mintz, Y., Fukuoka, Y., Goldberg, K., Flowers, E., Kaminsky, P., Castillejo, A., &

     Aswani, A. (2018). Personalizing mobile fitness apps using reinforcement learning. CEUR

     Workshop Proceedings, 2068.
                                                                                           1


                                  Supplementary Material for

             The Micro-Randomized Trial for Developing Digital Interventions:

                   Experimental Design and Data Analysis Considerations



Tianchen Qian, Ashley E. Walton, Linda M. Collins, Predrag Klasnja, Stephanie T. Lanza, Inbal

Nahum-Shani, Mashfiqui Rabbi, Michael A. Russell, Maureen A. Walton, Hyesun Yoo,

Susan A. Murphy



                                           Appendix A
   GEE and MLM Can Be Biased When Estimating Causal Excursion Effects in MRTs

       MRTs produce intensive longitudinal data (Schafer, 2006), as individuals are randomized

among intervention options repeatedly during the MRT, and outcomes and covariates are

assessed in tandem with randomization. Repeated measurement of the same individuals over

time means that the repeated observations are likely dependent. Generalized estimating

equations (GEE; Liang & Zeger, 1986) and multi-level models (MLM; Laird & Ware, 1982;

Raudenbush & Bryk, 2002), the latter also known as mixed models or random effects models,

have been used widely in analyzing longitudinal data. However, as we illustrate below,

inappropriate application of them to MRT data may result in biased estimates of the causal

excursion effects when endogenous time-varying covariates are included in the model. A time-

varying covariate is endogenous if it can depend on previous outcomes or previous treatments,

which commonly occurs in MRTs. For example, in analyzing the effect of activity suggestion in

the subsequent 30-minute step count in HeartSteps, one may want to control for the 30-minute

step count prior to each decision point to reduce noise. Because the 30-minute step count prior to

a decision point can be correlated with past step counts (i.e., past outcomes), it is endogenous.
                                                                                                   2


When a time-varying covariate is not endogenous, it is called exogenous. Examples of exogenous

time-varying covariates include time, weather, and anything that cannot be impacted by previous

treatments or previous outcomes.

Inappropriate Use of GEE and MLM Can Result in Biased Causal Excursion Effect

Estimates in the Presence of Endogenous Time-Varying Covariates

        Pepe & Anderson (1994) demonstrated that, in the presence of endogenous time-varying

covariates, parameter estimates from GEE may be biased unless certain conditions, described

below, are met. Such bias is also shown in subsequent research through simulation studies and

analytic calculations (Diggle et al., 2002; Pan et al., 2000; Schildcrout & Heagerty, 2005;

Tchetgen et al., 2012; Vansteelandt, 2007). For completeness we provide a brief explanation of

the bias here. Consider a simplified version of the HeartSteps MRT, where there are two decision

points for each individual and the feasible component options are always not restricted. Suppose

the observed data for individual i is (𝑋𝑖1 , 𝐴𝑖1 , 𝑌𝑖2 , 𝑋𝑖2 , 𝐴𝑖2 , 𝑌𝑖3 ), where 𝑋𝑖𝑡 denotes the 30-minute

step count prior to decision point 𝑡 (an endogenous time-varying covariate), 𝐴𝑖𝑡 is the indicator

of whether an activity suggestion is delivered at decision point 𝑡 (so 𝐴𝑖𝑡 has .6 probability to be

1), and 𝑌𝑖,𝑡+1 is the 30-minute step count following decision point t. The researcher chooses

𝑆𝑖𝑡 = 𝑋𝑖𝑡 in equation (2): they want to assess whether the effect of the activity suggestion is

moderated by the prior 30-minute step count. The researcher may then choose to impose the

following linear model on the mean of the proximal outcome given the treatment and the

covariate at decision point 𝑡:

                          𝐸(𝑌𝑖,𝑡+1|𝐴𝑖𝑡 , 𝑋𝑖𝑡 ) = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1 𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝐴𝑖𝑡 (𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑖𝑡 ),                     (1)
                                                                                                                   3


and use GEE to estimate the coefficients 𝛼0 , 𝛼1 , 𝛽0 , 𝛽1 .1 Often a non-independent working

correlation structure is used in GEE, aiming for efficiency gain (i.e., smaller standard error of the

estimated coefficients compared to GEE with working independence correlation structure).

           It is well known that GEE produces consistent estimates regardless of the choice of the

working correlation structure, as long as equation ( 1) holds; however, this is only true when all

covariates are exogenous. In this above example with two decision points, Pepe & Anderson

(1994) demonstrated that to guarantee the consistency of the GEE estimates, one of the following

conditions needs to hold:

    (i)       𝐸(𝑌𝑖,𝑡+1 |𝐴𝑖𝑡 , 𝑋𝑖𝑡 ) = 𝐸(𝑌𝑖,𝑡+1 |𝐴𝑖1 , 𝑋𝑖1 , 𝐴𝑖2 , 𝑋𝑖2) for 𝑡 = 1,2; or

    (ii)      a working independence correlation structure is used.

Condition (i) is usually violated when 𝑋𝑖𝑡 is endogenous: In this particular example, 𝑋𝑖2 can be

correlated with 𝑌𝑖2 , so that 𝐸(𝑌𝑖2 |𝐴𝑖1 , 𝑋𝑖1) ≠ 𝐸(𝑌𝑖2|𝐴𝑖1 , 𝑋𝑖1 , 𝐴𝑖2 , 𝑋𝑖2 ). This means that unless the

independent working correlation structure is used, GEE can produce biased estimates even if

equation (7) holds.

           The same bias can occur when MLM is used instead of GEE. In general, for each MLM

there is a corresponding GEE with a non-independent correlation structure that produces the

same estimated coefficients. For example, an MLM resembling equation (7) is 𝑌𝑖,𝑡+1 = 𝛼0 +

𝛼1 𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝐴𝑖𝑡 (𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑖𝑡 ) + 𝑢𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡 , where 𝑢𝑖 ∼ Normal(0, 𝜎𝑢2 ) is a random intercept and 𝜖𝑖𝑡 ∼

Normal(0, 𝜎𝜖2 ) is the error term. This corresponds to a GEE with compound symmetric (also



1 In this particular example in which the randomization probability is constant, the 𝛽 , 𝛽
                                                                                          0 1 in the proximal treatment
effect term in (7) equals the 𝛽0′ , 𝛽1′ in 𝐸[𝐸( 𝑌𝑡+1 ∣ 𝐴𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ) − 𝐸( 𝑌𝑡+1 ∣ 𝐴𝑡 = 0, 𝐻𝑡 )|𝑆𝑡 ] = 𝛽0′ + 𝛽1′ 𝑆𝑡 . Therefore,
if one can obtain consistent estimates for 𝛽0 , 𝛽1 , one obtains consistent estimate for the proximal treatment effect
defined in (2). In general, however, when the randomization probability can depend on 𝐻𝑡 , the 𝛽0 , 𝛽1 in (7) no
longer equals the 𝛽 in (2) due to the marginalization over 𝑆𝑡 . This is another reason, in addition to the reason that
will be presented in the next paragraph of the paper, why inappropriate use of GEE results in biased proximal
treatment effect estimates.
                                                                                          4


called exchangeable) working correlation structure. Given this equivalency, MLM can produce

biased estimates if the covariate 𝑋𝑖𝑡 is endogenous.

A Few Scenarios Where GEE or MLM Provides Consistent Causal Excursion Effect

Estimates from MRT Data

       GEE builds upon a marginal mean model (i.e., the relationship between the mean of the

proximal outcome, the covariates, and the treatment assignments, such as (7)). If no endogenous

time-varying covariates are included in the model, the feasible component options are always not

restricted, and the randomization probability is constant, GEE with any working correlation

structure gives consistent estimates as long as the marginal mean model is correct. If there are

endogenous time-varying covariates in the model, the feasible component options are always not

restricted, and the randomization probability is constant, GEE with independent working

correlation structure still gives consistent estimates as long as the marginal mean model is

correct, but GEE with other working correlation structure does not.

       Because an MLM always corresponds to a GEE with some non-independent working

correlation structure, MLM provides consistent causal excursion effect estimates if no

endogenous time-varying covariates are included in the model, the feasible component options

are always not restricted, and the randomization probability is constant. However, although the

estimated coefficients from an MLM will generally be biased for the causal excursion effect

when there are endogenous time-varying covariates, those estimated coefficients can have a

different, individual-specific interpretation under a rather strong assumption. As shown in Qian,

Klasnja, & Murphy (2020), if the endogenous time-varying covariates can be safely assumed to

only depend on the random effect through the observed previous outcomes and previous

covariates, then the fitted results from standard linear mixed models can be interpreted as a
                                                                                                      5


causal effect that is conditional on the random effect (i.e., individual-specific rather than

population-average) and conditional on the entire history 𝐻𝑡 (rather than conditional only on 𝑆𝑡 ).

An example where this strong assumption holds is when the endogenous time-varying covariates

are previous proximal outcomes (e.g., the endogenous time-varying covariate at decision point 𝑡

is the proximal outcome at decision point 𝑡 − 1).

A Mathematical Demonstration of the Bias from Inappropriate Application of GEE When

There are Endogenous Time-Varying Covariates

        For clarity we consider the case where each participant is in the MRT for two decision

points. The data for the i-th participant is (𝑋𝑖1 , 𝐴𝑖1 , 𝑌𝑖2 , 𝑋𝑖2 , 𝐴𝑖2 , 𝑌𝑖3 ), where 𝑋𝑖𝑡 is the covariate,

𝐴𝑖𝑡 is the treatment assignment, and 𝑌𝑖𝑡+1 is the continuous outcome. The covariate 𝑋𝑖𝑡 is

endogenous time-varying, in the sense that it can depend on previous treatment and previous

outcome.

        The model on the marginal mean of 𝑌𝑡+1 is 𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1|𝐴𝑡 , 𝑋𝑡 ) = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1 𝑋𝑡 +

𝐴𝑡 (𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑡 ). The corresponding GEE solves the following estimating equation:


                 n    1           1
                     𝑋           𝑋𝑖2            𝑌 − 𝛼0 − 𝛼1 𝑋𝑖1 − 𝐴𝑖1 (𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑖1 )
                ∑ [ 𝑖1                  ] 𝑉 −1 [ 𝑖2                                    ] = 0.             (2)
                     𝐴𝑖1         𝐴𝑖2            𝑌𝑖3 − 𝛼0 − 𝛼1 𝑋𝑖2 − 𝐴𝑖2 (𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑖2 )
                i=1
                    𝐴𝑖1 𝑋𝑖1     𝐴𝑖2 𝑋𝑖2

Here, 𝑛 denotes the number of participants, and 𝑉 is a 2 × 2 working covariance matrix.

Examples of 𝑉 include the following:

                                     2
•   Working independence: 𝑉 = [𝜎         0]
                                    0 𝜎2
                                  𝜎 2 𝜌𝜎 2
•   Compound symmetry: 𝑉 = [ 2               ]
                                 𝜌𝜎      𝜎2
•   Autoregressive (in the special case of two decision points, autoregressive is the same as
                                  𝜎 2 𝜌𝜎 2
    compound symmetry): 𝑉 = [ 2              ].
                                 𝜌𝜎      𝜎2
                                                                                               6


       In this setting, the result in Pepe & Anderson (1994) implies that GEE is guaranteed to
produce consistent 𝛼0 , 𝛼1 , 𝛽0 , 𝛽1 if either

    (i)       𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1|𝐴𝑡 , 𝑋𝑡 ) = 𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1 |𝐴1 , 𝑋1 , 𝐴2 , 𝑋2) for 𝑡 = 1,2, or

    (ii)      a working independence correlation structure is used,

and they provided simulation results to show that GEE can produce biased estimates when

neither condition holds. In the following, we rephrase the intuitive argument given in Pepe and

Anderson (1994) in this particular setting to show why GEE can be biased if neither condition

holds.
                            𝑤11     𝑤12
           We write 𝑉 −1 = [𝑤       𝑤22 ] and write the residual 𝑟𝑖𝑡 = 𝑌𝑖𝑡+1 − 𝛼0 − 𝛼1 𝑋𝑖𝑡 −
                               21

𝐴𝑖𝑡 (𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑖𝑡 ). A summand (for fixed 𝑖) in equation (8) becomes

                      1         1
                     𝑋𝑖1       𝑋𝑖2     𝑤11 𝑤12 𝑟𝑖1
                   [                ] [𝑤          ][ ]
                     𝐴𝑖1       𝐴𝑖2      21 𝑤22 𝑟𝑖2
                    𝐴𝑖1 𝑋𝑖1 𝐴𝑖2 𝑋𝑖2
                                    (𝑤11 + 𝑤21 )𝑟𝑖1 + (𝑤12 + 𝑤22 )𝑟𝑖2                              (3)
                            (𝑤11 𝑋𝑖1 + 𝑤21 𝑋𝑖2 )𝑟𝑖1 + (𝑤12 𝑋𝑖1 + 𝑤22 𝑋𝑖2 )𝑟𝑖2
                   =                                                                      .
                            (𝑤11 𝐴𝑖1 + 𝑤21 𝐴𝑖2 )𝑟𝑖1 + (𝑤12 𝐴𝑖1 + 𝑤22 𝐴𝑖2 )𝑟𝑖2
                     [(𝑤11 𝐴𝑖1 𝑋𝑖1 + 𝑤21 𝐴𝑖2 𝑋𝑖2 )𝑟𝑖1 + (𝑤12 𝐴𝑖1 𝑋𝑖1 + 𝑤22 𝐴𝑖2 𝑋𝑖2 )𝑟𝑖2 ]

Because 𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1|𝐴𝑡 , 𝑋𝑡 ) = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1 𝑋𝑡 + 𝐴𝑡 (𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑡 ), we have

                           𝐸[𝑟𝑖𝑡 ] = 𝐸[𝑋𝑖𝑡 𝑟𝑖𝑡 ] = 𝐸[𝐴𝑖𝑡 𝑟𝑖𝑡 ] = 𝐸[𝐴𝑖𝑡 𝑋𝑖𝑡 𝑟𝑖𝑡 ] = 0.

Therefore, all the terms with 𝑤11 𝑟𝑖1 and 𝑤22 𝑟𝑖2 (such as 𝑤11 𝑟𝑖1 𝑋𝑖1; i.e., terms that are multiplied

with the diagonal elements of 𝑉 −1) in (9) have expectation zero, and what is left are the terms

with 𝑤21 𝑟𝑖1 and 𝑤12 𝑟𝑖2 (i.e., terms that are multiplied with the off-diagonal elements of 𝑉 −1). In

other words, the expectation of (3) equals

                                                       0
                                          𝑤21 𝑋𝑖2 𝑟𝑖1 + 𝑤12 𝑋𝑖1 𝑟𝑖2
                                      [                                  ].                        (4)
                                          𝑤21 𝐴𝑖2 𝑟𝑖1 + 𝑤12 𝐴𝑖1 𝑟𝑖2
                                       𝑤11 𝐴𝑖2 𝑋𝑖2 𝑟𝑖1 + 𝑤12 𝐴𝑖1 𝑋𝑖1 𝑟𝑖2
                                                                                             7


Mathematical theory for GEE tells us that GEE outputs consistent 𝛼0 , 𝛼1 , 𝛽0 , 𝛽1 when (9) has

expectation zero; i.e., when (10) equals zero.

        If condition (i) holds, we have 𝐸[𝑋𝑖2 𝑟𝑖1] = 𝐸[𝐴𝑖2 𝑟𝑖1 ] = 𝐸[𝐴𝑖2 𝑋𝑖2 𝑟𝑖1 ] = 0, and similarly

𝐸[𝑋𝑖1 𝑟𝑖2] = 𝐸[𝐴𝑖1 𝑟𝑖2 ] = 𝐸[𝐴𝑖1 𝑋𝑖1 𝑟𝑖2 ] = 0. Therefore, (10) equals 0 with any choice of 𝑉 −1, and

GEE estimators are consistent.

        If condition (ii) holds, we have 𝑤21 = 𝑤12 = 0. Hence (10) equals 0 and GEE estimators

are consistent.

        When neither condition holds, it’s likely that (10) does not equal zero. For example,

suppose 𝑋𝑖2 = 𝑌𝑖2 . Then the term 𝑋𝑖2 𝑟𝑖1 equals

                             𝑌𝑖2 {𝑌𝑖2 − 𝛼0 + 𝛼1 𝑋𝑖1 + 𝐴𝑖1 (𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑖1 )},                       (5)

which is the residual multiplied with the outcome itself. Because the residual and the outcome at

the same time point are correlated, (11) likely does not equal zero. Therefore, (10) likely does

not equal zero. This means GEE can be biased when neither conditions hold, i.e., when

endogenous time-varying covariates are included and non-independent working correlation

structure is used.



                                            Appendix B

A General Form of the WCLS Estimator for the Causal Excursion Effect That Allows the

Randomization Probability to Vary Over Time

        We assume a linear model for the causal excursion effect: 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) = 𝑠 T 𝛽. Suppose 𝑍𝑡T 𝛼 is

a working model for the conditional mean of 𝑌𝑡+1 given no treatment at decision point t and

history 𝐻𝑡 , 𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1|𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ). Note that the consistency of the estimator for 𝛽 does not require
                                                                                                      8


𝑍𝑡T 𝛼 to be a correct model for 𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1|𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ). We use 𝑝𝑡 (𝐻𝑡 ) to denote the randomization

probability at decision point 𝑡, which may possibly depend on 𝐻𝑡 .

        The WCLS estimator for 𝛽 is calculated as follows. Suppose (𝛼̂, 𝛽̂ ) is the (𝛼, 𝛽) value

that solves the following estimating equation:
               𝑛   𝑇
           1                                                                   𝑍𝑖𝑡
             ∑ ∑ 𝐼𝑖𝑡 𝑊𝑖𝑡 [𝑌𝑖,𝑡+1 − 𝑍𝑖𝑡T 𝛼 − {𝐴𝑖𝑡 − 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑖𝑡 )}𝑆𝑖𝑡T 𝛽] [                      ] = 0;        (6)
           𝑛                                                           {𝐴𝑖𝑡 − 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑖𝑡 )}𝑆𝑖𝑡
             𝑖=1 𝑡=1

then 𝛽̂ is the WCLS estimator for 𝛽. 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑖𝑡 ) is an arbitrary probability as long as it depends on

𝐻𝑖𝑡 through at most 𝑆𝑖𝑡 and it is bounded away from 0 and 1; 𝑖 is the index for the ith individual,

and 𝑊𝑖𝑡 is defined as

                                                    𝐴                  1−𝐴𝑖𝑡
                                         𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑖𝑡 ) 𝑖𝑡 1 − 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑖𝑡 )
                                 𝑊𝑖𝑡 = {           } {                }        .                          (7)
                                         𝑝𝑡 (𝐻𝑖𝑡 )     1 − 𝑝𝑡 (𝐻𝑖𝑡 )

𝑊𝑖𝑡 , the ratio of two probabilities, serves as a change of probability: It makes it as if the

treatment 𝐴𝑖𝑡 is randomized with probability 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑖𝑡 ). It is used to marginalize the causal

excursion effect over variables in 𝐻𝑖𝑡 but not in 𝑆𝑖𝑡 . As long as 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 ) depends on 𝐻𝑖𝑡 through at

most 𝑆𝑖𝑡 and it is bounded away from 0 and 1, the particular choice of 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 ) doesn’t affect the

consistency of 𝛽̂ . For instance, one can set it to be 0.5 (or any constant between 0 and 1) for all

individuals and all decision points, or set it to be the predicted value from a logistic regression fit

of 𝐴𝑡 ~𝑆𝑡 . If the true randomization probability 𝑝𝑡 (𝐻𝑡 ) depends at most on 𝑆𝑡 , then one can also

set 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 ) to be equal to the true randomization probability, in which case (12) is mathematically

equivalent to (5). 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 ) can impact the standard error of 𝛽̂ . In addition, when the causal

excursion effect model 𝛽(𝑡, 𝑠) = 𝑠 T 𝛽 is misspecified, 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 ) impacts the limit of 𝛽̂ . See the

Appendix of Boruvka et al. (2018) for more technical details on how the limit of 𝛽̂ is impacted

by 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 ) in this case.
                                                                                                    9


        Now we present a way to obtain the general WCLS estimator for time-varying

randomization probability through standard statistical software that implements GEE. Suppose

the assumed causal excursion effect model is (6) and the working model for 𝐸(𝑌𝑡+1 |𝐼𝑡 = 1, 𝐻𝑡 ) is

𝑍𝑡T 𝛼; then the WCLS estimator 𝛽̂ and its standard error can be obtained by (i) incorporating 𝐼𝑡 𝑊𝑡

as the “prior weights”, (ii) choosing a working independence correlation structure, and (iii)

fitting GEE with dependent variable 𝑌𝑡+1 and independent variables 𝑍𝑡 and (𝐴𝑡 − 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 ))𝑆𝑡 .

Then the estimated coefficient for (𝐴𝑡 − 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 ))𝑆𝑡 is the WCLS estimate 𝛽̂ .

Standard Error Formula for WCLS.

        Below we provide the formula for the standard error of the WCLS estimator 𝛽̂ . For (𝛼̂, 𝛽̂ )

that solves estimating equation (12), variance can be estimated by

                                   ̂ ([𝛼̂]) = 1 𝑀𝑛−1 𝛴𝑛 (𝑀𝑛−1 )T ,
                                   Var
                                       𝛽̂     𝑛


where

                                             𝑍𝑡 𝑍𝑡T               {𝐴𝑡 − 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 )}𝑍𝑡 𝑆𝑡T
                𝑀𝑛 = −ℙ𝑛 ∑𝑇𝑡=1 𝐼𝑡 𝑊𝑡 [                                                     ]
                                      {𝐴𝑡 − 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 )}𝑆𝑡 𝑍𝑡T      {𝐴𝑡 − 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 )}2 𝑆𝑡 𝑆𝑡T

and
                𝑇

      Σ𝑛 = ℙ𝑛 ∑{𝑌𝑡+1 − 𝑍𝑡T 𝛼
               𝑡=1
                                             2              𝑍𝑡 𝑍𝑡T            {𝐴𝑡 − 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 )}𝑍𝑡 𝑆𝑡T
                     − (𝐴𝑡 − 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 ))𝑆𝑡T 𝛽} 𝐼𝑡 𝑊𝑡 [                                                  ].
                                                     {𝐴𝑡 − 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 )}𝑆𝑡 𝑍𝑡T   {𝐴𝑡 − 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 )}2 𝑆𝑡 𝑆𝑡T

Here, ℙ𝑛 denotes sample average over n individuals. The standard error formula can be modified

for the setting in which the randomization probability is constant over time (i.e., the setting in the

main paper) by letting 𝑝̃𝑡 (𝑆𝑡 ) = 𝑝 and 𝑊𝑡 = 1.



                                                 Appendix C
                                                                                          10


       We conduct a simulation study to illustrate the claim that including variables that are

correlated with 𝑌𝑡+1 in 𝑍𝑡 may reduce the variance of the WCLS estimator. The generative model

mimics features of the HeartSteps data and is set up as follows. For simplicity we assume that the

feasible component options are always not restricted. At decision point 𝑡, the covariate 𝑋𝑡 is

drawn from the empirical distribution of the log-transformed 30-minute step count preceding a

decision point in the HeartSteps data. For simplicity 𝑋𝑡 is generated independently of previous

outcomes and treatments. The treatment 𝐴𝑡 is generated from a Bernoulli distribution with .6

success probability; this mimics the .6 randomization probability of activity suggestions in

HeartSteps. The proximal outcome 𝑌𝑡+1 is generated from a Gaussian distribution with mean

                 1.6085 + 0.4037 × 𝑋𝑡 + 0.0655 × 𝑌𝑡 + 0.1229 × (𝐴𝑡 − 0.6)

and standard deviation 2.716. The coefficients in the above display are the estimated coefficients

from a WCLS fit on the HeartSteps data with the same control variables (1, 𝑋𝑡 , 𝑌𝑡 ) and constant

treatment effect model. The standard deviation is the empirical standard deviation of the residual

in 𝑌𝑡+1 from the above WCLS fit. As in the HeartSteps data set, for each simulated trial we

generate 37 individuals, each with 210 decision points.

       For each data set generated from the above generative model, we consider four WCLS

fits for the true treatment effect 0.1229 and compare their performance. All four WCLS assume

the constant treatment effect model, and they differ in the choice of the working model. The first

WCLS fit (WCLS-1) includes control variables (1, 𝑋𝑡 , 𝑌𝑡 ); the second WCLS fit (WCLS-2)

includes control variables (1, 𝑋𝑡 ); the third WCLS fit (WCLS-3) includes control variables

(1, 𝑌𝑡 ); and the fourth WCLS fit (WCLS-4) includes only the intercept. The bias, standard

deviation (SD), and coverage probability (CP) of 95% confidence interval are listed in

Supplementary Table 1. All four WCLS estimators are consistent with nominal confidence
                                                                                             11


interval coverage because their assumed constant treatment effect model holds under this

generative model. (This again illustrates that the consistency of the WCLS estimator does not

require the control part of the model to be correct.) On the other hand, the choice of working

model affects the efficiency of the estimator. In particular, WCLS-1 and WCLS-2 have smaller

standard errors than WCLS-3 and WCLS-4 because the former two include 𝑋𝑡 , a covariate that is

highly correlated with the proximal outcome 𝑌𝑡+1.



                                            Appendix D

       To assess sensitivity of the result to potential non-linearity in Question 2 of Section

“Analysis Using Data from HeartSteps MRT,” we fit a local 2-degree polynomial regression

with smoothing span 2/3 and tricubic weighting to estimate the causal excursion effect over time

(the default setting for many local regression software, such as the lowess function in R (R Core

Team, 2019)). The estimated effect from local regression is presented in Supplementary Figure 1

(black curve). Comparing this estimated effect with the estimated effect based on the linear

model (blue curve in Figure 1, with blue shaded area being the pointwise 95% confidence

interval), we see that the two estimates are relatively close to each other, indicating that the linear

model fits well.



                                            Appendix E

                          A Synthetic Data Set Mimicking HeartSteps


       The HeartSteps data set that was used in the illustrative data analysis is not publicly

available. To allow readers to try out the R code which implements the WCLS estimator, we

included a synthetic data set which was generated by mimicking some features of the HeartSteps
                                                                                         12


data. These features include the number of individuals, the number of decision points, the fact

that treatments are randomized 5 times a day, and the quantitative relationship among the

proximal outcome variable (30-minute step count following each decision point), the treatment

indicator, and some time-varying covariates including 30-minute step count preceding each

decision point and location of the individual.


       The synthetic data set and the example R code to analyze it can be downloaded at

https://github.com/tqian/paper_mrt_PsychMethods/tree/main/synthetic_data. Below is a brief

description of the files in the github repository folder:


   •   synthetic_data_37subject_210time.csv: A synthetic data set in csv format.

   •   analysis_synthetic_data.R: R code to analyze the synthetic data, which is similar to the R

       code used to analyze the original HeartSteps data set

       (https://github.com/tqian/paper_mrt_PsychMethods/blob/main/analysis.R)

   •   analysis_synthetic_data_with_result.pdf: A PDF file that describes the variables in the

       synthetic data set, walks through the steps in the analysis code, and shows the R output.

   •   xgeepack.R and estimate.R: Code that implements the WCLS estimator. (They will be

       loaded by analysis_synthetic_data.R)



                                             Appendix F

   Below we provide a SAS code example that utilizes PROC GEE to obtain the WCLS
estimator for the synthetic data set (description of which is provided in Appendix E).


  * import the synthetic_data_37subject_210time_SAS.csv data set;

  * you may need to modify the directory;



  FILENAME REFFILE '/home/synthetic_data_37subject_210time_SAS.csv';
                                                                                        13



PROC IMPORT DATAFILE=REFFILE

       DBMS=CSV

       OUT=example_data;

       GETNAMES=YES;

RUN;



* add variable: centered treatment indicator;

* (suppose the randomization probability is 0.6 in this case);

data example_data;

       set example_data;

       send_ctr = send - 0.6;

run;



* Marginal effect;

proc gee data = example_data;

       class userid;

       model jbsteps30_log = jbsteps30pre_log send_ctr / dist = normal;

       repeated subject = userid / corr = ind;

       weight avail;

run;



* Marginal effect with more control variables in WCLS fit;

proc gee data = example_data;

       class userid;

       model jbsteps30_log = jbsteps30pre_log jbsteps30_log_lag1 send_ctr / dist = normal;

       repeated subject = userid / corr = ind;

       weight avail;

run;



* Effect change over time;

proc gee data = example_data;

       class userid;

       model jbsteps30_log = jbsteps30pre_log study_day_nogap send_ctr

                  send_ctr * study_day_nogap / dist = normal;

       repeated subject = userid / corr = ind;
                                                                                        14

       weight avail;

run;



* Effect moderation by outcome at previous time point;

proc gee data = example_data;

       class userid;

       model jbsteps30_log = jbsteps30pre_log jbsteps30_log_lag1

            location_homework send_ctr send_ctr * jbsteps30_log_lag1 / dist = normal;

       repeated subject = userid / corr = ind;

       weight avail;

run;
                                                                                         15



Supplementary Figure 1.


Estimated effect of activity suggestion on proximal outcome as a linear function of days in study,

and corresponding 95% pointwise confidence intervals




Note. Figure for the sensitivity analysis in Appendix D regarding “Question 2: Does the effect of

the activity suggestions change with each additional day in the study?” in section “Analysis

Using Data from HeartSteps MRT.” The black curve is the estimated effect using local 2-degree

polynomial regression with smoothing span 2/3 and tricubic weighting. The blue line represents

the estimated causal excursion effect across the 42 study days, assuming a linear time trend, and

the shaded blue area is the pointwise 95% confidence interval.
                                                                                           16


Supplementary Table 1.

Simulation results for Appendix C: Efficiency gain from including prognostic variable in the

working model

                                                                                95% coverage
                            bias                 standard deviation
                                                                                 probability
      WCLS-1               -0.001                      0.067                       96.7%
      WCLS-2               -0.001                      0.067                       96.9%
      WCLS-3               -0.001                      0.074                       95.8%
      WCLS-4               -0.001                      0.074                       95.7%

Note. All four WCLS assumes the constant treatment effect model, and they differ in the choice

of the working model. WCLS-1 includes control variables (1, 𝑋𝑡 , 𝑌𝑡 ); WCLS-2 includes control

variables (1, 𝑋𝑡 ); WCLS-3 includes control variables (1, 𝑌𝑡 ); WCLS-4 includes only the

intercept.
