                                                 AI Harness Engineering: A Runtime Substrate for
                                                              Foundation-Model Software Agents
                                                                          Hailin Zhong1 , Shengxin Zhu2,∗
                                                                1 Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
                                                                     2 Beijin Normal University, Zhuhai, China
                                                                  ∗ Correspondence: shengxin.zhu@bnu.edu.cn




arXiv:2605.13357v1 [cs.SE] 13 May 2026
                                                                                           Abstract

                                               Foundation models have transformed automated code generation, yet autonomous software-
                                               engineering agents remain unreliable in realistic development settings. The dominant explanation
                                               locates this gap in model capability. We propose a different locus: software-engineering capability
                                               emerges from a model–harness–environment system, in which a runtime substrate—the harness—
                                               mediates how a foundation-model agent observes a project, acts on it, receives feedback, and
                                               establishes that a change is complete. We formalize this substrate as an AI Harness Engineering
                                               and identify eleven component responsibilities: task specification, context selection, tool access,
                                               project memory, task state, observability, failure attribution, verification, permissions, entropy
                                               auditing, and intervention recording. We operationalize the harness through a four-level ladder
                                               (H0–H3) that progressively exposes runtime support to the agent, and we propose a trace-based
                                               evaluation protocol that converts each agent run into an auditable episode package. Applied to
                                               a controlled validation task, the framework yields episode packages whose evidence structure
                                               varies systematically with harness level: lower levels produce only a final patch, higher levels
                                               produce reproduction logs, failure attributions, deterministic requirement checks, and structured
                                               verification reports. The framework reframes the central question of autonomous software
                                               engineering from whether a foundation model can produce a patch to whether the model–harness–
                                               environment system can produce a verifiably correct, attributed, and maintainable change. We
                                               outline a research program for the runtime systems that foundation-model software agents will
                                               require.


                                         Keywords: harness engineering; foundation models; autonomous software engineering; runtime
                                         systems; agent evaluation; verification; software-engineering agents.



                                         Introduction

                                         Foundation models have rapidly become capable programming assistants [1, 2]. They generate
                                         functions, modify files, explain code, write tests, invoke tools, and interact with software repositories.
                                         This progress has energized an ambition that predates the current generation of models but has
                                         only recently become plausible: autonomous software-engineering agents that take a high-level
                                         development task and carry it through implementation, testing, verification, and maintenance with
                                         minimal human supervision.

                                                                                               1
    Recent benchmarks and agent systems [3–7] show that the gap between local code generation
and complete software work is real and persistent. A model that writes a correct local patch may still
fail to complete a task. It may inspect the wrong files, apply a surface-level patch to a user interface
while the underlying API behavior remains broken, run the wrong tests, misinterpret a failure, forget
task state, leave behind obsolete artifacts, or declare success without sufficient verification. Humans
remain involved not primarily because they are writing every line of code, but because they provide
the missing runtime support: they identify relevant context, explain repository structure, select tools,
interpret feedback, enforce architectural boundaries, verify behavior, and clean up residue.
    The dominant framing of this gap locates it in model capability. On that view, an agent that fails
on a software task does so because the model is not yet capable enough at coding, reasoning, planning,
or tool use, and the field’s task is to train better models or compose them into more sophisticated
agent loops [8–10]. We do not contest that model capability matters. We argue that this framing is
incomplete.
    Software engineering is a long-horizon, stateful, tool-mediated, feedback-driven activity. It
depends on context management, project memory, tool interfaces, execution traces, validation signals,
permissions, rollback, and maintenance discipline. When a foundation model is placed inside a
development environment designed primarily for human developers, many of these supports remain
implicit, inaccessible, or unstable for the agent. The components that human developers acquire
through socialization, documentation, and experience are not freely available to a model invocation;
they must be exposed, structured, and traced. Where they are not, the agent either improvises or asks
the human to fill the gap.
    We therefore propose a different framing. Autonomous software-engineering capability is an
emergent property of a model–harness–environment system, not of the model alone:
                                                                             
                             Csystem = F Cmodel , Charness , Cenvironment , T ,

where Cmodel is the foundation model’s latent capability, Cenvironment is what the software environment
exposes, Charness is the runtime substrate that mediates between them, and T is the task distribution.
We call this substrate an AI Harness Engineering: a runtime layer that surrounds a foundation-model
software agent and manages context, tools, project memory, task state, observability, failure attribution,
verification, permissions, and maintenance state. The harness is what determines whether latent model
capability becomes auditable software-engineering behavior.
Contributions. This paper makes four contributions. (i) We define the AI Harness Engineering as
a new research object distinct from agent–computer interfaces [4], agent frameworks [11, 12], and
agent operating systems [13], and we identify its eleven component responsibilities and five design
principles. (ii) We propose the H0–H3 harness ladder, a controlled-visibility ablation that exposes
progressively more runtime support to the agent and makes the harness’s contribution empirically
separable from the model’s. (iii) We define a trace-based evaluation protocol that records eight classes
of execution evidence—action, tool, context, verification, failure attribution, intervention, entropy,
and outcome—and adjudicates each agent run by verification autonomy rather than task success
alone. (iv) We instantiate the framework on a controlled validation task and show that the resulting
episode packages differ systematically in evidence structure across harness levels, with the highest

                                                     2
level producing reproduction logs, failure attributions, requirement-level verification, and structured
verification reports that lower levels do not.
Why now. Industrial development practice has independently begun to converge on harness-like
structures around coding agents. Reports from OpenAI on Codex and from Microsoft on agent
harnesses describe context management, repository knowledge, observability, tool interfaces, feedback
loops, and human attention as first-class concerns of agent deployment [14, 15]. These practitioner
accounts confirm that something like a harness exists and matters. They do not, however, treat the
harness as a research object. They do not define its components, expose its support as a controlled
ablation, or specify the evidence that an episode should produce. This paper does.


A runtime view of autonomous software engineering

From coding ability to software-engineering capability. A foundation model that generates correct
code fragments, explains an existing function, or proposes a patch for a localized bug exhibits
coding ability. Software-engineering capability is more than this. It is a stateful process involving
repository navigation, context selection, tool use, test execution, failure interpretation, verification,
documentation, and maintenance. The two are commonly conflated: a model that performs well on
isolated code-generation benchmarks is taken to be a competent software-engineering agent. The
performance gap between local benchmarks and realistic software tasks [3, 16] indicates otherwise.
The unit of analysis. Treating the model alone as the unit of analysis produces a characteristic
attribution error. A failed autonomous episode is read as a model failure; a successful episode is
credited to the model. But the model rarely acts alone in a realistic setting. It receives a representation
of the task, observes a subset of the repository, invokes tools through an interface, receives feedback
from tests or commands, and decides when the task is complete. Every one of these steps is mediated
by runtime structure. When that structure is present and well-designed, the system performs as if the
model is competent. When it is absent or unstable, the same model appears incompetent. Figure 1
depicts the unit of analysis we adopt: the model–harness–environment system, with the harness as the
mediating substrate.
The autonomy gap. We define the autonomy gap as the difference between a model’s apparent
local coding ability and the complete system’s ability to perform a software task without runtime-
substituting human help. The gap is not a single failure mode but a family. An agent may write correct
logic but inspect the wrong files. It may select a relevant test but misinterpret its output. It may apply
a patch to the wrong layer of the architecture. It may verify the change it made but fail to check that
prior behavior is preserved. It may declare completion without recording evidence. Each of these is
recognizable to practitioners and each maps, in our framework, to a missing harness responsibility.
Human intervention as runtime signal. A consequence of treating the system as the unit of
analysis is that human intervention takes on a new role. In conventional agent evaluation, human
help during an episode is either disallowed (to preserve autonomy) or treated as noise. We treat it
as a diagnostic signal. When a human tells the agent which file to inspect, this indicates a missing
or inadequate context manager. When a human interprets a test failure for the agent, this indicates
missing observability or failure-attribution support. When a human verifies the final behavior, this
indicates a missing verification protocol. When a human removes generated residue, this indicates

                                                    3
                                            AI Development Harness
                                                     task interface
                                                    context manager
                                                      tool registry
                               prompts,                                             tool calls,
   Foundation Model             context             project memory               test commands
                                                                                                  Software Environment
      latent capability:                                task state                                     repository, tests,
  code, reasoning, planning,                       observability layer                                tools, logs, build,
                                actions,                                            outputs,
    instruction following                         failure attribution                                    dependencies
                               tool calls                                          feedback
                                                 verification protocol
                                                 permission boundary
                                                    entropy auditor
                                                   intervention log



                                                    episode package
                                                traces, verification report,
                                            failure attribution, entropy audit



Figure 1: The model–harness–environment system. The foundation model provides latent reasoning and
coding capability. The software environment provides repositories, tests, tools, logs, and build affordances. The
AI Harness Engineering sits between them, mediating context, actions, feedback, and verification evidence.
Autonomous software-engineering capability is a property of the composed system, not of the model alone.


a missing entropy auditor. We call such an intervention a missing-harness human intervention and
define the missing-harness human intervention rate (M-HIR) accordingly:

                                              missing-harness interventions
                                  M-HIR =                                   .
                                                     total episodes

A harness that lowers M-HIR is one that supplies runtime support the human would otherwise have to
provide.
Failure taxonomy. The diagnostic value of treating the system as the unit of analysis depends on being
able to distinguish failure types. We use eight: Fcontext (the agent lacks or misuses relevant context);
Ftool (a tool is missing, unstable, or misused); Ffeedback (feedback is unavailable or not interpretable);
Fverify (the agent cannot prove the task requirements are satisfied); Frecovery (the agent cannot recover
from a failure); Fentropy (the agent introduces maintenance burden); Fmodel (model reasoning or coding
failure despite adequate harness and environment); and Funknown (a failure that cannot be confidently
attributed). The taxonomy enables a question that pass/fail evaluation cannot answer: when an agent
fails, what kind of runtime support was missing?


The AI Harness Engineering

Definition. An AI Harness Engineering is a runtime substrate surrounding a foundation-model
software agent that manages context, tools, project memory, task state, observability, failure attribution,
verification, permissions, and maintenance state, so that latent model coding capability becomes
auditable software-engineering behavior.
    Four implications follow. First, a harness is external to the model; it influences model behavior
but is not itself the model. Second, a harness is task-runtime infrastructure: it governs how an agent


                                                           4
observes a project, acts on it, receives feedback, and establishes completion. Third, a harness is
evaluable: its components can be exposed, hidden, ablated, traced, and compared. Fourth, a harness
produces evidence: why files were chosen, what tools were used, how failures were attributed, which
requirements were verified, whether human intervention was needed, and what maintenance burden
was introduced.
Five design principles. A harness should satisfy five principles: (P1) Explicit runtime resources.
Critical resources—context, tool affordances, project memory, verification evidence, human atten-
tion, permission boundaries, maintenance state—are exposed and named rather than left implicit.
(P2) Traceable mediation. The harness records how the agent selects context, invokes tools, attempts
verification, recovers from failure, and incurs intervention. (P3) Requirement-level verification. Task
completion is bound to evidence—deterministic checks, targeted tests, regression attempts, lint,
patch review—rather than to a natural-language assertion. (P4) Attribution before recovery. A failed
observation produces a classified diagnosis before the agent edits again. (P5) Maintenance and
entropy awareness. The harness records whether the agent introduced maintenance burden—stale
documentation, dependency churn, generated residue, test weakening, or boundary violations—rather
than treating these as outside the loop.
Eleven component responsibilities. Table 1 enumerates the component responsibilities of a develop-
ment harness, the runtime contract each fulfills, the characteristic failure mode that arises when the
responsibility is absent, and the evidence artifact each produces in a recorded episode. These eleven
are not framework-internal abstractions; they correspond to identifiable runtime decisions that any
agent-on-repository system must make implicitly, whether or not the harness makes them explicit.
A resource-management view. Traditional operating systems manage CPU, memory, files, processes,
and devices. A development harness manages an analogous but distinct set of runtime resources,
summarized in Table 2: context budget, tool budget, verification evidence, project memory, task state,
human attention, permission boundary, failure signal, entropy budget, and test-time compute. The
analogy serves a single purpose: it identifies what must be managed for an agent’s behavior to be
coherent, verifiable, and maintainable. We do not propose an operating system for AI agents and do
not claim that conventional operating system mechanisms transfer to this setting. The value of the
analogy is strictly that of a resource-management lens.
Positioning. A harness is distinct from each of the research objects to which it is most often compared.
It is not a prompt: a prompt shapes a single model invocation, while a harness governs an entire
episode. It is not an agent framework [11, 12]: an agent framework provides infrastructure for
composing agents and tools, while a harness is the runtime configuration of supports exposed to a
software agent. It is not an agent–computer interface [4]: an ACI specifies how an agent acts through
tools, and is one component of a harness. It is not an agent operating system [13]: an agent OS targets
general agent scheduling and resource management, while a harness targets a software-engineering-
specific substrate. It is not an evaluation harness: an evaluation harness measures behavior, while a
development harness shapes behavior. And it is not DevOps or platform engineering [17, 18]: those
provide infrastructure for human and machine development workflows; a development harness focuses
specifically on the runtime interface between foundation-model agents and software-development
environments. The harness can be built using prompts, agent frameworks, ACIs, DevOps tools, and



                                                   5
Table 1: The eleven component responsibilities of an AI Development Harness. For each component we list
its runtime contract, the failure mode that arises when the responsibility is unmanaged, and the evidence artifact
it produces.

Component                 Runtime contract                  Failure when absent              Evidence
Task interface            Present objective, require-       Underspecified goal; wrong-      Task record
                          ments, constraints, success       target work
                          criteria
Context manager           Select and expose task-           Wrong-file inspection; missed    Context trace
                          relevant project content          constraints
Tool registry             Declare available tools and al-   Failed call; unsafe command;     Tool trace
                          lowed commands                    repeated timeout
Project memory            Provide agent-readable archi-     Repeated rediscovery; wrong-     Memory references
                          tecture, testing, known-failure   layer fix
                          knowledge
Task state                Maintain hypothesis, in-          Drift; repeated work; incoher-   Task-state file
                          spected files, open questions,    ence
                          next steps
Observability layer       Expose logs, traces, outputs,     Unverifiable success; un-        Observation log
                          runtime errors                    diagnosable failure
Failure attribution       Separate observation, ex-         Random patching after failure    Attribution log
                          pected behavior, diagnosis
Verification protocol     Map task requirements to de-      Unverified success; false con-   Verification trace
                          terministic evidence              fidence
Permission boundary       Restrict risky actions; expose    Unsafe invalid episodes          Permission record
                          approval gates
Entropy auditor           Detect maintenance burden in-     Stale docs; dependency churn;    Entropy audit
                          troduced by the agent             residue
Intervention logger       Record human assistance and       Invisible human scaffolding      Intervention log
                          its avoidability


operating-system services. The research object is the configuration of runtime supports exposed to the
agent and the evidence produced during execution.


A controlled harness ladder

The harness framework provides a vocabulary; it does not by itself permit empirical inquiry. To make
the harness’s contribution separable from the model’s, we need a controlled way to vary runtime
support while holding the task, the repository, and the model fixed. We propose a four-level ladder,
H0–H3, that progressively exposes runtime support to the agent (Figure 2).
H0 (Minimal baseline). The agent receives only the task description and the repository files. No tool
registry, no project memory, no verification protocol. H0 is the comparison point against which all
other levels are read.
H1 (Tool harness). H0 plus a tool registry, a test-command registry, and a tool-usage protocol. H1
makes the action surface explicit and traceable but does not provide agent-readable project knowledge
or verification discipline.
H2 (Context–memory harness). H1 plus agent-readable project memory (architecture, testing
conventions, known failures), a task-state file, and a context-selection protocol. H2 makes context use
explicit and traceable.


                                                        6
Table 2: Runtime resources managed by an AI Development Harness. The harness mediates a set of
resources analogous to but distinct from those managed by conventional operating systems.

Resource                 What it represents                                Failure when unmanaged
Context budget           What the agent can see and reason over            Wrong-file selection; missed constraints
Tool budget              Which actions the agent can take, when            Inability to inspect, test, or modify
Verification evidence    Proof that requirements are satisfied             Premature success claims
Project memory           Stable, agent-readable project knowledge          Repeated rediscovery; wrong-layer fixes
Task state               Current plan, inspected files, open ques-         Drift; incoherent execution
                         tions
Human attention          Cost of human assistance during episode           High missing-harness intervention rate
Permission boundary      Allowed and forbidden actions                     Unsafe edits; destructive commands
Failure signal           Structured feedback from tests, logs, run-        Random patching; poor recovery
                         time
Entropy budget           Maintenance burden introduced by the              Long-term degradation
                         agent
Test-time compute        Compute spent on verification and explo-          Runaway commands; expensive loops
                         ration

                                                                                                    visibility

                                H3 – Observability–verification harness.
                                + deterministic checks; bug reproduction;
                                failure attribution; verification protocol.

                         H2 – Context–memory harness.
                         + project memory; task state; context-selection protocol.

                        H1 – Tool harness.
                        + tool registry; test-command registry; tool-usage protocol.

                                     H0 – Minimal baseline.
                                     Task description; repository files.
                                                                                                    minimal

Figure 2: The H0–H3 harness ladder. Each level adds one named class of runtime support. Visibility is
monotonic: each level inherits all artifacts of lower levels. The ladder is a controlled ablation that makes the
contribution of each runtime-support class separable from the others.


H3 (Observability–verification harness). H2 plus a deterministic behavioral check registry, a bug-
reproduction protocol, a failure-attribution protocol, a verification protocol, and a verification report
template. H3 makes completion an evidentiary object rather than an assertion.
Five design requirements. The ladder satisfies five requirements. (R1) Controlled visibility: each
level exposes only the artifacts assigned to that level; lower levels do not see higher-level artifacts.
(R2) Same task, same repository, same initial state: all levels run from the same task and the same
repository state. (R3) Traceable runtime support: when a level provides a capability, its use is recorded.
(R4) No hidden evaluator leakage: expected files, expected fixes, and evaluator notes are not visible
to the agent at any level. (R5) Outcome comparability: every level is adjudicated under the same final
outcome taxonomy.
Visibility matrix. Table 3 states which artifacts are visible at which level. It is the operational
definition of the ladder.


                                                            7
Table 3: Visibility matrix for the H0–H3 ladder. Each artifact is either visible (✓) or hidden (—) at a given
level. Visibility is monotonically increasing along the ladder.

                            Artifact                        H0   H1    H2    H3
                            Task description                ✓    ✓      ✓     ✓
                            Repository files                ✓    ✓      ✓     ✓
                            Tool registry                   —    ✓      ✓     ✓
                            Test-command registry           —    ✓      ✓     ✓
                            Tool-usage protocol             —    ✓      ✓     ✓
                            AGENT _G UIDE                   —    —      ✓     ✓
                            A RCHITECTURE                   —    —      ✓     ✓
                            T ESTING guide                  —    —      ✓     ✓
                            TASK _S TATE                    —    —      ✓     ✓
                            K NOWN _FAILURES                —    —      ✓     ✓
                            Context-selection protocol      —    —      ✓     ✓
                            Deterministic check registry    —    —     —      ✓
                            Bug-reproduction protocol       —    —     —      ✓
                            Failure-attribution protocol    —    —     —      ✓
                            Verification protocol           —    —     —      ✓
                            Verification report template    —    —     —      ✓
                            Hidden evaluator notes          —    —     —      —


What the ladder measures. The H0–H3 ladder does not treat task success as its only outcome.
It measures whether the agent inspected relevant context, used tools, ran tests, reproduced the
failure, attributed it, verified each requirement, preserved prior behavior, avoided unrelated changes,
introduced entropy, and required human intervention. The next section formalizes these measurements
as a trace-based evaluation protocol.


Trace-based evaluation

The harness ladder defines what is visible to the agent. The evaluation protocol defines how each
agent run is recorded, verified, audited, and classified.
Principle. The principle is simple: autonomous software-engineering evaluation should measure
not only whether a patch is produced, but whether the model–harness–environment system produces
auditable evidence that the task requirements are satisfied. A conventional benchmark reports whether
a final patch passes tests. That is useful but insufficient for studying harnesses, because harnesses
shape the process by which an agent selects context, uses tools, interprets failures, verifies behavior,
and avoids maintenance burden. The protocol therefore records both final outcomes and intermediate
evidence.
Episode. An episode is one attempt by a model–harness–environment system to complete a specified
software-engineering task. An episode is defined by an episode identifier, the model or agent identity,
the harness level, the repository, the initial commit, the task specification, the visible artifacts, the
allowed tools, the intervention policy, the verification procedure, and the final outcome rule. The unit
of evaluation is the episode, not a single model response.
Episode package. Each episode produces an episode package (Figure 3): an auditable record


                                                     8
                                                             Input pack
                                               task + repository + harness artifacts


                                                            Agent episode
                                                      model acts under harness



                     action trace              tool trace            context trace       verification trace

                   intervention log        failure attribution       entropy audit       outcome record


                                      patch + verification report



                                          Episode package


                                      Outcome classification
                                           5-label taxonomy


Figure 3: The evaluation pipeline. An input pack (task + repository + harness artifacts) is converted through
an agent episode into an episode package containing eight trace types, a patch, and a verification report, which
is then classified by a five-label final-outcome taxonomy.

Table 4: The eight trace types and what they capture. Each trace is associated with one or more runtime
resources and the failure type it makes diagnosable.

Trace                     Runtime resource captured                              Failure type addressed
action trace              all (sequence of agent operations)                     overall episode coherence
tool trace                tool budget; test-time compute                         Ftool
context trace             context budget; project memory                         Fcontext
verification trace        verification evidence                                  Fverify
failure-attribution log   failure signal                                         Fverify , Fmodel
intervention log          human attention                                        all (diagnostic signal)
entropy audit             entropy budget                                         Fentropy
outcome record            — (final classification)                               overall adjudication


containing eight trace types plus a patch, a verification report, a final report, and a final-outcome
record. Table 4 maps each trace type to the runtime resource it captures and the failure type it
addresses.
Trace schemas. Each trace is line-structured JSON (JSONL) and admits a compact schema. The
action trace records externally meaningful operations such as read_file, edit_file, run_tool,
write_report, update_task_state, inspect_diff, and declare_complete. The tool trace
records the command, the exit code, the duration, the timeout status, the failure type, and whether the
agent recovered. The context trace records which project memory artifacts were consulted, what they
contributed, and whether the contribution influenced agent decisions. The verification trace records
the type of verification attempted (bug reproduction; deterministic behavioral check; registered test;
targeted test; full regression; lint; patch review; manual evaluator check), the method, the result, the
requirements covered, and the agent’s interpretation. The failure-attribution log records the observed
output, expected output, failure type, evidence, alternative explanations, and next diagnostic action.


                                                                 9
The intervention log records human assistance, its avoidability, its burden level, and the harness gap it
corresponds to. The entropy audit records categories of agent-introduced maintenance burden—code,
documentation, dependency, test, file residue, architecture, workflow—together with a 0–3 severity.
The outcome record records final classification and summary metrics.
Outcome taxonomy. The final outcome of an episode is one of five labels. autonomous_verified_
success: task requirements are satisfied and sufficient evidence is produced without missing-harness
human intervention. assisted_verified_success: the final patch is correct, but key progress or
verification depended on human assistance. unverified_success: the patch appears correct or the
task behavior passes evaluator-side checks, but the agent did not itself produce evidence sufficient
under the protocol. failed: required behavior fails, tests fail due to the patch, or no usable patch
is produced. unsafe_invalid: tests are weakened, unrelated destructive edits occur, or the task is
bypassed. The taxonomy separates task behavior from evidence quality: a patch can be correct but
unverified, and a failed patch can be diagnostically useful.
Deterministic behavioral checks. The protocol relies on deterministic behavioral checks to map
task requirements to directly observable outputs. For a validation task, these take the form of short
commands that exercise the corrected behavior, the preserved valid-input behavior, and the preserved
invalid-input behavior, each with an expected output substring. Deterministic checks serve two roles:
at H3 they are agent-visible harness artifacts that support the agent’s own verification; at all levels
they are evaluator-side adjudication checks that classify the final outcome. The distinction preserves
the ladder while permitting consistent adjudication.
Metrics. The protocol enables a family of process-level metrics: the autonomous verified success
rate (AVSR); the missing-harness human intervention rate (M-HIR); verification autonomy; context-
trace meaningfulness; tool recovery rate; failure attribution completeness; and entropy delta. These
are population-level quantities that summarize episode packages produced under specified (model,
harness, task, repository) cells.


An illustrative case: a controlled validation task

We illustrate the framework on a controlled task. The task is small by design: its purpose is to
make the ladder and the protocol concretely inspectable, not to support population-level performance
comparisons. What the case shows is that the H0–H3 ladder is operationally feasible and that the
resulting episode packages differ in evidence structure in ways that the framework predicts.
Task: repoA-T1. The repository repoA is a small login application with a controlled validation
defect. The login flow does not reject an empty password as a validation error; an empty password
instead reaches credential matching and is reported as Invalid credentials. The task is to
modify the application so that an empty password is rejected with a validation error containing the
substring Password is required., while preserving the existing valid-login and invalid-non-empty-
credential behaviors.
Requirements. The task has five requirements: (i) empty password produces a validation error
containing "Password is required."; (ii) valid credentials (alice / correct-password) still
succeed; (iii) invalid non-empty credentials still return "Invalid credentials."; (iv) a test covers
the empty-password behavior; (v) existing tests continue to pass, or regression-test instability is


                                                   10
Table 5: Outcomes and evidence packages across H0–H3 on repoA-T1. All four levels execute the task; the
distinguishing characteristic is the evidence structure the episode produces. “Verified” here means under the H3
protocol’s verification discipline; lower levels lack a structured verification protocol of their own.

Level    Final outcome                          Distinctive evidence produced
H0       autonomous_verified_success            patch; evaluator-side deterministic checks pass; full regression
                                                succeeds
H1       unverified_success                     patch; tool trace; targeted login test; lint; full regression records
                                                a timeout
H2       unverified_success                     H1 evidence plus context trace over project memory; updated
                                                task state
H3       autonomous_verified_success            H2 evidence plus bug reproduction log; failure attribution log;
                                                deterministic requirement checks; structured verification report


explicitly recorded.
Verification checks. The evaluator’s adjudication relies on three deterministic behavioral checks: an
empty-password probe, a valid-login probe, and an invalid-non-empty-credentials probe. Each probe
invokes the login controller directly and is expected to return a specific substring. Targeted login tests,
lint, and full regression are also recorded when available.
Harness setup. The same task and the same initial repository state are evaluated under all four harness
levels per the visibility matrix (Table 3). Hidden evaluator notes are not visible to the agent at any
level. The agent has no access to the deterministic check registry below H3.
Outcomes. Table 5 summarizes the result of one execution per harness level. All four levels produce
a working patch; the evidence packages differ in characteristic ways.
H3 in detail. H3’s distinctive contribution is to convert task completion into a structured evidentiary
object via the canonical workflow shown in Figure 4: reproduce → attribute → fix → verify → report.
Before editing, H3 runs the empty-password probe and observes

                         {"ok":false,"errors":["Invalid credentials."]}

against an expected output of

                        {"ok":false,"errors":["Password is required."]}.

The failure is attributed to a validation failure: the empty string reaches credential matching instead
of being rejected by validation. The fix modifies the validator to reject empty or whitespace-only
passwords, together with a test covering the corrected behavior. Verification then executes the three
deterministic probes plus targeted tests; a full regression attempt is made and bounded by a timeout,
with the result recorded. The episode concludes with a verification report linking each requirement to
its evidence.
What the case reveals. Three observations follow directly from the case. First, evidence quality varies
systematically with harness level. Higher levels produce qualitatively different evidence packages: tool
traces appear at H1 and above; context traces appear at H2 and above; reproduction logs, attribution
logs, deterministic-check records, and verification reports appear only at H3. Second, tool instability is
a runtime concern, not an incidental nuisance. The H1–H3 packages record a full-regression timeout;
the protocol surfaces this rather than hiding it, and H3’s verification discipline accommodates it via


                                                      11
                                 re-attribute if verification reveals diagnosis was wrong


      1. Reproduce          2. Attribute                 3. Fix                   4. Verify         5. Report
       observe failure      classify failure          targeted edit         deterministic checks     verification
        vs. expected       type & evidence         to attributed layer      +preserved behavior    report + limits

Figure 4: The H3 verification workflow. H3 binds the agent to a five-step discipline: reproduce the failure
before editing, classify the failure type, apply a targeted fix to the attributed layer, verify both required
and preserved behavior, and report evidence and limitations. A back-edge from verification to attribution
accommodates the case in which verification reveals that the initial diagnosis was wrong.


deterministic checks bound to specific requirements. Third, verification can be a harness responsibility.
Lower levels treat completion as an assertion; H3 binds the agent to produce requirement-linked
evidence. This is the difference between a patch and a verifiable change.


Implications

The framework, the ladder, and the protocol together support a reframing of autonomous software
engineering. The central question is not whether a model can produce a patch but whether the
model–harness–environment system can produce a verifiable, attributed, maintainable change. Five
implications follow.
Verification is a runtime capability. In many current workflows, verification is delegated to humans or
to external evaluators: the agent declares completion and someone else checks. H3 places verification
inside the harness. The agent must reproduce the failure, attribute it, apply a targeted fix, check each
requirement, and report evidence and limitations. This imposes epistemic discipline on the agent
and produces a transferable record of why the change is believed to be correct. A model that writes
code but cannot itself verify behavior remains dependent on human review; a harness that makes
verification explicit reduces that dependence.
Memory is auditable only when its use is traced. Project memory is often treated as a generic
benefit for agents. Providing memory is insufficient; the agent’s use of memory must be inspectable.
The context trace records which memory artifact was consulted, what it contributed, and whether
it influenced a decision. This converts project memory from an invisible prompt ingredient into an
analyzable runtime resource and lets us ask whether the agent ignored, misunderstood, or correctly
applied the memory available to it.
Failure attribution separates diagnosis from action. Agent systems frequently move from a failed
observation directly to a new edit. The result is lucky fixes when the new edit happens to address
the underlying cause, and random patching when it does not. H3 inserts an attribution step: the
agent records observed output, expected output, inferred failure type, supporting evidence, alternative
explanations, and the next diagnostic action. The attribution log is auditable: an evaluator can inspect
whether the agent’s diagnosis was reasonable before scrutinizing the patch.
Tool stability is a harness problem. Autonomous agents act in real environments where commands
can hang, tests can be flaky, and full regression suites can be expensive or unstable. Human developers
adapt: they choose targeted tests, add timeouts, inspect logs, or report uncertainty. The same adaptation
must be available to the agent. The protocol’s distinction between deterministic behavioral checks,


                                                           12
targeted tests, full regression attempts, and lint—each recorded with its outcome and any instability—
makes tool stability an analyzable runtime resource rather than an incidental engineering nuisance.
Entropy is part of autonomous engineering. Autonomous agents do not only produce solutions.
They can also produce residue: redundant code, stale documentation, unnecessary dependencies,
weakened tests, debug scripts, inconsistent task notes, or architecture violations. These do not break
the immediate task but degrade the project over time. The entropy auditor places this concern inside
the harness rather than outside the loop. As autonomous agents take on more sustained software work,
entropy management is likely to become as important as the immediate code change.
Toward AI-native development environments. Current software repositories are designed for
human developers: they assume that the reader can infer architecture from convention, remember
testing practices, interpret test failures, and clean up residue. None of these assumptions hold for a
foundation-model agent. The harness framework suggests that future repositories will need explicit,
agent-readable affordances: architecture maps, testing guides, deterministic check registries, task-state
files, failure templates, verification report templates, entropy dashboards, permission manifests, and
intervention logs. The design question shifts from what should a software repository contain for
human developers to what should it expose so that an agent can work on it reliably.


Outlook

The framework opens an empirical program rather than concluding one. The harness ladder is a
controlled-ablation instrument; the protocol produces episode packages that admit population-level
analysis. We identify six directions in which the program naturally extends.
Multi-task evaluation. The harness ladder is designed to be reusable across task classes. A balanced
task suite would stress different harness components: validation tasks stress the verification protocol;
UI-behavior tasks stress observability; dependency-cleanup tasks stress the entropy auditor; refactoring
tasks stress project memory and architecture guidance; flaky-test diagnosis stresses failure attribution
and recovery; long-feature implementation stresses task state and context management; permission-
sensitive tasks stress the permission boundary. Each task class illuminates a different facet of the
harness.
Multi-model evaluation. Harness effects may interact with model capability. A stronger model
may localize files with minimal guidance; a weaker model may depend heavily on project memory.
Some models may follow structured verification protocols well; others may not. The models ×
harness levels × tasks design separates model effects from harness effects and reveals which harness
components are model-agnostic and which are model-dependent.
Quantitative metrics. The protocol defines AVSR, M-HIR, verification autonomy, tool recovery rate,
failure attribution completeness, and entropy delta. With a multi-task multi-model design, these
become statistically estimable quantities with confidence intervals, supporting hypothesis testing of
harness contributions.
Long-horizon evaluation. Real software work spans many episodes on the same repository. Entropy
accumulates; task state becomes more useful or more contradictory; project memory either ages
well or rots. A long-horizon evaluation runs a sequence of tasks under each harness level, preserves
repository state between tasks, audits entropy after each episode, and measures how prior episodes


                                                   13
affect later success. This is the natural test of whether richer harnesses reduce long-term maintenance
burden.
AI-native repository design. If a harness benefits from agent-readable affordances, repository de-
sign itself becomes a research question. What documentation structure best supports an agent’s
context selection? What test-command registry shape best supports recovery from instability? What
architecture-map format best prevents wrong-layer fixes? These are questions about repository
artifacts, not about models or agents.
Runtime systems for agent-first development. The broader implication is that autonomous soft-
ware engineering will require runtime systems analogous to operating systems, but specialized for
foundation-model agents: systems that manage context, tools, memory, verification, permissions,
failure recovery, human oversight, entropy, cost, and risk. The AI Harness Engineering names the
missing layer. The next stage is to build it.


Methods

Repository construction. The repository repoA is a small Node.js login application constructed
specifically to support the H0–H3 ladder. It contains an API controller, a validator, an authentication
service, a UI layer, and an existing test suite. The validation defect is localized to the validator: it
accepts empty-string passwords. The defect is chosen to be objectively checkable through three
deterministic behavioral probes, to require modifying a specific architectural layer (rejecting it
elsewhere would be a wrong-layer fix), and to admit verification via a structured workflow.
Harness instantiation. Each harness level is instantiated by exposing exactly the artifacts listed
in Table 3. H0 receives a task description file and the unmodified repository tree. H1 additionally
receives a tool registry, a test-command registry, and a tool-usage protocol, placed under a top-level
harness/ directory. H2 additionally receives an agent guide, an architecture document, a testing
guide, a task-state file, a known-failures file, and a context-selection protocol. H3 additionally receives
a deterministic check registry, a bug-reproduction protocol, a failure-attribution protocol, a verification
protocol, and a verification report template. Evaluator notes, including the expected attribution and
the expected fix, are kept in a separate evaluator pack not visible to the agent at any level.
Trace recording. Traces are recorded as JSONL files following the schemas summarized in the main
text. The action trace captures externally meaningful operations rather than every token of internal
reasoning. The tool trace records every command invocation with exit code, duration, timeout status,
and recovery status. The context trace records every project-memory artifact consulted by the agent
with a structured contribution field. The verification trace records every verification attempt with
type, method, result, covered requirements, and the agent’s interpretation. The failure-attribution
log is required only at H3. The intervention log records every human action with an avoidability
classification and a corresponding harness-gap label. The entropy audit is produced at the end of each
episode and classifies any agent-introduced residue.
Deterministic behavioral checks. The three checks exercise the login controller directly with
three input cases. The empty-password probe invokes the controller with username = "alice"
and password = ""; the expected output contains the substring "Password is required." The
valid-login probe uses password = "correct-password" and expects the substring "ok":true.


                                                    14
The invalid-non-empty-credentials probe uses password = "wrong-password" and expects the
substring "Invalid credentials." Each probe is executed as a short Node.js invocation that
requires the login controller, calls it with the test input, and prints the JSON response. These checks
are agent-visible only at H3 (via the deterministic check registry); they are evaluator-side adjudication
checks at all levels.
Outcome adjudication. The evaluator applies the deterministic checks, targeted login tests, lint, and
a bounded full-regression attempt to every episode. The five outcome labels are assigned by rule: a
patch that passes all deterministic checks and is accompanied by a verification protocol that maps
requirements to evidence is autonomous_verified_success; a patch that passes the deterministic
checks without an internal verification protocol is unverified_success; an unsuccessful patch is
failed; a patch that weakens tests or introduces unrelated destructive edits is unsafe_invalid; a
successful patch that required substantive human assistance is assisted_verified_success. The
taxonomy distinguishes task behavior from evidence quality.
Full regression handling. Full regression is attempted under a strict timeout. If full regression
times out or triggers platform-level instability, the timeout is recorded; full regression is not silently
retried, and a missing full-regression result is not silently treated as success. At H3, a full-regression
timeout does not by itself prevent autonomous_verified_success when deterministic requirement
coverage is complete and the limitation is reported in the verification report.
Compute environment. Each episode is executed in an isolated workspace with the repository
checked out at a fixed initial commit. Tool invocations and test commands run in subprocesses with
explicit timeouts. The agent’s compute environment is identical across harness levels except for the
harness artifacts described above.


References

 [1] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
     Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
     language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.

 [2] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
     et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 2020.

 [3] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and
     Karthik Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world GitHub issues? In
     International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.

 [4] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan,
     and Ofir Press. SWE-agent: Agent–computer interfaces enable automated software engineering.
     In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.

 [5] Xingyao Wang, Bowen Li, Yufan Song, Frank F. Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi
     Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, Hoang H. Tran, Fuqiang Li, Ren Ma, Mingzhang
     Zheng, Bill Qian, Yanjun Shao, Niklas Muennighoff, Yizhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Junyang Lin,

                                                   15
     Robert Brennan, Hao Peng, Heng Ji, and Graham Neubig. OpenHands: An open platform
     for AI software developers as generalist agents. In International Conference on Learning
     Representations (ICLR), 2025.

 [6] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yinlin Deng, Soren Dunn, and Lingming Zhang. Agentless: Demystifying
     LLM-based software engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01489, 2024.

 [7] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. AutoCodeRover: Au-
     tonomous program improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05427, 2024.

 [8] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
     Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.

 [9] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
     Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
     models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

[10] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
     ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on
     Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.

[11] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun
     Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W. White, Doug Burger,
     and Chi Wang. AutoGen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversation. In
     COLM, 2024.

[12] Anthropic. Introducing the Model Context Protocol. Anthropic blog, 2024.

[13] Kai Mei, Zelong Li, Shuyuan Xu, Ruosong Ye, Yingqiang Ge, and Yongfeng Zhang. AIOS:
     LLM agent operating system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.16971, 2024.

[14] OpenAI. Codex: Lessons from building agent-first software. OpenAI engineering report, 2026.

[15] Microsoft. Building agent harnesses for developer tools. Microsoft engineering blog, 2026.

[16] Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
     Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui
     Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie
     Tang. AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. In International Conference on Learning
     Representations (ICLR), 2024.

[17] Jez Humble and David Farley. Continuous Delivery: Reliable Software Releases through Build,
     Test, and Deployment Automation. Addison-Wesley, 2010.

[18] Gene Kim, Jez Humble, Patrick Debois, and John Willis. The DevOps Handbook. IT Revolution
     Press, 2016.


                                               16
