                                          FALAT: Tracing Failures in LLM Agent Trajectories
                                                   via Dependency-Guided Search


                                                              Md Nakhla Rafi                             Md Ahasanuzzaman
                                                                SPEAR Lab                                    SPEAR Lab
                                                            Concordia University                         Concordia University
                                                              Montreal, Canada                             Montreal, Canada




arXiv:2606.00765v1 [cs.AI] 30 May 2026
                                                     mdnakhla.rafi@mail.concordia.ca                 m_ahasa@live.concordia.ca

                                                            Dong Jae Kim                               Zhijie Wang
                                                           DePaul University                        Concordia University
                                                            Chicago, USA                             Montreal, Canada
                                                         dkim121@depaul.edu                     zhijie.wang@concordia.ca

                                                                                 Tse-Hsun Chen
                                                                                   SPEAR Lab
                                                                               Concordia University
                                                                                 Montreal, Canada
                                                                           peterc@encs.concordia.ca



                                                                                      Abstract
                                             LLM-based agents increasingly solve complex tasks through long trajectories involving rea-
                                             soning steps, tool calls, and inter-agent communication. However, when these agents fail, it
                                             is often unclear which agent caused the failure and which step introduced the decisive error.
                                             This attribution problem is challenging because mistakes can propagate across the trajectory:
                                             later actions may appear incorrect, but only because they depend on an earlier corrupted state.
                                             Therefore, failure attribution cannot be treated as independent step-level classification. We pro-
                                             pose FALAT, a diagnostic framework for failure attribution in LLM agent trajectories. FALAT
                                             frames attribution as a dependency-guided search problem. It first constructs an expectation of
                                             how the task should be solved and uses this expectation to identify suspicious regions in the
                                             trajectory. It then traces dependencies among decisions, tool outputs, and agent messages to
                                             distinguish error-introducing steps from steps that merely inherit or propagate prior mistakes.
                                             Finally, FALAT evaluates whether correcting a candidate step would be sufficient to recover
                                             the expected outcome, allowing it to identify both the responsible agent and the decisive fail-
                                             ure step. We evaluate FALAT on the Who&When benchmark, which includes both algorithm-
                                             generated and hand-crafted multi-agent failure trajectories. The results show that FALAT consis-
                                             tently improves responsible-agent and decisive-step attribution. Its best configurations achieve
                                             46.0% step-level accuracy on algorithm-generated trajectories and 29.1% on the more challeng-
                                             ing hand-crafted trajectories, outperforming specialized attribution baselines and direct prompt-
                                             ing with standalone LLMs. These findings suggest that dependency-aware reasoning is essential
                                             for reliable failure diagnosis in LLM agent systems.


                                         1    Introduction
                                         Large language models (LLMs) have enabled a new class of agentic systems that solve complex tasks
                                         through iterative reasoning, tool use, and environment interaction. Modern software engineering
                                         agents such as OpenAI Codex and Claude Code can autonomously edit code, invoke tools and

                                         Preprint.
scripts, and execute tests over long execution horizons. Such a sequence of actions generated and
executed by these agents is also referred to as a trajectory.
Despite rapid progress, state-of-the-art (SOTA) agents still fall short on many real-world tasks, par-
ticularly those involving long-range dependencies, under-specified requirements, and multi-step ex-
ecution chains [Jimenez et al., 2023, Yu et al., 2025]. Understanding why an agent failed is thus
increasingly important as these systems become more autonomous. When a trajectory produces
an incorrect output, developers must determine which agent (who) introduced the decisive error at
which step(s) (when), where a decisive error refers to an error whose correction would recover the
final outcome of the agentic system.
Addressing this problem, which we refer to as failure attribution, is essential for ensuring the relia-
bility of agentic systems. However, decisive error localization is challenging because trajectories are
often long, interdependent, and difficult to inspect directly. Moreover, once an early mistake corrupts
the execution state, many downstream steps may appear locally reasonable while still propagating
the original fault. As a result, the true error source can be obscured by later symptoms.
Recent failure-attribution methods address these issues only partially. Single-pass LLM judges treat
trajectories as flattened inputs, making them vulnerable to positional bias [Liu et al., 2024], order
sensitivity in the presented evidence [Rafi et al., 2026], and limited hypothesis revision across long
chains [Zhu et al., 2025]. Learning-based tracers [Zhang et al., 2025a] independently evaluate can-
didate steps and predict which one is responsible for the failure. While intuitive, this formulation
generalizes poorly in practice [Zainullina et al., 2025].
In this paper, we reformulate failure attribution as hierarchical dependency-guided search. Rather
than classifying steps independently, FALAT performs a top-down search across layers of abstrac-
tion and uses typed dependencies to guide error candidate pruning and verification. FALAT first
constructs a task-conditioned prior and a hierarchical representation of the trajectory to support
coarse-to-fine localization. The prior is constructed independently of the trajectory’s intermediate
steps so that candidate selection is not guided solely by the agent’s own flawed reasoning. FALAT
then constructs typed dependencies among candidate steps to separate possible error sources from
downstream carriers and prune candidates whose effects cannot reach the final output. The remain-
ing candidates are ranked and verified by checking whether fixing a candidate would recover the
expected outcome. Finally, FALAT performs local verification around the predicted decisive step to
reduce premature commitment to a plausible but non-decisive candidate.
We evaluate FALAT on the Who&When benchmark [Zhang et al., 2025b] using three LLM back-
bones and compare it against two state-of-the-art attribution baselines and multiple standalone LLM
baselines. FALAT consistently achieves higher responsible-agent and decisive-step attribution accu-
racy. On algorithm-generated trajectories, FALAT reaches 46.0 step-level accuracy, compared with
37.3 for CHIEF [Wang et al., 2026] under the same MiniMax 2.5 [MiniMax AI, 2025] backbone. On
the more challenging hand-crafted trajectories, FALAT reaches 29.1 step-level accuracy, compared
with 17.0 for CHIEF under DeepSeek V3.2 [Liu et al., 2025].
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

       • We formulate failure attribution in LLM agent trajectories as hierarchical dependency-
         guided search, shifting the task from flat step classification to structured diagnosis over
         candidate steps and their dependencies.
       • We propose FALAT, a diagnostic framework that uses expected task behavior and step
         dependencies to identify where an error is introduced.
       • We evaluate FALAT on the Who&When benchmark across multiple LLM backbones,
         showing consistent gains over specialized attribution baselines and direct prompting with
         standalone LLMs, especially on the stricter step-level attribution task.

2   Hierarchical Dependency-Guided Search for Agent Trajectory Diagnostics
In this paper, we reformulate failure attribution as hierarchical dependency-guided search. The
task is to identify the earliest step, or set of steps, whose correction would change the system’s
final output from the observed incorrect output ô to the expected output o∗ . The search proceeds
top-down through layers of abstraction and uses typed dependency relations to prune candidates.


                                                  2
                                                               STAGE 2: Constructing Typed                    STAGE 3: Dependency-Guided                           STAGE 4: Local Re-Search:
   STAGE 1: Constructing the Search Space
                                                               Dependencies for Candidate                     Search and Verification                              Adversarial Verification
                                                               Pruning

   INPUTS                                                      INPUTS                                               error_shift         follow_up
                                                                                                               s₃                 s₄                 s₅          Window [ Ƹ𝑡-2, Ƹ𝑡+2] — compare neighbors
                           Failed Trajectory                       Candidate Decisive Steps
   - Question
   - Agent                                                                                                       Expected                Hierarchical       s₁          s₂        s₃        s₄         s₅
                           s₁   s₂     s₃      s₄   s₅   s₆     s₂           s₃            s₄          s₅      Behavior Profile           Trajectory      Symptom Symptom        Root      Propag.   Symptom

                                                                                                                         narrow → test → vote
                                                                                                                                                                  Ranking (most → least decisive)
                                                                  Expected                 Hierarchical                   Narrow 𝒞 → 𝒞_H
       Task-                           Hierarchical
    conditioned                                                 Behavior Profile            Trajectory                     𝒞 = { s₃, s₄, s₅ }                           s₃ — Root_Cause
                                        trajectory
       prior                          representation                                                                                                                    s₄ — Propagation
                                                                                                                                                                        s₂ — Symptom
                                            High
     Expected                                                                                                              𝒞_H = { s₃, s₄ }                             s₅ — Symptom
                                            Mid                       error_shift          follow_up
   Behavior Profile
                                            Low
                                                                 s₃                   s₄               s₅     Test each: 3 decisive-step criteria
                                                                                                                      Check Type                s₃   s₄
                                                                                                                                                                     Verdict: ✓ Confirm
                                                                        Transition Vocabulary                 1. Error independence             ✓    ✗

                                                                 follow_up :        dependency propagation    2. Counterfactual sufficiency     ✓    ✗
                                                               redundancy :         repeated content                                                              Verified Decisive Step
                                                              no_influence :        no dependency             3. Temporal precedence            ✓    —

            Candidate Decisive Steps
                                                                 error_shift :      new error introduced                                                                       𝒕෤ = s₃
                                                                 correction :       error corrected
                                                                 dead_end :         no downstream use
         s₂           s₃         s₄            s₅
                                                                                                                    Predicted Decisive Step
                                                                                                                             𝒕ො = s₃




Figure 1: Overview of FALAT. Stage 1 constructs an external prior π, a three-level trajectory repre-
sentation M , and an initial candidate set C. Stage 2 constructs typed dependencies to separate pos-
sible error sources from downstream carriers and prune candidates. Stage 3 performs dependency-
guided search and verifies whether fixing a candidate would recover the expected output. Stage 4
locally verifies the predicted decisive step.


This reformulation addresses two properties of the problem that step-level classification ignores.
First, directly searching on trajectories spanning hundreds of steps can be both inefficient and in-
effective compared to coarse-to-fine narrowing, as shown in classical abstraction hierarchies for
planning [Sacerdoti, 1974] and reinforcement learning [Sutton et al., 1999]. Second, since errors
may propagate across steps, distinguishing origination from propagation requires deductive reason-
ing over dependency structure rather than ranking individual steps independently.
These observations motivate three design principles for FALAT.

         • Expectation-guided search. Candidate error steps should be identified using an external
           prior over expected behavior. Signals derived solely from the trajectory can be misleading
           because they may reflect the same flawed assumptions that led the agent to fail.

         • Source-propagation separation. Dependency relations between candidate steps should
           be typed to distinguish error origination from propagation. Without this distinction,
           straightforward LLM judgments often mistake downstream propagated errors for decisive
           causes [Guo et al., 2026].

         • Counterfactual sufficiency. A candidate is decisive only if fixing it would recover the
           expected output o∗ . This counterfactual test holds earlier steps unchanged while allowing
           later steps to adjust, filtering out visible errors that do not affect the final outcome.

FALAT operationalizes these principles as a four-stage search procedure (Figure 1). The first stage
constructs the search space: a task-conditioned prior π and a hierarchical trajectory representation
M define what is searched and what counts as a deviation. The second stage constructs typed
dependencies for candidate pruning: typed transitions determine which candidates can be pruned
and which remain as possible error sources. The third stage executes dependency-guided search:
the candidate set is narrowed and checked by asking whether fixing a candidate would recover the
expected output. The fourth stage performs local verification: nearby candidates are re-examined
to reduce premature commitment to a plausible but non-decisive step.


                                                                                                          3
Notation. Let G denote an agentic system and Q denote a task specification. A trajectory τ =
(s1 , s2 , . . . , sT ) is an ordered sequence of T steps generated by G in response to Q. Each step
si = (ri , ui , oi ) consists of intermediate reasoning ri , an action or message ui , and the resulting
output or observation oi . A trajectory is classified as a failure if the final output ô produced at sT
differs from the expected output o∗ , i.e., ô ̸= o∗ . A step si is active if it involves an independent
decision, such as retrieval, computation, filtering, tool use, or code execution, and passive if it only
relays prior information. Let Iact (τ ) ⊆ {1, . . . , T } denote the indices of active steps in τ .

Definition (decisive step set). We formalize failure diagnosis as identifying a minimal subset of
active steps whose correction would be sufficient to recover the expected outcome. Formally, a
decisive step set S ∗ satisfies
                                                                   ′ 
                       S ∗ ∈ arg min |S| s.t. ∃{s′t }t∈S : f τ (S←S ) = o∗ .
                             S⊆Iact (τ )
             ′
Here, τ (S←S ) denotes the counterfactual trajectory obtained by replacing each selected step st with
a corrected step s′t , while allowing subsequent steps to adapt to the corrected state. The function
f returns the final output induced by this counterfactual trajectory. When the minimal set contains
a single step, the decisive index is t∗ = min S ∗ , which recovers the standard step-level formula-
tion [Zhang et al., 2025b]. Throughout the paper, the search target is S ∗ and the responsible agent(s)
associated with its steps, denoted by α∗ . For exposition, and to match the benchmark annotation
format, we focus on the common single-step case unless otherwise noted.

2.1   Constructing the Search Space

Effective searching in long trajectories requires a structured space in which coarse regions can be
examined and pruned before fine-grained inspection.

Defining an external prior. We construct the external π from the task specification Q, the agent
set A, the agents’ roles and system prompts P, the available tools T , and the failed final output ô.
The intermediate reasoning, actions, or tool outputs in τ are not used to ensure π is independent of
any intermediate steps. This independence is crucial because agentic failures can remain internally
coherent: once an early error corrupts the state, later steps may be reasonable responses to that
corrupted state. Evaluators based only on trajectory self-consistency may therefore miss the original
deviation. The prior records the task objective, expected output type, appropriate agent/tool use at
each stage, tool-use constraints, and task-specific failure risks such as unsupported information use,
skipped verification, or incorrect intermediate values [Bouzenia and Pradel, 2025]. These risks serve
only as guidance for identifying suspicious steps, not as evidence of failure.

Hierarchical representation as a search space. Rather than searching directly over τ , we con-
struct a hierarchical abstraction that reduces the search space. Specifically, we convert τ into a
three-level representation M = (Mhi , Mmid , Mlo ) (Table 1), conditioned on the external prior π.
The high level captures coarse execution stages, the mid level summarizes local decisions and their
significance, and the low level preserves raw execution evidence such as tool outputs and concrete
values. This coarse-to-fine decomposition follows the principle of abstraction hierarchies in plan-
ning [Sacerdoti, 1974, Miki et al., 2015] and temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning [Sutton
et al., 1999]. It allows search to first identify suspect stages in Mhi , then localize candidate steps in
Mmid , and finally verify them against evidence in Mlo .
FALAT constructs a hierarchical representation M from a trajectory τ = (s1 , . . . , sT ) via non-
overlapping window-based abstraction. The trajectory is partitioned into N = ⌈T /k⌉ consecutive
windows {Wj }N j=1 , where each Wj contains k steps, except possibly the final window, and is pro-
cessed independently to ensure uniform coverage and reduce positional bias [Liu et al., 2024, Rafi
et al., 2026].
                                                                 (j)
For each window Wj , FALAT retains the original steps as Mlo = Wj , summarizes them into mid-
                        (j)                                                               (j)
level representations Mmid , and further abstracts them into high-level representations Mhi . Both
abstraction stages are conditioned on the prior π, so actions and decisions are interpreted relative
to the expected task behavior rather than only their local text. The full representation is M =
     (j)    (j)   (j)
{(Mlo , Mmid , Mhi )}N j=1 . Here, π guides abstraction, while the evidence stored in M remains


                                                    4
Level               Contents                                                Role in Search
High (Mhi )         Global execution summary: task objective, ex-           Identifies suspect regions of the trajectory
                    pected output type, high-level failure pattern,         and provides global context for dependency-
                    and agent responsibilities                              guided pruning (§2.1)
Mid (Mmid )         Local step summaries: step index, agent, ac-            Localizes suspicious steps within suspect re-
                    tion, and decision, and significance in the tra-        gions and provides candidate-level context for
                    jectory                                                 constructing typed dependencies (§2.2)
Low (Mlo )          Step-level evidence: original step content, tool        Supports candidate verification against raw
                    outputs, concrete values, assumptions, and              execution evidence (§2.3)
                    provenance
Table 1: Hierarchical trajectory representation as a three-level search space. Each level supports a
distinct search operation, and the levels are aligned so that coarse-level narrowing constrains lower-
level candidate selection and verification.


derived from the observed trajectory. The three levels are aligned, enabling top-down localization
from coarse segments in Mhi to raw evidence in Mlo . Processing windows independently trades
limited cross-window context for substantially reduced positional bias in long trajectories.

Error candidate set selection. Using the prior π and the hierarchical representation M , FALAT
identifies an initial error candidate set C of possible failure locations. The role of M is to make
candidate selection coarse-to-fine rather than purely step-wise: Mhi identifies execution stages that
deviate from the expected task progress, Mmid identifies suspicious steps within those stages by
summarizing each step’s agent, action, decision, output, and role in the local context and Mlo pro-
vides the raw evidence used to check whether the corresponding steps should enter the candidate
set. Thus, a step si is included in C if the aligned representations around si show at least one signal
of potential failure. At this stage, C is not treated as the decisive set; it only defines the initial search
candidates for later typed-transition analysis and counterfactual verification.
Let τ = (s1 , . . . , sT ) and let Y (τ ) denote the final outcome. For each step si , FALAT evaluates
three signals using the aligned views of M : (i) outcome relevance, where Mhi and Mmid indicate
that si belongs to a stage or transition that contributes to Y (τ ); (ii) prior inconsistency, where the
action, decision, or transition associated with si conflicts with the task objective, agent role, tool-use
constraints, or expected verification behavior encoded in π; and (iii) local execution inconsistency,
where Mlo shows that the agent’s stated reasoning, executed action, and observed output do not
align, such as when an agent calls a tool inconsistent with its stated intent, uses mismatched tool
arguments, ignores a tool error, or continues from an empty or unsupported result.
      (r)     (p)    (e)
Let δi , δi , δi           ∈ {0, 1} denote indicators for these conditions. The candidate set is then
                                                      (r)      (p)      (e)
                                          C = {i | δi       ∨ δi     ∨ δi     = 1}.

Because M is constructed over disjoint windows {Wj }N   j=1 , candidates are consolidated across win-
dows by merging adjacent indices into contiguous regions R = {Rk }, where each Rk ⊆ {1, . . . , T }
is a maximal interval of candidate steps. This consolidation uses the alignment between Mhi , Mmid ,
and Mlo to recover context when suspicious behavior spans window boundaries.

2.2     Constructing Typed Dependencies for Candidate Pruning

The error candidate set C identifies steps where deviations may occur, but it does not distinguish
between steps that originate an error and those that merely propagate it. This distinction is critical,
as downstream steps often remain internally consistent with earlier errors and are thus incorrectly
identified as decisive [Zhang et al., 2025b].
To separate error sources from downstream carriers and prune candidates whose effects cannot reach
the final output, we construct a directed dependency structure over candidate steps. For each ordered
pair (si , sj ) with i < j, we assign a transition label ℓi→j ∈ L, where L is a finite set of diagnostic
relation types. These labels describe how information, decisions, and errors move between candidate
steps. The resulting structure is used to retain candidates that may introduce or carry a deviation


                                                              5
toward the final output ô, and to prune candidates whose effects are redundant, corrected, unrelated,
or unable to reach the final output.
We use the following transition labels:

       • follow_up: sj builds on the output, decision, or assumption introduced by si . If si is
         aligned with the prior π, the transition indicates normal progression and can be pruned. If
         si is already corrupted, sj is treated as a downstream carrier, and attribution is traced back
         to si .
       • redundancy: sj repeats, restates, or rechecks information already provided by si without
         adding new evidence or changing the trajectory. Such transitions are pruned unless the
         repeated step introduces an independent deviation.
       • no_influence: sj does not consume or depend on the output of si . This relation pre-
         vents attribution from being transferred across unrelated steps. Candidates connected only
         through such transitions are pruned unless they independently deviate from the prior.
       • error_shift: sj introduces a new deviation, shifts the trajectory away from the expected
         path, or transforms an upstream issue into a different downstream error. Such steps are
         retained as possible error sources or error-shifting points.
       • correction: sj fixes, compensates for, or invalidates a deviation introduced by si . Up-
         stream candidates whose effects no longer propagate beyond the correction are pruned.
       • dead_end: si leads to an output that is not consumed by later reasoning or the final answer.
         Such candidates are pruned unless there is independent evidence that they affect the final
         output.

Applying these labels yields a refined candidate set C ′ ⊆ C containing candidates whose effects can
plausibly reach the final output ô. This reduces the search space while preserving candidates that
may have originated, propagated, or transformed the failure.

2.3   Dependency-Guided Search and Verification

After typed-transition structure, FALAT further narrows C ′ to a small high-confidence set CH and
verifies each remaining candidate against the counterfactual sufficiency objective.

Narrowing the candidates. Ranking combines π with the typed transition structure of C ′ . Candi-
dates are prioritized if they introduce a deviation from π and lie on a propagation path that reaches
the final output. They are deprioritized if their outputs are unused, corrected, or independent of
the final output (i.e., already pruned by dead_end, redundancy, or follow_up deductions). The
remaining candidates are ranked using three signals: (i) whether the step makes an incorrect exe-
cution decision (e.g., wrong tool, flawed code, or misused data); (ii) whether it introduces or relies
on unverified or fabricated information relative to π; and (iii) whether it lies on a typed transition
path that influences subsequent reasoning or the final output. We retain the top K candidates as the
high-confidence set CH , with K = 3 in our experiments. If fewer than K candidates remain after
pruning, all remaining candidates are included.

Verification against the counterfactual objective. For each candidate in CH , FALAT constructs
a localized verification context centered on the candidate: the prior π, the raw window (r, a, o) for
steps [i−1, i, i+1], the typed transitions involving i, and linked Mlo evidence. Where available, raw
logs such as executable code and full tool outputs replace summarized content to preserve precise
execution details. The full representation M remains available when broader context is required.
We then evaluate each candidate using three criteria aligned with the search objective:

      1. Error independence. Does the step introduce the error, or merely inherit it from an up-
         stream fault? We assess this by tracing typed dependencies backward from the candi-
         date: error_shift indicates that the candidate may introduce or transform an error, while
         follow_up indicates propagation from an earlier step.
      2. Counterfactual sufficiency. Would correcting this step’s output, decision, or assumption
         recover o∗ while keeping prior steps fixed and allowing subsequent steps to adapt?


                                                  6
       3. Temporal precedence. Among candidates satisfying the above criteria, select the earliest.

The candidate that satisfies all three criteria is selected as the predicted decisive step t̂, and its
corresponding agent is denoted by α̂.

2.4   Local Re-Search: Adversarial Verification

A common issue in LLM-as-judge settings is anchoring. Namely. once a plausible candidate is
selected, later reasoning may rationalize it rather than challenge it. Thus, the predicted decisive step
t̂ may still be worse than a nearby alternative under direct comparison. We address this with local
verification: a bounded re-evaluation that compares t̂ against its immediate neighbors and re-applies
the source–propagation distinction at finer scope.
Given t̂, FALAT extracts a bounded neighborhood [max(1, t̂ − 2), min(t̂ + 2, T )] and provides the
LLM with π, the relevant typed transitions, and M . For each step in the window, the LLM constructs
arguments for and against the step being decisive and assigns one of four roles: ROOT _C AUSE,
which independently introduces the decisive error; P ROPAGATION, which carries an upstream error
into downstream reasoning; S YMPTOM, which reflects an existing error without materially affecting
downstream computation; or C ONTRIBUTING, which affects execution but is not by itself sufficient
to cause the final failure.
The four-role taxonomy is the local-search counterpart of the typed-transition vocabulary:
ROOT _C AUSE and P ROPAGATION are the cause-vs-carrier distinction restated as step-level roles,
while S YMPTOM and C ONTRIBUTING catch the two ways a step can look wrong without being
decisive. FALAT then ranks the steps in the window from most to least likely to be the decisive error
using the role classification, the for/against arguments, the typed transition structure, and a coun-
terfactual check on whether correcting the step would change the final output. This evaluation is
comparative by construction since t̂ must outperform specific named alternatives, which is precisely
what local search requires to escape an anchored local optimum.
FALAT then either confirms that t̂ remains the highest ranked decisive step or replaces it with a
higher ranked neighboring step. We denote the verified decisive step t̃ and its associated agent ã.

3     Experiment Setup
Benchmark. We evaluate FALAT on Who&When [Zhang et al., 2025b], a benchmark of 184 failed
executions from 127 LLM-based multi-agent systems. The benchmark covers both CaptainAgent-
generated teams on GAIA and AssistantBench tasks [Song et al., 2024, Mialon et al., 2023, Yoran
et al., 2024] and hand-crafted Magentic-One systems [Fourney et al., 2024]. Each instance provides
the full trajectory and human annotations for the responsible agent and decisive error step.
Metrics. Following prior work [Zhang et al., 2025b], we evaluate FALAT using three metrics.
Agent-level accuracy measures whether the predicted responsible agent α̂ matches the ground-truth
agent α∗ . Step-level accuracy measures whether the predicted decisive step t̂ exactly matches the
ground-truth step t∗ , making it the strictest metric. Step-level accuracy with tolerance considers a
prediction correct if |t̂ − t∗ | ≤ k. We report results for k ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}.
Baselines. We compare FALAT with CHIEF [Wang et al., 2026], which we re-run under the same
three backbone models as FALAT, and AgentTracer-8B [Zhang et al., 2025a], whose results are
adopted from prior work. We also include direct-prompting LLM baselines from Who&When,
where the full trajectory is provided to the model in a single pass.

4     Result
Overall performance. FALAT achieves the strongest results on both trajectory types (Table 2).
Its best configuration reaches 68.0 agent-level and 46.0 step-level accuracy on algorithm-generated
trajectories, and 73.0 agent-level and 29.1 step-level accuracy on hand-crafted trajectories. Com-
pared with CHIEF and AgentTracer, FALAT shows the largest gains at the step level, the stricter
and more diagnostic metric. Against CHIEF, FALAT improves agent-level accuracy by up to +13.2
points (MiniMax 2.5) on algorithm-generated trajectories and +23.0 points (DeepSeek V3.2) on


                                                   7
Table 2: Performance on algorithm-generated and hand-crafted trajectories. We report agent-level
accuracy (Agent) and exact step-level accuracy (Step). Best results within each block are bolded.
For fair comparison, we re-run CHIEF under the same backbone configurations used by FALAT.

                                         Algorithm-Generated (n = 126) Hand-Crafted (n = 58)
     Backbone / Model Method
                                         Agent              Step             Agent      Step
     Same-backbone comparison
     GPT-5.4-Mini      CHIEF              59.0              27.0              55.2       13.8
                       FALAT              66.5              42.0              65.5       22.2
     DeepSeek V3.2     CHIEF              52.0              30.0              50.0       10.3
                       FALAT              59.7              38.0              73.0       29.1
     MiniMax 2.5       CHIEF              54.8              37.3              51.0       17.0
                       FALAT              68.0              46.0              66.3       25.9
     Specialized attribution baseline (results adopted from Zhang et al. [2025a])
     AgentTracer-8B        AgentTracer 63.7                  37.3              63.8      20.7
     Standalone LLM baselines (results adopted from Zhang et al. [2025a])
     Qwen3-8B           Direct           60.3             5.6                 39.5       3.5
     LLaMA-3.2-3B       Direct           45.2             8.7                 50.0       3.5
     Qwen3-32B          Direct           57.9             8.7                 44.8       1.7
     Qwen3-Coder        Direct           36.5            32.5                 60.4       13.8
     GPT-4.1            Direct           59.5            21.9                 37.9        3.4
     DeepSeek-R1        Direct           65.1            29.5                 53.4        6.9
     Gemini-2.5-Pro     Direct           57.1            25.9                 51.7        6.9
     Claude-Sonnet-4    Direct           51.1            38.8                 50.0       18.9


Table 3: Step-level accuracy under tolerance windows on Hand-Crafted trajectories. We report
whether the predicted decisive step falls within k steps of the ground-truth step (|t̂ − t∗ | ≤ k).

                                                    Hand-Crafted
                       Tolerance
                                   GPT-5.4-Mini DeepSeek V3.2 MiniMax 2.5
                       Exact            22.2              29.1              25.9
                       ±1               22.4              32.5              32.8
                       ±2               25.9              36.7              34.5
                       ±3               32.8              40.0              37.9
                       ±4               41.4              45.6              51.7
                       ±5               43.1              49.1              53.4



hand-crafted trajectories. At the step level, FALAT improves performance by +8.7 points (MiniMax
2.5) on algorithm-generated trajectories and +12.1 points (DeepSeek V3.2) on hand-crafted trajec-
tories. Compared to AgentTracer, FALAT further improves step-level accuracy by +8.7 points on
algorithm-generated trajectories and +5.2 points on hand-crafted trajectories. These results indicate
that FALAT provides a more effective attribution procedure than existing trajectory-level baselines,
especially for the harder step-localization task.
Comparison to standalone LLMs. Increasing model scale alone does not reliably solve step-level
attribution. Small standalone models achieve near-zero step-level accuracy, while medium and large
models remain unstable across trajectory types. The strongest standalone baseline, Claude-Sonnet-4,
reaches 38.8 step-level accuracy on algorithm-generated trajectories but only 18.9 on hand-crafted
trajectories. In contrast, FALAT improves step-level accuracy by +7.2 points (38.8 → 46.0) on
algorithm-generated trajectories and by +10.2 points (18.9 → 29.1) on hand-crafted trajectories.
These results suggest that stronger backbones alone are insufficient for reliable step-level attribution,
and that structured search provides additional benefits beyond model scaling
Performance under tolerance windows. In practice, precisely identifying the decisive step is not
always required; narrowing the failure to a range of steps is often sufficient. We therefore report
tolerance-based step-level performance of FALAT in Table 3, focusing on hand-crafted trajectories
due to their higher difficulty. Algorithm-generated trajectories are excluded, as their short length
(maximum of 10 steps) would lead to inflated accuracy under relaxed tolerances [Zhang et al.,


                                                     8
Table 4: Ablation results on algorithm-generated and hand-crafted trajectories. All experiments use
GPT-5.4-Mini as the backbone.
                                              Algorithm-Generated           Hand-Crafted
              Configuration
                                                Agent         Step        Agent        Step
              Full FALAT                         66.5         42.0         65.5        22.2
              No external prior              55.6 (-10.9) 36.5 (-5.5) 58.6 (-6.9) 22.4 (+0.2)
              No hierarchical representation 50.0 (-16.5) 31.7 (-10.3) 53.8 (-11.7) 17.2 (-5.0)
              No transition typing           57.9 (-8.6) 37.3 (-4.7) 55.0 (-10.5) 18.8 (-3.4)


2025b]. As shown in Table 3 exact step-level accuracy (k = 0) remains modest (22.2–29.1), but
increases steadily with relaxed tolerance, reaching up to 53.4 at ±5. This indicates that even when
FALAT does not predict the exact step, it typically localizes the error within a small neighborhood
of the ground-truth decisive step.
Ablation study. Table 4 shows how each component contributes to FALAT’s performance. The
hierarchical representation has the largest impact. Removing it reduce step-level accuracy by 10.3
on algorithm-generated trajectories and 5.0 on hand-crafted trajectories. The external prior is also
critical, particularly for algorithm-generated trajectories. Without it, agent-level and step-level ac-
curacy decrease by 10.9 and 5.5, respectively. Removing transition typing yields consistent drops
across both datasets, including a 10.5 decrease in agent-level accuracy on hand-crafted trajectories.
Overall, these results suggest that FALAT benefits from all three components, with the hierarchical
representation playing the largest role.

5   Limitations
Dependence on LLM judgments. FALAT relies on LLM-based judgments at multiple stages, in-
cluding candidate selection, transition typing, and counterfactual verification. As a result, its effec-
tiveness depends on the underlying model’s reasoning reliability, and errors in intermediate judg-
ments may propagate through the pipeline.
Limited long-range dependency capture. FALAT constructs hierarchical abstractions and typed
dependencies using window-based processing, which may miss long-range dependencies that span
across windows. Although consolidation partially mitigates this issue, complex interactions across
distant steps may not be fully captured.
Assumption of localized failure. Our formulation assumes that failures can be localized to a small
set of decisive steps under a counterfactual correction objective. In scenarios where failures arise
from distributed or interacting errors across multiple steps, this assumption may not fully hold,
potentially limiting the precision of attribution.

6   Related Work
LLM-based multi-agent systems. LLM-based multi-agent systems coordinate specialized agents
through structured communication, role assignment, and tool use [Li et al., 2023, Wu et al., 2024,
Hong et al., 2023, Qian et al., 2024]. Recent work increasingly automates the design of these sys-
tems, including prompt optimization [Khattab et al., 2023, Yuksekgonul et al., 2024], routing and
model selection [Chen et al., 2025, Yue et al., 2025], adaptive interaction topologies [Zhuge et al.,
2024], and workflow generation [Li et al., 2025a, Zhang et al., 2024, Hu et al., 2024, Zhang et al.,
2025c,d]. These advances improve agent capability but also produce long, interdependent trajec-
tories in which errors can propagate across agents, steps, and tool outputs. Our work focuses on
diagnosing such failures by reasoning over dependencies within a single failed trajectory.
Failure attribution and trajectory analysis. Recent work has begun to study failures in multi-
step LLM agent trajectories. Who&When [Zhang et al., 2025b] formalizes multi-agent fail-
ure attribution and shows that step-level localization remains challenging. Other studies analyze
trajectory-level failure patterns such as loops, reasoning-action mismatches, and ineffective observa-
tion use [Bouzenia and Pradel, 2025, Banerjee et al., 2025, He et al., 2025], or introduce additional


                                                     9
signals for debugging, including cross-run spectrum analysis [Ge et al., 2025], implicit execution
traces [Li et al., 2025b], and graph-based interaction tracing [Zhang et al., 2025e]. Most related to
our setting, AgenTracer [Zhang et al., 2025a] learns an attribution model from synthetic counter-
factual data, while CHIEF [Wang et al., 2026] performs backtracking over a reconstructed causal
graph. In contrast, FALAT diagnoses a single failed trajectory without task-specific training data
or oracle guidance. FALAT explicitly types step-to-step dependencies to separate error origination
from propagation and verifies candidates through counterfactual sufficiency.

7   Conclusion
In this paper, we reformulated failure attribution in LLM agent trajectories as hierarchical
dependency-guided search rather than step-level error classification. Based on this formulation,
we proposed FALAT, a four-stage framework consisting of search space construction with a task-
conditioned prior, candidate pruning through typed dependencies, dependency-guided search and
verification, and local re-search. We evaluated FALAT on the Who&When benchmark, where it
consistently outperformed existing SOTA baselines across multiple LLM backbones.

References
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
  Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2310.06770, 2023.

Boxi Yu, Yuxuan Zhu, Pinjia He, and Daniel Kang. Utboost: Rigorous evaluation of coding agents
  on swe-bench. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3762–3774, 2025.

Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and
  Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the
  association for computational linguistics, 12:157–173, 2024.

Md Nakhla Rafi, Dong Jae Kim, Tse-Hsun Chen, and Shaowei Wang. Order matters! an empirical
 study on large language models’ input order bias in software fault localization. In Proceedings of
 the 48th international conference on Software engineering, 2026.

Kunlun Zhu, Zijia Liu, Bingxuan Li, Muxin Tian, Yingxuan Yang, Jiaxun Zhang, Pengrui Han,
  Qipeng Xie, Fuyang Cui, Weijia Zhang, et al. Where llm agents fail and how they can learn from
  failures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25370, 2025.

Guibin Zhang, Junhao Wang, Junjie Chen, Wangchunshu Zhou, Kun Wang, and Shuicheng
  Yan. Agentracer: Who is inducing failure in the llm agentic systems? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2509.03312, 2025a.

Karina Zainullina, Alexander Golubev, Maria Trofimova, Sergei Polezhaev, Ibragim Badertdinov,
  Daria Litvintseva, Simon Karasik, Filipp Fisin, Sergei Skvortsov, Maksim Nekrashevich, et al.
  Guided search strategies in non-serializable environments with applications to software engineer-
  ing agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13652, 2025.

Shaokun Zhang, Ming Yin, Jieyu Zhang, Jiale Liu, Zhiguang Han, Jingyang Zhang, Beibin Li, Chi
  Wang, Huazheng Wang, Yiran Chen, and Qingyun Wu. Which agent causes task failures and
  when? on automated failure attribution of llm multi-agent systems. In Proceedings of the 42nd
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025b.

Yawen Wang, Wenjie Wu, Junjie Wang, and Qing Wang. From flat logs to causal graphs: Hier-
  archical failure attribution for llm-based multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.23701,
  2026.

MiniMax AI. Minimax m2.5: Built for real-world productivity. https://www.minimax.io/
 news/minimax-m25, 2025. Accessed: 2026-05-05.


                                                 10
Aixin Liu, Aoxue Mei, Bangcai Lin, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bingzheng Xu, Bochao Wu, Bowei
  Zhang, Chaofan Lin, Chen Dong, et al. Deepseek-v3. 2: Pushing the frontier of open large
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02556, 2025.
Earl D Sacerdoti. Planning in a hierarchy of abstraction spaces. Artificial intelligence, 5(2):115–135,
  1974.
Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A frame-
  work for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 112(1-2):181–
  211, 1999.
Linqiang Guo, Wei Liu, Yi Wen Heng, Tse-Hsun Peter Chen, and Yang Wang. Agent-sama: State-
  aware mobile assistant. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol-
  ume 40, pages 29459–29467, 2026.
Islem Bouzenia and Michael Pradel. Understanding software engineering agents: A study of
   thought-action-result trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18824, 2025.
Yuta Miki, Tomoko Kojiri, and Kazuhisa Seta. “if thinking” support system for training historical
  thinking. Procedia Computer Science, 60:1542–1551, 2015.
Linxin Song, Jiale Liu, Jieyu Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Ao Luo, Shijian Wang, Qingyun Wu, and
  Chi Wang. Adaptive in-conversation team building for language model agents. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.19425, 2024.
Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia:
  a benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2023.
Ori Yoran, Samuel Joseph Amouyal, Chaitanya Malaviya, Ben Bogin, Ofir Press, and Jonathan
  Berant. Assistantbench: Can web agents solve realistic and time-consuming tasks? In Pro-
  ceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
  8938–8968, 2024.
Adam Fourney, Gagan Bansal, Hussein Mozannar, Cheng Tan, Eduardo Salinas, Friederike Niedt-
  ner, Grace Proebsting, Griffin Bassman, Jack Gerrits, Jacob Alber, et al. Magentic-one: A gener-
  alist multi-agent system for solving complex tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04468, 2024.
Guohao Li, Hasan Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. Camel: Com-
  municative agents for" mind" exploration of large language model society. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 36:51991–52008, 2023.
Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun
  Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, et al. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-
  agent conversations. In First conference on language modeling, 2024.
Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao
  Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for a
  multi-agent collaborative framework. In The twelfth international conference on learning repre-
  sentations, 2023.
Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen,
  Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, et al. Chatdev: Communicative agents for software development. In
  Proceedings of the 62nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume
  1: Long papers), pages 15174–15186, 2024.
Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri
 Vardhamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T Joshi, Hanna Moazam, et al. Dspy:
 Compiling declarative language model calls into self-improving pipelines. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2310.03714, 2023.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and
 James Zou. Textgrad: Automatic" differentiation" via text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496,
 2024.


                                                  11
Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy Davis, Boris Hanin, Peter Bailis, Matei Zaharia, James Zou, and Ion
  Stoica. Optimizing model selection for compound ai systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14815,
  2025.
Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boyang Liu, Guancheng Wan, Kun Wang, Dawei Cheng, and Yiyan Qi.
  Masrouter: Learning to route llms for multi-agent systems. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 15549–
  15572, 2025.
Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Jürgen
 Schmidhuber. Gptswarm: Language agents as optimizable graphs. In Forty-first International
 Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Boyi Li, Zhonghan Zhao, Der-Horng Lee, and Gaoang Wang. Adaptive graph pruning for multi-
  agent communication. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02951, 2025a.
Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xionghui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen
   Zhuge, Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, et al. Aflow: Automating agentic workflow genera-
   tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10762, 2024.
Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic systems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2408.08435, 2024.
Guibin Zhang, Luyang Niu, Junfeng Fang, Kun Wang, Lei Bai, and Xiang Wang. Multi-agent
  architecture search via agentic supernet. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04180, 2025c.
Guibin Zhang, Kaijie Chen, Guancheng Wan, Heng Chang, Hong Cheng, Kun Wang, Shuyue
  Hu, and Lei Bai. Evoflow: Evolving diverse agentic workflows on the fly. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2502.07373, 2025d.
Adi Banerjee, Anirudh Nair, and Tarik Borogovac. Where did it all go wrong? a hierarchical look
  into multi-agent error attribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04886, 2025.
Pengfei He, Zhenwei Dai, Bing He, Hui Liu, Xianfeng Tang, Hanqing Lu, Juanhui Li, Jiayuan
  Ding, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Suhang Wang, et al. Traject-bench: A trajectory-aware benchmark
  for evaluating agentic tool use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04550, 2025.
Yu Ge, Linna Xie, Zhong Li, Yu Pei, and Tian Zhang. Who is introducing the failure? au-
  tomatically attributing failures of multi-agent systems via spectrum analysis. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2509.13782, 2025.
Z. Li et al. When only the final text survives: Implicit execution tracing for multi-agent attribution.
   arXiv preprint, 2025b.
Heng Zhang, Yuling Shi, Xiaodong Gu, Haochen You, Zijian Zhang, Lubin Gan, Yilei Yuan, and
  Jin Huang. Graphtracer: Graph-guided failure tracing in llm agents for robust multi-turn deep
  search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10581, 2025e.




                                                  12
A     Prompt Templates

A.1    Prompts for Search-Space Construction

External-prior prompt (π construction). This prompt operationalizes the construction of the
external prior π from the task specification, agent roster, and observed incorrect output ô, without
exposing the intermediate trajectory. Its purpose is to define the expected output type, the reasoning
requirements of the task, the role boundaries of each agent, and a task-specific set of failure risks
that later guide candidate selection.

    # QUESTION
    Question: {question}
    Expected answer type: {answer_type}
    Constraints: {constraints}
    # AGENTS
    {agents_block}
    # AGENT’S FINAL ANSWER (WRONG)
    {final_answer}
    # INSTRUCTIONS
    Produce the following sections.   Stay observational; do not plan a solution.
    ===QUESTION_ANALYSIS===
    - What is the question asking for? Be precise about the answer type.
    - What kind of reasoning is required (e.g., retrieval, calculation, comparison,
    cross-referencing, verification)?
    - What makes this question hard (e.g., ambiguity, multiple required data points, domain
    knowledge)?
    ===AGENT_ROLES===
    For each agent, describe:
    - What domain expertise they bring
    - What they are equipped to do vs. what falls outside their stated role
    - What a competent agent in this role should be expected to catch or verify
    ===ERROR_SIGNALS===
    Based on the question type and the observed wrong final answer, what patterns should we
    watch for when reading the trajectory?
    Examples of error signals:
    - Data truncation (incomplete lists, pagination, “showing N of M ”)
    - Cross-reference with incomplete data on one or both sides
    - Fabricated data (values that appear without a retrieval or calculation source)
    - Domain confusion (agent working outside its expertise)
    - Verification theater (agent “confirms” by restating, not by checking)
    - Wrong entity / wrong time period / off-by-one errors
    - Placeholder values used as real data
    List 3–5 specific signals tailored to this question.



Hierarchical-representation prompt (M construction). This prompt constructs the hierarchical
representation M = (Mhi , Mmid , Mlo ) conditioned on the external prior π. It organizes the observed
trajectory into coarse execution summaries, local step summaries, and low-level evidence, which
together define the initial search space.

    # CONTEXT ANALYSIS (your lens for reading this trajectory)
    {context_analysis}
    # TASK CONTEXT
    Question: {question}
    Expected answer type: {answer_type}
    Constraints: {constraints}
    Agents involved:
    {agents_block}
    Agent’s final answer:   {final_answer}




                                                 13
  Step-to-Agent index ({num_steps} steps total):
  {step_index}
  # FULL TRAJECTORY ({num_steps} steps)
  {steps_block}
  # INSTRUCTIONS
  Using the context analysis as your lens, read the trajectory and produce three memory
  documents. Focus on what is surprising, suspicious, or inconsistent, not on confirming
  expectations.
  ===HIGH_LEVEL===
  Write 4–6 bullet points covering:
  - What is the task asking?
  - What did the agents answer?
  - What overall strategy did the agents follow?
  - What looks wrong at a glance?
  - Which agent handled the most critical work?
  ===MID_LEVEL===
  Write one entry per key moment. Skip all routine steps.
  For each key moment:
  ### Step N (AgentName)
  What happened and why it matters. (2–3 sentences max)
  Include a step if:
  - It computed or chose a value that feeds into the final answer
  - It made a decision that changed the trajectory’s direction
  - Something looks wrong, suspicious, or surprising
  - It introduced NEW information
  - It matches an error signal from the context analysis
  ===LOW_LEVEL===
  Write one entry per suspicious or critical step.
  For each entry:
  ### Step N (AgentName)
  - Exact values computed or used
  - Data provenance
  - Data completeness
  - Assumptions made
  - What specifically looks wrong or risky
  - What inputs this step received and whether they were correct



A.2   Prompts for Typed Dependency Construction

Typed-dependency prompt. This prompt operationalizes typed dependency construction over di-
agnostically salient steps. It uses the hierarchical representation M to assign transition labels, detect
loops and dead ends, and induce a value-flow structure that is later used to prune candidates from C
to C ′ .

  # HIERARCHICAL REPRESENTATION
  ## High Level
  {high_level}
  ## Candidate Steps / Key Moments
  {mid_level}
  ## Supporting Evidence
  {low_level}
  # STEP INDEX (all {num_steps} steps, condensed)
  {step_index}
  # INSTRUCTIONS
  Analyze how the candidate steps depend on one another. Your goal is to determine which
  candidates may have introduced, propagated, transformed, or eliminated a deviation that
  affects the final output.
  For each ordered pair of candidate steps in temporal order:
  1. Determine whether the later step depends on the earlier step’s output, decision, or
  assumption.




                                                   14
  2. Assign one transition label from the set below.
  3. State briefly how the later step relates to the earlier step and whether this
  relation suggests source, propagation, correction, redundancy, or irrelevance.
  # OUTPUT FORMAT
  Write a single markdown document with the following sections:
  ## Typed Dependencies
  For each relevant ordered pair:
  ### Step X → Step Y
  - Type: follow_up | redundancy | no_influence | error_shift | correction | dead_end
  - Relationship: 1 sentence on how Y depends on X.
  # TRANSITION LABELS
  - follow_up: step Y builds on the output, decision, or assumption introduced by step
  X. If step X is already corrupted, treat step Y as a downstream carrier.
  - redundancy: step Y repeats, restates, or rechecks information already provided by
  step X without adding new evidence or changing the trajectory.
  - no_influence: step Y does not consume or depend on the output of step X.
  - error_shift: step Y introduces a new deviation, shifts the trajectory away from the
  expected path, or transforms an upstream issue at step X into a different downstream
  error.
  - correction: step Y fixes, compensates for, or invalidates a deviation introduced by
  step X.
  - dead_end: step X leads to an output that is not consumed by step Y or by the final
  answer.
  ## Candidate-Pruning Summary
  Summarize which candidates remain plausible error sources or downstream carriers
  whose effects can still reach the final output, and which candidates can be pruned as
  redundant, corrected, unrelated, or dead ends.
  ## Value Flow
  Describe how information and decisions propagate from retained candidates toward the
  final output. If the chain is incomplete or broken, state where and why.




A.3   Prompts for Dependency-Guided Search

High-confidence candidate selection prompt (CH ). This prompt narrows the refined candidate
set C ′ to a small high-confidence subset CH using the external prior, the typed dependency structure,
and the compressed trajectory representation.


  # TASK CONTEXT
  Question: {question}
  Expected answer type: {answer_type}
  Final answer given: {final_answer}
  Agents:
  {agents_block}
  Step-to-Agent mapping:
  {step_index}
  # TRAJECTORY REPRESENTATION
  ## Big Picture
  {high_level}
  ## Key Moments
  {mid_level}
  {transitions_section}
  # INSTRUCTIONS
  Identify the 2–3 steps most likely to contain the decisive error. Use the step-to-agent
  mapping to assign the correct agent to each step. Rank the candidates by likelihood,
  with the most suspicious step first.
  Output only the JSON object.



                                                 15
Candidate verification prompt. This prompt verifies candidates in CH against the counterfac-
tual sufficiency objective using localized raw evidence, typed dependencies, and linked low-level
evidence.

  # TASK CONTEXT
  Question: {question}
  Final answer given: {final_answer}
  Step-to-Agent mapping:
  {step_index}
  # CANDIDATES TO VERIFY
  {candidates_block}
  # LOCAL RAW EVIDENCE
  Only the candidate steps and their immediate neighbors are shown.      Candidate steps are
  marked explicitly.
  {raw_steps}
  # LINKED LOW-LEVEL EVIDENCE
  {low_level}
  # INSTRUCTIONS
  For each candidate, evaluate the following three criteria:
  1. Error independence. Does this step introduce the error, or merely inherit it from an
  upstream fault? Use the typed dependency structure to trace whether the candidate is an
  error source or a downstream carrier.

  2. Counterfactual sufficiency. If this step’s output, decision, or assumption were
  corrected, would the final answer recover the expected output while keeping prior steps
  fixed and allowing subsequent steps to adapt?

  3. Temporal precedence.        Among candidates satisfying the above criteria, prefer the
  earliest step.
  Select the candidate that best satisfies these conditions and return the decisive error
  together with supporting reasoning.
  Output only the JSON object.



A.4   Prompts for Local Re-Search

Local re-search prompt (adversarial verification). This prompt performs bounded local re-
search around the predicted decisive step t̂, comparing it directly against neighboring candidates
under an adversarial for-and-against evaluation.

  # TASK CONTEXT
  Question: {question}
  Final answer given: {final_answer}
  Agents: {agents_block}
  Total steps: {total_steps}
  # PRELIMINARY DIAGNOSIS
  Predicted decisive error: Step {t̂} by {â} –- {predicted_desc}
  Backward chain: {backward_chain}
  # LOCAL WINDOW ([t̂ − 2, t̂ + 2])
  {candidates_block}
  # ROLE DEFINITIONS
  For each step X in the local window, assign one of the following roles:
  - ROOT_CAUSE: step X independently introduces the decisive error, such that correcting
  it would change the final output.
  - PROPAGATION: step X consumes an upstream error and carries it into downstream
  reasoning or output.
  - SYMPTOM: step X reflects an existing error without materially contributing to
  downstream computation.
  - CONTRIBUTING: step X is independently problematic but is not by itself sufficient to
  change the final output.




                                                  16
    # INSTRUCTIONS
    ## Step A: FOR-AND-AGAINST
    For each step in the local window:
    1. give 1–2 arguments for it being the decisive error;
    2. give 1–2 arguments against it being the decisive error;
    3. assign a suspicion score in [0, 1];
    4. assign one role: ROOT_CAUSE, SYMPTOM, PROPAGATION, or CONTRIBUTING.
    Be critical. Do not simply confirm the current diagnosis; challenge it against nearby
    alternatives.
    ## Step B: COUNTERFACTUAL TEST
    For the top-3 candidates by suspicion score:
    - If only this step were corrected, would the final answer become correct?
    - Provide one sentence of reasoning.
    ## Step C: FINAL VERDICT
    Based on Steps A and B, select the step with the highest suspicion score that also passes
    the counterfactual test. Produce a ranked list of all local candidates and return either
    CONFIRM or REVISE.
    # OUTPUT FORMAT
    {
      "candidates": [
         {
           "step": <int>,
           "agent": "<name>",
           "for": ["<point>", ...],
           "against": ["<point>", ...],
           "suspicion_score": <float 0.0–1.0>,
           "classification": "<ROOT_CAUSE | SYMPTOM | PROPAGATION | CONTRIBUTING>"
         }
      ],
      "counterfactual_tests": [
         {
           "step": <int>,
           "passes": <true | false>,
           "reasoning": "<1 sentence>"
         }
      ],
      "ranked_steps": [<int>, <int>, ...],
      "final_verdict": {
         "decision": "<CONFIRM | REVISE>",
         "decisive_step": <int>,
         "decisive_agent": "<name>",
         "failure_mode": "<wrong_query | wrong_logic | wrong_interpretation |
    wrong_assumption | wrong_calculation | wrong_filter | missed_info | hallucination |
    other>",
         "description": "<1–2 sentences>",
         "confidence": "<low | moderate | high>",
         "reasoning": "<1–2 sentences on why you confirmed or revised>"
      }
    }
    Output only the JSON object.



B     Compute and Execution Setup
All experiments are conducted using API-based inference. We use the OpenAI API and OpenRouter
to access the underlying LLM backbones. No local model training or fine-tuning is required. The
experiments can be reproduced by invoking the same APIs with the specified prompts, model con-
figurations, and parameters described in this paper. Execution time depends on API latency and the
number of LLM calls per trajectory, as FALAT involves multiple stages (prior construction, hierar-
chical abstraction, dependency typing, and verification).




                                               17
